Mr. Wilmot (Ghana): I congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of office as the President of the Council this
month. I also thank you for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council on the tragic developments in Liberia,
as detailed in the report of the Secretary-General now under
consideration.

My Government is naturally disturbed and
disappointed by the recent resurgence of fighting and
mayhem in Monrovia. We had hoped that after the series of
mediation talks, culminating in the Abuja Agreement of 19
August 1995, the faction leaders in Liberia would
rededicate themselves to the objectives of peace and return
their country to normalcy, in the interest of their people. It
is therefore with great sadness that I agree with the
Secretary-General's observation in his report that by the
events of the last few weeks the faction leaders have clearly
demonstrated their disregard for the aspirations of the
Liberian people for peace and have shown wanton
disrespect for the international community.

On assuming office as Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 1994,
His Excellency Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings,
President of the Republic of Ghana, lost no time in taking
up energetically the search for peace in Liberia. Following
earlier efforts by his predecessors in the ECOWAS chair,
success finally came with the signing in August 1995 of the
Abuja Agreement to supplement the Cotonou and
Akosombo Agreements, as subsequently clarified by the
Accra Agreement.

The Abuja Agreement had political and military
aspects, encompassing a wide array of activities that would
lead, through disarmament of the factions, to free and fair
elections in August 1996. In keeping with the schedule of
implementation, the cessation of hostilities came into effect

 

during the night of 26/27 August 1995, paving the way
for the installation of a new Council of State on 1
September 1995 and subsequent appointments to the
Cabinet and other high offices of State.

Even though there was some delay, caused by the
lack of logistical support for the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), the peace process took off on the
right track. However, certain actions of the Council and
faction leaders soon started to undermine the Abuja
Agreement. Among these was a change of status of the
Council of State to that of a collective presidency,
creating a situation where Liberia virtually had six
Presidents, each availing himself of the full trappings of
presidential protocol.

Other problems arose, which I need not recount for
lack of time. Efforts continued to address these, and in
mid-December 1995, while still faced with serious
personnel and logistical constraints, ECOMOG started the
first phase of deployment in some cities held by the
various factions. The initial success was, however, short-
lived, when ECOMOG suffered an unprovoked surprise
massive attack by one of the factions on 28 December
1995.

This senseless attack against ECOMOG and innocent
civilians was covered by the Secretary-General's report of
23 January 1996, and was condemned by this Council.

In spite of these setbacks, and with little material
support from the international community, ECOWAS and
ECOMOG persevered, taking casualties on the way. We
continued to give to the brotherly people of Liberia the
best of our resources and the lives of our most gallant
sons, in the hope that a return of peace to that country
would strengthen peace in the whole subregion, and
thereby international peace and security in general.

Regrettably, despite these efforts and sacrifices, the
Liberian conflict escalated into fighting in Monrovia, a
safe haven, on 6 April 1996, following an internal rift in
the ULIMO-J faction, the reported deposition of its
leader, General Roosevelt Johnson, and a subsequent
order by the Council of State for his arrest for murder.

At the outbreak of the fighting in Monrovia, His
Excellency the President of Ghana, in his capacity as
Chairman of ECOWAS, took immediate steps to contain
the situation. He dispatched personal envoys for urgent
consultations with key ECOWAS partners and for talks
with the parties to the conflict. After strenuous efforts, the
envoys obtained the agreement of the Liberian parties to
lines of action aimed at restoring the Abuja Agreement,
through a cease-fire, the redeployment of ECOMOG for

 

security throughout Monrovia, the withdrawal of all armed
fighters from the city, and the release of hostages. The
ECOWAS Chairman's efforts culminated on 7 May 1996
in the seventh meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of the ECOWAS Committee of Nine on Liberia, in Accra.

After intensive deliberations, the Ministers concluded
that the Abuja Agreement remained the best framework for
peace in Liberia and that ECOMOG should continue its
efforts to seek its implementation. They emphasized the fact
that the ultimate responsibility for peace rests with
Liberians themselves, notably the Government and faction
leaders, who need to demonstrate in specific terms their
commitment to implement the Abuja Agreement and their
commitment to peace in their country.

In pursuit of this objective, the Ministers established
a Mechanism for Returning Liberia to the Abuja
Agreement, which, if implemented by the Transitional
Government during the coming three months, would
demonstrate convincingly their continued attachment to the
peace process. The Mechanism, copies of which have been
made available for the attention of this Council, requires the
Liberian parties to take steps that would, among other
things, restore the cease-fire, restore Monrovia to its safe-
haven status and return looted property. It would ensure
reconciliation and inclusiveness of the National Transitional
Government, a return to the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants and, most
importantly, a return to the programme of democratization
that would lead to free and fair elections. Implementation
of the Mechanism will be closely monitored by the
Committee of Nine, which will assess from it the
commitment of the Liberian people to peace and report
thereon to the ECOWAS Summit in August 1996.

The ECOWAS Ministers also reiterated what has been
said time and again, that the task of ensuring international
peace and security is primarily that of the United Nations
Security Council and the entire international community.
Regional or subregional initiatives can only complement,
but not substitute for, the international community's own
efforts. Here, we wish to re-echo the call of the Committee
of Nine on the international community to assume its
rightful duty to Liberia and assist ECOMOG accordingly.
Liberia should be given the same assistance and attention
as are accorded other conflict situations in the world.

With our meagre resources, despite the casualties
suffered, we in West Africa have decided to give Liberians
yet another chance to put their house in order. The
international community cannot turn its back on that
country. We have offered what we can, but the task facing
ECOMOG is not one that can be shouldered by the region
alone.

 

The Security Council is aware that under the Abuja
and related Agreements the tasks of ECOMOG include
the deployment of its personnel throughout Liberia, the
sealing of all Liberia's borders, the manning of all sea,
land and air borders, the encampment and disarmament of
combatants, and the establishment of road and confidence
patrols, to create an atmosphere conducive to the holding
of free and fair elections.

These are no mean tasks. They require adequate
military manpower, material and other logistic support.
That is why we have repeatedly called on the
international community to provide adequate assistance to
ECOMOG.

ECOMOG, as constituted at present, has neither the
required number of personnel nor the logistic base to
effectively implement its mandate. Whereas only 8,500
troops are currently on the ground, the ECOMOG
Commander has estimated that between 12,000 and
14,000 troops are required in order to be effective. The
difference has to be made up. In the volatile atmosphere
prevalent in the country, ECOMOG needs to be
strengthened with more personnel, and logistic and
financial resources, to become a credible force that can be
a threat to intransigent parties, inspire the respect of the
combatants and infuse confidence in the people of
Liberia. Without such a force, our personnel will continue
to be thinly spread on the ground and remain easy targets
of power-hungry warlords, with consequences desired by
none of us here, as seen in the recent past.

The time for this Council to act is now, to secure
unconditional logistic and financial support for
ECOMOG, coupled with humanitarian and development
assistance to Liberia, to get the job done. Time is not on
our side. A solution now will be cheaper, in terms of
lives and material resources, than it will be tomorrow,
after ECOMOG is compelled to withdraw as a result of
inaction by the international community.

Among other measures it may decide upon, this
Council may wish to call on the donor counties that made
pledges for the peace process in Liberia at the United
Nations-sponsored Conference on Liberia in New York in
October 1995 to redeem their pledges now. The Council
may also renew its call for strict compliance with its
resolution on an arms embargo in relation to Liberia.

At this juncture, I wish to express our gratitude to
Governments of Member States which have given or
pledged assistance so far to ECOMOG and the Liberian
peace process. We are particularly grateful to the United
States Government, not only for its keen interest in the
Liberian problem, but also for its humanitarian

 

intervention during the recent crisis, the recent offer of
$30 million to ECOMOG and the welcome initiative to
establish an International Contact Group on Liberia. We
also thank the other members of the Contact Group for
their continued interest, and hope that through their work,
much-needed material support will be forthcoming from the
international community - and in good time - to
facilitate the fulfilment of our common objective: to return
peace to Liberia.

While the assistance received so far is deeply
appreciated, it is nevertheless grossly inadequate to meet
the logistic and other challenges faced by ECOMOG. We
therefore hope that all Member States will review their
contributions with the aim of augmenting them to a level
commensurate with the goals we wish to see ECOMOG
achieve, and without conditionalities.

The humanitarian consequences of the recent events in
Liberia also need to be kept in sight. The international
community must give more aid to countries like mine,
which have been constrained to grant asylum to additional
Liberian refugees fleeing their devastated country.

I wish before yielding the floor to express the
gratitude of my Government and that of the Chairman of
ECOWAS to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
for his unrelenting support for Liberia. We are also grateful
to UNOMIL and to the Special Representative and Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General, whose cooperation and
encouragement has seen us thus far.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
on the extension of UNOMIL's mandate, as a step in the
right direction, and hope it will be given favourable
consideration.

Finally, I hope that the outcome of the Council's
deliberations will go one step further than previous
resolutions and provide for urgently required concrete
financial and logistic assistance to ECOMOG, to salvage
the Liberian peace process in support of the suffering
people of Liberia.

