Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): I should like to join
previous speakers in welcoming the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord
Ashdown, to today's meeting and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing. I also wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Klein, for his very useful briefing. In addition, we
wish to commend the valuable contributions of the
High Representative and of Mr. Klein to the success
achieved thus far in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Most other delegations have commented on the
elections, and I should also like to highlight certain
points concerning them. First of all, we are pleased to
note that the elections, held for the first time by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, were conducted
successfully and without violence. We therefore
congratulate the authorities on that achievement.

Nevertheless, we have noted that a sizeable portion
of the population in Bosnia and Herzegovina did not
participate in the elections. As Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Klein rightly pointed out, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina may have expressed their frustration at the
manner in which the outgoing Government conducted its
business during its mandate. It is, therefore, imperative
that the political leaders of the incoming Government
focus on priority policies and programmes that will
address the concerns of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that context, we should like to support
the idea of establishing tests to judge the seriousness of
the incoming Government on its commitment to the
reform process, as mentioned in paragraph 46 of the
report submitted by Lord Ashdown.

Various efforts have been carried out by the
Office of the High Representative to establish the rule
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Some of those are
commendable, such as the restructuring of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina court system at all levels, ensuring
that justice will be administered only by capable and
honest judges in the future. We also note with
satisfaction that the new State Court will become
operational on 1 January 2003, with a special
jurisdiction to try serious violations of international
humanitarian law. If we correctly understood Judge
Jorda of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia when he addressed the Council in
July, the new State Court will include international
judges for a certain period of time. My delegation
would like to be updated on progress in that regard.

I have two questions for Lord Ashdown and for the
Special Representative concerning the domestic debt
crisis. It is mentioned in paragraph 17 of the report:

"... Bosnia and Herzegovina could be in the
grip of a severe domestic debt crisis. The country
is racing against time".

I should like to know what programmes have been set
up by the Special Representative and by Lord Ashdown
to deal with this severe domestic debt crisis as soon as
possible. We understand the need to implement
programmes that will alleviate the debt crisis of the
country, whose economy is in a nascent stage.

Secondly, we have observed that there is a need to
attract foreign investment to the country. We should like
to know from Lord Ashdown what incentives have been
proposed in the programme to attract foreign investment
in order to put the economy on an even keel.

Finally, we should like to make some observations
as the Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina prepares its
exit strategy. We are satisfied that the International
Police Task Force has done an incredible amount of
work. Bosnia and Herzegovina now has a police force
that is adequately equipped to exercise police powers in
accordance with democratic standards. The recent
appointment of career professionals as police
commissioners and the successful certification of an
increasing number of police officials, as well as the
participation of more women and members of minority
communities in the police academies, indicate that the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) has successfully completed its mandate and
can readily hand over the baton to the European Union
Police Mission (EUPM) when its mandate expires at the
end of this year. We hope that the EUPM. will preserve
and continue UNMIBH's legacy. Indeed, the Security
Council can claim the successful conclusion of another
of its peacekeeping operations.

