Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation has been following
developments in Tajikistan very closely, including
Tajikistan's political settlement process. In our view, a
settlement to the conflict in Tajikistan depends principally
on the efforts by the parties in Tajikistan and on the
effective implementation by the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) of the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council; that effective
implementation also depends on the political will of the
parties concerned towards a settlement to the conflict, and
on what progress is actually made towards a political
settlement.

In this connection, we have noted that
President Rakhmonov of Tajikistan and the Chairman of
the Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan, Mr. Nuri,
held a bilateral meeting in mid May and that the two
sides held a fourth round of talks on national
reconciliation at Almaty from 22 May to 1 June 1995;
during these talks, they conducted, for the first time, an
in-depth discussion of fundamental institutional issues and
on consolidating Tajikistan's statehood, and they reached
agreements and adopted a joint statement on extending
the cease-fire, exchanging prisoners of war and
repatriating refugees. The Chinese delegation welcomes
these positive developments.

We sincerely hope that the parties, in order to
accelerate the process of political settlement in Tajikistan,
will implement in earnest the agreements reached in the
fourth round of inter-Tajik talks; will continue to observe
strictly and implement fully the Tehran Agreement,
particularly the provisions for a cease-fire; will strengthen
the supervisory and investigatory role of the Joint
Commission in this connection; and will cooperate fully
with UNMOT so as to facilitate stability in Tajikistan. We
hope also that the parties will take effective measures to
ease tensions along the Tajik-Afghan border.

There is a Chinese saying that peace brings benefits
to both sides while fighting hurts them both. The key to
a fundamental solution to the Tajik conflict lies in the
achievement of broad-based national reconciliation, and
the only way to achieve national reconciliation is to give
up using military means and seek a solution that both can
accept through dialogue and negotiation. To this end, we
urge President Rakhmonov and Mr. Nuri to continue their
direct dialogue in order to build mutual confidence

 

further, so advancing the process of achieving a
comprehensive political settlement.

UNMOT has played a positive role in containing the
conflict by assisting in the implementation of the cease-fire
and in building mutual confidence. It has also maintained
good relations with the Peace-keeping Force of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. We hope that
UNMOT' 3 continued presence will help advance further the
process of political settlement in Tajikistan.

The draft resolution exactly reflects the laudable desire
of the international community to provide the parties in
Tajikistan with further assistance in order to achieve a
lasting peace at an early date. The Chinese delegation will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
