Mr. Ould Abdallah: I should like to start by
thanking the Council for its continued interest in and
attention to the situation in Somalia, and specifically to
the issue of piracy there.

I should like to make it clear from the beginning
that piracy is, first and foremost, a very successful
business with outlets in the region and beyond. It is
therefore very important that we see it as it is - a
criminal activity.

Following the adoption of resolution 1846
(2008), we have been working with a number of
organizations within the United Nations system, our
colleagues in Vienna and here at Headquarters, and
other United Nations entities, including the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), to follow up events in Somalia.

The deployment of naval ships and military
aircraft to suppress piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia, as well as better self-protection
of ships transiting the area, have considerably reduced
the number of successful incidents in the region,
especially in the Gulf of Aden. This expanding
maritime presence is playing a critical role in
stabilizing the situation at sea, and there is no doubt
that the number of successful attacks would increase
again if these military assets were reduced. The naval
escorts protecting World Food Programme shipments
are providing crucial protection for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Somalia.

At the same time, the number of pirate attacks
has in no way diminished; the threat remains and, in
some ways, is becoming more entrenched as more
sophisticated methods are being adopted and attacks
are taking place further out at sea. However, this is a
further financial cost to the pirates and their criminal
business - a risk they are nevertheless still ready to
take because they see it as worthwhile.

We have to recognize that the international
maritime presence has dealt a serious blow to the
financial profitability of this criminal activity.
Therefore the approach to combating piracy cannot be
limited to the containment of the problem by
international naval forces alone, no matter how
successful - and I do consider it to be successful. This
09-61200
fight must be part of an overall plan which includes
building regional capacity, on the one hand, and
dealing with the root causes, on the other.

In addition to various bilateral initiatives being
undertaken by Member States, regional capacity-
building is also being carried out through the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), a
specialized United Nations agency steering the
implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct. The
Code of Conduct aims to establish a cooperation
framework among regional States combating piracy at
both the operational and the legal levels. This covers
interdicting ships suspected of piracy, information-
sharing among regional States, and the prosecution of
suspected pirates. Piracy's root causes are being
addressed by my Office and my colleagues in the
United Nations system, whose joint action focuses on
establishing sustainable peace, effective governance,
creating capable rule of law and security institutions,
and - as far as possible - offering the Somali people
lawful alternatives to piracy and banditry. I would like
to address these issues in more detail.

The report before the Council (S/2009/590)
highlights the role played by IMO in promulgating
guidance for Governments, seafarers and the global
maritime industry in suppressing piracy and armed
robbery against ships, and in developing and
implementing a regional strategy for the western Indian
Ocean and the Gulf of Aden. This is the essence of the
Djibouti Code of Conduct, which has been signed by
10 States of the region. IMO and its member States
have long recognized that piracy is a symptom of the
lack of effective Government and the rule of law
ashore. With this aspect in mind, IMO has been
working actively, in partnership with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Vienna and other United Nations bodies, INTERPOL
and navies, to develop regional States' capacities to
enforce the law at sea and, in particular, to counter
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off
the coast of Somalia.

On the prosecution of suspected pirates caught by
the international naval forces operating off the coast of
Somalia, UNODC has been providing assistance to
regional States. Although all agencies agree that the
ideal solution to the trial of pirates is a fair and
effective court system in Somalia, that goal is still out
of reach. Therefore, UNODC and the Office of Legal
Affairs here at Headquarters are leading on the best
09-61200
alternative: ensuring trial within a sound legal
framework in other regional States.

Through the delivery of support directly to the
police, prosecutors, courts and prisons of Kenya and
Seychelles, UNODC is creating the conditions in
which the arresting States are content to pass suspects
over for trial and improving overall criminal justice
and standards. The programme is being expanded to
other regional States through the conduct of legal
assessments and the delivery of assistance and, in
partnership with UNDP, will develop the prisons -
and later the prosecutors and police investigators - in
some entities within Somalia, such as Somaliland and
Puntland, to create the conditions in which pirates
convicted outside Somalia can be returned home to
serve their prison sentences. The United Nations plans
to implement high-impact interventions, primarily in
Puntland. Civilian policing performance and
infrastructure - especially communications - in the
strategic corridor from Bossaso to Galkayo through
Qardho and Garowe will be and should be
strengthened. After that, by the middle of next year,
Puntland authorities should roll out police services to
the rural and coastal areas.

In addition to the United Nations working closely
to contain and combat the root causes of piracy, the
United Nations has been closely working with
INTERPOL, whose law enforcement strategy to
combat maritime piracy is threefold: to increase
intelligence-sharing, build regional police capacity and
cooperate with other international and regional
organizations. The goal is to support efforts to identify,
arrest and prosecute pirates, trace and seize ransom
monies and disrupt criminal networks.

The first priority has been promoting
information-sharing with all police and non-police
organizations, including the United Nations and naval
and shipping industry partners. The INTERPOL I-24/7
global secure communications network is designed to
facilitate this type of collaboration, and INTERPOL is
helping to expand access to I-24/7 in the region.
INTERPOL is also working with a number of
Governments, including the United States and the
United Kingdom, on maritime piracy financial
investigations, and will host a maritime piracy
conference early next year.

I would like also to welcome the proposal made
by the regional body, the Intergovernmental Authority
3
on Development (IGAD), to establish a blockade of
known ports that are supporting piracy. I believe that
that measure should send a clear message to the
criminals behind the small ports - because some port
facilities are in fact small and harmless - that they
cannot keep defying the law and getting away with it.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that any
long-term effort to address lawlessness at sea must be
complementary to the current political, security,
recovery and development efforts already being
undertaken by the United Nations and the African
Union Mission in Somalia. In this regard I welcome the
intention of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia to coordinate its initiatives with the
International Contact Group on Somalia. Piracy is a
symptom of wider problems ashore in Somalia. The
only sustainable solution will be effective governance,
the establishment of the rule of law and security
institutions and the creation of alternative livelihoods
in Somalia for stable and inclusive economic growth.
In the present Government we have a credible and
legitimate partner with whom to work to achieve this.
It needs more assistance to do so.

