Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this discussion on peacekeeping operations,
which my country hopes will be an important link in
the chain of reform of peacekeeping operations. We
wish to thank Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for their
extremely useful briefings.

Since it was established, the United Nations has
used peacekeeping operations as a tool to achieve
peace and stability, alongside preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peacebuilding. Peacekeeping operations
have proven to be effective in many countries where
they have insured security and stability, such as
Cambodia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mozambique.

Currently we are witnessing the ongoing success
of certain peacekeeping operations, such as in Burundi
and Sierra Leone. However, it must not be forgotten
that some missions have failed miserably in building
peace in time and to protect civilians. We have also
witnessed unimaginable horrors such as those that
occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Rwanda and in
Somalia.

Despite the mixed results of peacekeeping
operations, they are still the most appropriate tool for
peacekeeping and for ensuring stability and preserving
the lives of civilians. Nonetheless, the growing demand
for peacekeeping operations and for their expansion
and the growing costs have raised questions about their
effectiveness and how best to manage and enhance
them. How can we provide those operations with the
necessary human and financial resources? Other
questions concern the nature of their mandate, when
and in what conditions we should resort to force and
now best to fulfil their mandate to protect civilians.

Numerous efforts have been made to reform the
planning and management of peacekeeping operations,
from the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) to the 2010
reform agenda, the restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the establishment of the
Department of Field Support. The work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has ensured
follow-up to and assessment of the reform. We look
forward to receiving the non-paper on the New
Horizon initiative on peacekeeping reform to be
presented by the Secretariat, of which we have
obtained an executive summary.

We hope that the debate that began in the Security
Council on the United Kingdom/French initiative on
the reform of peacekeeping operations will lead to
concrete results through open debate in which all
interested parties, including troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs),
participate. There is no doubt that the participation of
TCCS and PCCs is important in order to fill in the gaps
in peacekeeping operations and to find ways to
strengthen their effectiveness within the context of
clear, agreed and verifiable mandates. We believe that
it is high time to expand the corps of TCCs so that more
of them will provide troops. That could be achieved
through financial support to certain countries that are
unable to provide troops, weapons and equipment.

The establishment or extension of any peacekeeping
mandate must be in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, agreed
guidelines, the consent of the parties concerned, the
non-use of force except in legitimate self-defence, and
strict respect for the neutrality, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, as well as non-interference
in their internal affairs.

In that regard, we affirm the importance of all
TCCS participating in all aspects and phases of
peacekeeping. The growing need for peacekeeping
operations requires more cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations,
which must be encouraged to take part in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping through regional mechanisms.

The African Union is the primary organization for
two reasons. First, the majority of conflicts take place on
the African continent. Secondly, the African Union has
acquired special mechanisms for peacekeeping with the
establishment of its Peace and Security Council, which
is playing an increasingly important role in peacekeeping.

Furthermore, the African Union has launched
initiatives that merit the support and encouragement of
us all. We also support the implementation of a joint
working programme between the African Union and
the United Nations in order to strengthen the
capabilities of the African Union's peacekeeping
operations in the short and long terms, as well as those
of its mission in Somalia. We welcome Mr. Le Roy's
statement to that effect earlier in this meeting.

The success of peacekeeping operations depends
on an active accompanying political process that
includes the resolve of all parties to a conflict to
repudiate violence and to favour a dialogue to restore
peace. Peacekeeping must be part of all mandates, and
peacebuilding must also include support for strengthening
and restructuring State institutions and the security
sector, as well as the establishment of an effective
police force, a robust legal system and the State's
authority over its entire territory.

