Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to congratulate on your
leadership of the Council for the month of June. We
know that it has been an eventful and complicated
month, and your able stewardship has been much
appreciated.

Allow me to share the facts concerning the latest
developments on the ground. On Sunday, 25 June, at
approximately 5.30 a.m., members of Hamas, along
with its partner terror organizations, infiltrated Israel
near the Kerem Shalom border crossing with the Gaza
Strip, through a deep tunnel dug 300 metres into Israeli
territory. During the ensuing attack, Palestinian
terrorists killed two Israeli soldiers, First Lieutenant
Hanan Barak, age 20, and Staff Sergeant Pavel
Slutzker, also age 20. They kidnapped one soldier,
Corporal Gilad Shalit, age 19, and wounded three
others. The terrorist organizations Hamas, the Popular
Resistance Committees (PRC) and Jaish al-Islam -
the Army of Islam - took responsibility for the attack.
The last of these organizations is a new, previously
unknown terror group.

Gilad Shalit is currently being held hostage and
his whereabouts are not known. On that same day, the
PRC kidnapped and subsequently shot and murdered
an 18-year old Israeli civilian, Eliyahu Asheri. He was
murdered on the day of his abduction and his body was
discovered late Wednesday night by Israeli forces.

These Palestinian terrorist attacks were launched
after weeks of Israeli restraint in the face of numerous
attempted kidnappings and unceasing Kassam rocket
attacks from the Gaza Strip that have targeted civilians,
schools and homes, traumatized children and paralyzed
the city of Sderot.

As the Council will recall, Israel disengaged from
the Gaza Strip last August with the hope of creating a
window of opportunity and re-energizing the peace
process. Instead, the response was an actualization of
Israel's worry - an increase in terrorist attacks. Gaza
is now a terror base, actively supported by the elected
Hamas Government. Israel is under attack day in and
day out. Terrorists have perpetrated suicide bombings,
gunfire shootings, stabbing attacks, Katyusha and
Kassam rocket fire, explosions and Molotov cocktail
attacks and other forms of terror. Only two weeks ago,
two young girls luckily escaped yet another kidnapping
attempt. But this is only one example.

One particular form of continuous Palestinian
terror has been the barrage of Kassam rockets launched
into Israeli territory from the Gaza Strip. Since last
October, more than 600 Kassam rockets have fallen
onto Israeli cities and territory, and in just this past
week more than 50 rockets were launched from Gaza.
In the city of Sderot, a constant target of Kassam fire,
rockets have struck homes, schools and places of work
and have injured numerous people, causing shrapnel
wounds, shock and trauma. The clear target of these
rocket attacks is men, women and children - Israeli
civilians.

Madam President, members of the Security
Council, what would the mayors and citizens of your
respective cities demand of your Governments? How
would your respective Governments react to such
blatant acts of terrorism?
The aggressive terrorist provocations of the past
week and indeed those in recent months have persisted

only because they are supported by the official
Palestinian Government, a terrorist regime with a
sworn intent to deny us our most fundamental human
rights. Hamas is committed to a radical and militant
ideology, and continues - even as we are meeting at
this moment - to engage in terrorism and reject the
very tenets of the peace process.

Hamas declared this month that it is renouncing
its ceasefire. Yet its campaign of terror has always been
its prime objective. We were not surprised when in fact
Hamas broke its ceasefire, engaging in rocket attacks
with its partner organizations one week prior to its
deceptive declaration. This deception was corroborated
only when we learned, this past Sunday, that for
months it had been digging a deep tunnel in order to
infiltrate Israel.

But Hamas is not alone. The dangerous realities
in the Middle East are further inflamed by the active
and direct collaboration between Syria, Iran, Hezbollah
and Palestinian terror groups, comprising an axis of
terror.

The first and foremost obligation of every State is
to protect its citizens. Each and every member of this
Council and of this Organization understands this
responsibility. Alongside maintaining peace, it is the
premise of government to protect its citizens. This
responsibility is enshrined in the most basic principles
of international law.

Israel is deeply concerned about the abduction of
Corporal Gilad Shalit. That is a grave humanitarian
issue and, as a Sovereign state, it is our duty to do all
that we can to bring about his safe return.

From the moment initial reports of Gilad's
kidnapping were received, Israel spared no effort in
exploring and exhausting all diplomatic channels and,
in particular, gave Chairman Abbas every opportunity
to secure his safe release, which can be seen as a test of
his leadership. Even in Damascus - where Khaled
Meshaal, a leader of Hamas, keeps his headquarters
and liaises with the Assad regime - many important
communications were received in order to influence
Corporal Shalit's safe return. Indeed, many leaders in
our region agree that Meshaal is the key to resolving
this humanitarian crisis.
Nevertheless, the diplomatic efforts have so far
been fruitless. With the passing of each hour, the threat
to the life and well-being of Gilad has intensified and

the urgency of ending this crisis is becoming even
greater. May I remind Council members of the outcome
of similar cases, in Israel and in other countries, where
soldiers, journalists, humanitarian workers and
civilians were kidnapped, brutally tortured, slaughtered
and beheaded.

Israel, like any other responsible Government,
cannot tolerate a situation in which its citizens are
being held hostage by members of a terrorist group
such as Hamas. Let me assure the Council that we did
not disengage from the Gaza Strip in order to return to
it. It is not in our moral, security or financial interests
or in our interest in any other form. As it now stands,
the Israeli army's presence is limited to a very small
area in southern Gaza, with the sole aim of preventing
Corporal Shalit from being smuggled outside of the
Gaza Strip by his terrorist captors. The military
operation now taking place is thus specific in nature
and limited in scope. Its objective is not punishment or
retaliation. Israel is taking every effort to minimize any
harm to Palestinian civilians. Indeed, just an hour ago,
Defense Minister Amir Peretz declared that Israel is
immediately planning to take steps to ease the
humanitarian situation on the ground in Gaza.

International terrorism is the largest challenge to
global peace and security. In Israel, it remains the
greatest obstacle to the safety and security of our
citizens. Our duty to confront this threat has guided our
efforts since even before Israel's inception.

Our goal with this military endeavour is in line
with our legitimate right to live in security. In the light
of the escalation of Palestinian terrorism, Israel has
decided to intensify its efforts to arrest those operatives
responsible for terrorist attacks so they can be tried and
brought to justice. Israel will not accept terrorism even
if it is hidden behind political titles. The world should
recognize those who purposefully and intentionally
target innocents as exactly what they are: terrorists. We
should not be fooled by their suits and ties. We should
rather listen to what they are saying and look at what
they are doing.

Sadly, our worst fears about a terrorist
organization taking over the Palestinian Authority have
now been realized. The world is now witnessing the
true colours of Hamas. The grave developments this
week reaffirm the importance of the policy that the
international community adopted following the recent
Palestinian elections, in particular the three core
conditions that it has called on the Palestinian
Government to fulfil if it is to be considered a
legitimate political partner. It is therefore critical that
the international community continue to strictly adhere
to this policy. It should not be led astray by any vague
Palestinian formulations that fail to demonstrate an
unconditional commitment to any of those three
stipulations.

We are deeply concerned by the grave turn of
recent events in our region. Yet the responsibility for
those developments lies squarely on the shoulders of
Hamas, which has perpetrated these crimes, and of the
Chairman of the Palestinian Authority, who has been
unable to stop terrorism from emanating from his
territory. We urge the international community to
continue applying all possible political pressure on the
Palestinian Authority and on the Hamas terrorist
organization, including its members and sponsors in
Damascus, so as to ensure the immediate and safe
release of the Gilad Shalit and to finally bring an end
to the use of Palestinian territory as a base for terrorist
operations. Our common commitment to fighting
terrorism and to empowering those who are genuinely
committed to peace demands no less.

