Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): There is no
disputing the gravity and complexity of the crisis that has
erupted in eastern Zaire. It is one of the largest and most
challenging tasks the United Nations has faced. The
potential for a humanitarian catastrophe is real. The
international community has a moral obligation to help
where we can, and to do so urgently.
We pay tribute to Canada for offering to take on the
leadership role in the organization of a multinational
force. The United Kingdom is ready to play a full part in
this. We cosponsored the draft resolution before us, and
we intend to vote in favour of it. We have been actively
involved in contingency planning since the Council
adopted resolution 1078 (1996). A multinational force is
not a panacea, but it must be able to meet the task we are
setting for it. What we need is a properly balanced force,
of a size adequate to the task and with a clear and
achievable mandate. In such a force let there be no doubt
that the British contribution would be substantial and
prominent. As the British Defence Secretary told our
Parliament yesterday, we recognize our obligations in the
face of such a call to action. We are among the relatively
few nations with the military capability to help, and we
are proud that the British armed forces can make a
difference. A British military reconnaissance team has
already gone to the region to assess the conditions on the
ground.

The deployment of a multinational force is the only
feasible option if we are to get people on the ground
quickly. But it is important to recognize the temporary
nature of this operation. It is an immediate response to an
immediate crisis. It is also essential that the United
Nations start work immediately on preparations for the
necessary follow-on operation, in the context of an
international humanitarian task force, so that this
follow-on force is ready to take over before the mandate
of the multinational force expires, at the latest on 31
March 1997.

 

We also need to ensure that these immediate actions
do not render the longer-term tasks more difficult. We do
not want the previous unhappy situation, which led directly
to the present crisis, to occur again. This deployment must
not freeze the situation as it is, nor set back the efforts over
the last two years to resolve the complex humanitarian
situation in the region. Any serious attempt to meet the
humanitarian crisis and to prevent further suffering must try
to ensure that those refugees who want to return to their
homes are not prevented from doing so by armed gangs or
intimidators. Nor should this operation result in the
re-establishment of camps in which armed elements are
allowed to operate. We agree with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that the force should be able to
ensure the exclusively humanitarian and civilian character
of all refugee locations under the multinational force's
control. This means it should be sufficiently large, and
sufficiently well-equipped, to do the job properly.

The geographical scope of the operation must also be
matched to the force's capability. Many of the refugees
have now spread out into the less-accessible areas of
eastern Zaire. This could reduce the effectiveness of an
operation limited purely to Goma and Bukavu.

This crisis affects the region as a whole. The
Governments of the region recognized this at their Summit
in Nairobi on 5 November and made clear their willingness
to play a full part in helping to resolve the crisis. A
successful operation needs the full strategic consent of all
the Governments concerned. As far as possible, it also need
the acquiescence of the various militias active in the area.

We believe that participation and cooperation by
African States is very important. By authorizing the
establishment of a multinational force, the Security Council
is responding to African calls for a neutral force to alleviate
the suffering and to promote the return of refugees. We
hope that African States will play an important role in the
multinational force and in the follow-on force that will
succeed this operation. It is also important that they
participate actively in the planning for both forces from the
outset.

All States can help in this endeavour. We look to
those nations that are not providing troops to do everything
they can to support it. We encourage them to contribute
urgently to the Secretary-General's voluntary trust fund,
which is established by this draft resolution.

I said that the multinational force was not a panacea.
It cannot resolve the problems of the region. The political

 

dimension of this crisis remains paramount in order to
achieve a lasting solution. We believe the regional
Governments have a key role to play in this, and we
welcome the lead that they took at the Nairobi Summit.

We must help Rwanda create the conditions which
are necessary to encouraging the refugees to return,
including by increasing the number of human rights
monitors working there. As the largest bilateral donor to
the Rwanda Human Rights programme, Britain is playing
a leading role in this, and we encourage others to do so,
too.

We agree with the point just made by the
Ambassador of France that a Great Lakes conference
would have a central role to play in securing a peaceful
and stable future for the region. We agree that
preparations should begin for such a conference under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). It is only right that the OAU
should be closely involved in the search for a lasting
political solution in the region.

The United Nations has suffered some setbacks in
recent years. It is right that we should learn the lessons of
past mistakes. Now we face, in the challenge presented by
the crisis in eastern Zaire, a new call to live up to the
aims and ideals of the United Nations Charter. There are
pitfalls. We should not underestimate the risks and the
difficulties. Thorough preparation and planning, a clear
mandate, achievable objectives and renewed efforts to
reach a long-term political settlement are essential. But
we should take encouragement from the rapid and
effective work here at United Nations Headquarters over
recent days and from the political signal that the
unanimous adoption of this Security Council resolution
will send. What we are setting in motion today will, I
trust, show that the United Nations and its Member States
are able to make a difference and that we have the
courage and determination to do so.

It was once well said that the only real reason for
doing something is that it is the right thing to do. All the
others are reasons for doing nothing. The United
Kingdom believes that, with the course charted by this
draft resolution, the United Nations is doing the right
thing.

