Mr. Mezode (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I shall have to beg the Council's
indulgence, being so moved by the wealth of analyses
and reflections I have heard in this Chamber.

As the Security Council, under your leadership,
Sir, is meeting on the situation in my country,
following the issuance ofthe Secretary-General's latest
report and following up on the activities of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA), I wish to convey the
greetings of Mr. Ange-Felix Patasse, Head of State,
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic. He sincerely hopes, Mr. President, that your
country, Singapore, and its valiant people - occupying
a particularly choice place in the concert of nations at
the dawn of the twenty-first century - will continue to
contribute effectively to the consolidation of peace
throughout the world. He has also charged me with
conveying the enormous gratitude of the Central
African Republic to the international community,
international organizations, the Organization of African
Unity, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie and to our friends and
partners for their invaluable and tireless contributions
to restoring and securing the peace and to establishing
conditions for genuine and lasting stability and
economic revival in my country.

I have not come solely to discuss our profound
gratitude. I have come above all solemnly to reaffirm
that our authorities, in the interests and on behalf ofthe
Central African people, remain faithful to the
indispensable option of preserving national peace and
unity and of consolidating our democratic
achievements, despite the logic of confrontation
tirelessly pursued by some extremist political leaders.
Given the tremendous risks posed by the strategies of
rupture and destabilization to the process of
consolidating the achievements of our fledgling
democracy, it is absolutely indispensable and urgent
that we submit to the Security Council, in total
objectivity and without seeking to evoke superficial
emotion, our correct interpretation of the prevailing
situation.

In his toast on 1 December 2000, the national
holiday of the Central African Republic, President
Ange-Felix Patasse declared that there was no political
crisis in the Central African Republic; there was a
social crisis. This is not to minimize the social crisis,
but to call attention to the level of confusion.

I do not know whether this is traditional in this
forum, but ifI may, I would like to commend the
objectivity and the comprehensive nature of elements
of the report of the Representative in Bangui. His
conclusions capture completely the expectations of the
people of the Central African Republic and of their
Government. How can we remain unmoved when
hearing the eminent personalities who have addressed
this forum and expressed their genuine and sincere
concern for the problems of the people of the Central
African Republic?

I will also pay tribute to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the island of Mauritius, and I share his
relevant analysis of the situation in Africa as a whole
and in particular in my country.

I would like to renew my sincere compliments to
the Ambassador of France and to recall the significant
role played by his country in the restoration of peace
and the establishment of democracy in the Central
African Republic. By giving wise advice to all parties,
BONUCA and France continue to work tirelessly to
consolidate what has been achieved, and the same can
be said for most of the major countries that are
represented in the Central African Republic.

It is true that, since the middle of the year 2000,
in the capital of the Central African Republic there
have been demonstrations inspired by the extremist
political parties, which have lost their popularity and
are desperately grasping at methods to revive
themselves, as well as seeking short cuts to a transfer
of power. In their reckless search to take and exercise
the power that they were not able to obtain through the
free elections - which were supervised, barely a year
ago, by the international community - these extremist
political parties are leaving no stone unturned,
inventing or provoking incidents when they do not
exist, and seizing on whatever incidents do occur and
making political issues out of them. This is the case
with the essentially legitimate protest movement being
organized by the trade unions that represent civil
servants and Government officials. In my country we
call this political theatre. But we would turn to the
neutral observers of the Central African situation and
ask them what our country, the Central African
Republic, really needs in the present situation: civic
education or political theatre?

There should not be a political crisis in the
Central African Republic. Why is this? Simply because
95 per cent of the republican institutions provided for
by the 14 January 1995 Constitution have already been
established and they are functioning normally and well.

Let us look at a few examples, in particular the
National Assembly. It is composed of six parliamentary
groups, five of which are of the opposition. In every
debate, the Chairmen of the parliamentary groups,
depending on the importance of the project or issue,
have 15 to 20 minutes. If we total the statements, the
opposition has 75 minutes of air time every day, since
all the debates are broadcast in their entirety via the
national radio - and some are broadcast on television
as well. Added to this are the individual statements,
each of which is 10 minutes long. And given the allure
of microphones and the camera, everyone wants to
speak, and the opposition representatives do not forgo
the opportunity, even if it is only to repeat themselves,
to incite violence or to slander others. None of these
representatives has been harassed in any way, despite
the fact that they say anything and everything.

The judicial branch also functions independently.
The most recent verdicts provide vigorous proof of
this. However, the Government should have intervened,
because a crime had been observed: the refusal to
comply with a ban on meetings, which had been issued
because of the risks posed. But the Government
allowed the justices to say what was just. And their
ruling, of which the Council has been informed,
supports the policy of trying to calm the situation -
and this without the intervention of the Government.
Civil society also plays a role, and sometimes with
disturbing partisanship.

As for the Government, it never stops reiterating
that it is open to dialogue, to openness. The head ofthe
Government, Mr. Anicet Doleguele, repeats this
constantly. The President of the Republic, whenever
there is a national event - be it happy or sad - invites
all the political and opinion leaders, including his
predecessors. Some attend, but the extremists continue
to hide behind their refusal to enter into dialogue.

The crisis experienced by the Central African
Republic during the last six months is a social crisis
rooted in events of 1991-92, when the fight for multi-
party politics took place. This period was characterized
by several series of strikes, by paralysis. It was quickly
followed by the presidential campaign, in which there
was excessive tribalization even in the administration
and the defence forces. Those who witnessed the
events of 1996 and 1997 - that is, the mutinies -
were able to see the extent of the violence provoked on
all sides by this excessive tribalization of social life.

After those two years of mutiny during which
almost everything was destroyed and there was no
fundamental authority, the Central African Republic
found itself 12 months in arrears on civil servants'
salaries. Despite the goodwill and intentions that were
expressed here and there, no emergency plan was
devised to address the tremendous needs. The wait-
and-see policy adopted in response to the mutinies was
pursued until 1999, because we had two major events:
the legislative elections in 1998 and the presidential
elections in 1999. These two elections were considered
to be risky, and thus donors and other economic actors
did not take steps to intervene. Nonetheless, the
Government paid staff salaries at the end of every
month until May 2000, but it had no further means for
tackling the thorny problem of paying the 12 months'
arrears that followed the mutinies.

I would like to recall as well that when it came to
power, the new regime inherited 13 months' arrears.
However, as has been said here, with debrouillara'ise -
or some call it corruption - prevailing in the country,
many Central Africans succeeded in getting their
salaries arrears from 1993 paid.

Today accounting for the civil servants who have
not been reimbursed for their arrears from 1993, we
arrive at a total of 9 billion CFA francs, which is the
equivalent of five months' back salaries inherited from
the previous Government. These five months plus the
12 months that were passed on as a result of the
mutinies add up to 17 months, which will soon be 16,
since in the next 10 days we will be paying salaries that
will finish off the three months just referred to here.

In sum, when I left Bangui on Saturday, the
Government had already paid - on Friday, 19 January,
and Saturday, 20 January - three months' back
salaries to civil servants. Today, 1999 has been entirely
paid off.

I would like to clarify what has been written and
said about civil servants not having been paid for an
entire year. That is inaccurate. Up until the crisis of
May 2000, we had been making monthly payments on
salary backlogs under a system that may have seemed a
bit unorthodox. In other words, instead of making
payments from the budget for the current year, 2001,
the budget in place made it possible to make payments
for the 1999 and 2000 arrears. This means that
payments due in the current year are deferred to the
following year, thereby making it possible to pay
salaries regularly or even monthly. It was only with the
emergence of the fuel crisis in May - a perverse effect
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - that civil servants had to live for two or three
months without being paid. But we cleared up the 1999
arrears last September.
Everything has been said. The comments were
objective and the suggestions relevant. I do not wish to
go on too long, but I would like to make some
concluding comments to the Council. We believe that
the systematic destruction of the social and economic
infrastructure that began in 1991-1992 and worsened
with the mutiny of 1997 has become even more serious
with the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its perverse effects. The increased precariousness
of the infrastructure that resulted from the May 2000
fuel crisis - among whose perverse effects have been
complications in our dealings with financial
institutions on the second year of the programme-
added to our foreign debt. Finally, the logic of political
recovery implemented by extremist parties constitutes
today the true framework of the worsening of the crisis
in the Central African Republic.

The Government has never deprived civil
servants of the rights they claim. But it is essential to
understand that the state ofthe country and the national
effort that must be made to achieve concrete and
realistic solutions are constantly being jeopardized by
the irresponsible activities of certain corrupt politicians
who since independence have fostered tendencies
towards anarchy. Those trends can be found both in the
majority and in the opposition and present a major
obstacle to the campaign to fight corruption and to
extend good governance, the latter being one of the
Government's current projects to revive the economy.

Democrats everywhere must understand that if
taking and managing power is not carried out in
keeping with electoral rules, any number of
temptations can arise-including thinking that the
course of events can be altered in the streets. That is
the logic that some parties are using in their strategies
to win power. It is also a logic that calls for them to
occupy the streets constantly by infiltrating and taking
over student, union and any other demonstrations that
may take place. It also sometimes includes relying on
examples taken out of their social or political contexts
from such places as Yugoslavia, Cote d'Ivoire and even
Poland, where Lech Walesa was able to take power; he
was a trade unionist too. Under this logic, trade
unionists in our country believe they should take
power.

We in the Central African Republic firmly believe
that the urgency of the situation does not call for
closing ourselves off nor for seeking methods that are
supposedly perceived as authentic. What is urgent for
the people and Government of the Central African
Republic is to consolidate democratic achievements.
The essential national expectation with regard to the
issues at hand is for stabilization of a State that is
reborn from the ashes of the mutinies that severely
challenged national unity. What is important for us is
for there to be a resumption of economic activity that
generates our own resources to meet the immense
needs and desires of our population, in addition to the
assistance we hope for from the international
community.

We in the Central African Republic are convinced
that the success and consolidation of our fledgling
democracy does not imply the succession of new teams
in accordance with an illegitimate timetable. Instead, it
means that the team in place should complete its
mandate and organize free, fair and democratic
elections that bring about genuine political transition.
Any process that deviates from this classic pattern
would distort the democratic ideal, which is a justified
aspiration of people. This seems basic, but it must be
clearly understood if we are to avoid any upheaval or
divisions along ethnic, tribal, regional or even religious
lines.

We are convinced of the need for effective rule of
law. Despite what has been written and said, human
rights have never been of as much concern to our
leaders as they are now. The many seminars organized
by non-governmental organizations, BONUCA, and the
Government itself bear witness to that fact. The Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
oversees human rights, is carrying out very intensive
activities in my country. The official, who is a woman,
visits the few remaining prisons in Bangui, as well as
police detention centres. She speaks quite freely, not as
a civil servant, of the fate of detained persons. There is
not a single political prisoner among the approximately
1,100 prisoners we have.

With regard to freedom of expression, I said a
few moments ago that parliamentary debates are
broadcast in their entirety in both French and Sango.
This means that representatives may speak freely to
criticize or say whatever they wish. The media
publishes whatever they want to. I have brought a few
copies of opposition newspapers with me. Some of
these newspapers say, for instance, that it was the trade
unions that broke off the dialogue with the
Government. Another publication even said that the
opposition parties are saying "nyet" to President
Patasse. All this corroborates what some have said
here.

The burden is shared here, and the other side also
bears responsibility for refusal to engage in dialogue.
When one sees our newspapers, he will realize that
quite a few countries would envy the freedom we have
to say whatever we want and to criticize, even vilify,
the President, ministers and members of Parliament.
Freedom of expression exists and thrives in our
country. There has been neither censorship nor closings
of media outlets, either national or international ones.
There have been no police visits of any sort to the
headquarters of political or professional groups.

To conclude, there are no militias of the
Movement for the Liberation of the Central African
People (MPLC) or of the governing party in Bangui.
This is somewhat like the Loch Ness monster: much is
said about it, but no one has actually ever seen it, just
as no one has ever been able to find these militias or to
count their numbers. This is all part of the strategy to
spread disinformation and slander the Government.

Reference has been made here to a lack of
dialogue between the opposition and the
Government - between the opposition leaders and the
President of the Republic. But, as I have already said,
the appointed institutions have always expressed their
willingness to act. It is true, as has been said here, and
from reading from what has been written, that the
President was annoyed to meet with the opposition
leaders in June and July. But, as I said, on sad,
non-political occasions, they sometimes visit.
Mr. Goumba, one of the radicals, went to the home of
the late Mrs. Patasse to pay tribute to her remains. This
was a gesture of understanding, because in our
tradition, when there is a death, we cease quarrelling
and meet together, which calms the situation to some
extent. Again, contrary to what has been said, freedom
does exist, as I said earlier. It is not ideal, but we are all
doing our best.

Democracy and the rule of law also dictate that
everyone accept what we call the principle of the
primacy oflaw. This may sound a little pretentious, but
anyone having an elected or administrative
responsibility must obey the law. One cannot flout the
law just because one is a representative - still less if
one is a president or a minister. Ministers are always
being monitored, so they are not able to do that. Thus,
no one is above the law.

I assure the Council that, in order to face up to all
of these difficulties - all the situations with which the
Security Council is rightly concerned- the
Government intends to shoulder the full burden of its
responsibility and to respect its commitments, as we
repeat the simple but powerful words of Boganda, the
father of our nation. He said, "Let us not say a great
deal, but let us work very hard", and "We cannot feed a
people with politics".

We ask the Council to be understanding. The
Council will see that, if we are given the means to help
us make a start, and a little time, the Central African
Republic will become a haven of peace-the
Switzerland of Africa - as it was known to be some
30 years ago.

I should like to thank the United Nations, the
Security Council, the international and non-
governmental organizations and the friends and
partners of the Central African Republic. The
statements that we have heard today will comfort us
and encourage us to do better. We are willing to do so.
I hope that Radio Ndeke Luka, which is the civic
education vehicle for BONUCA, will be able to obtain
cassette recordings of today's statements so that all of
us in the Central African Republic can listen, time and
again, to the wisdom that has been expressed here
today.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Council for your generosity and attention.

