Mr. Menkerios: I would like to express my
appreciation to the President of the Security Council
for convening this important meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the African Union (AU), and for giving me
this opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/744) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.
The Council has the report before it, and last week held
briefings and discussions on the topic in Addis Ababa.
I will therefore just update the Council on what has
happened since the report was issued.

Let me start by congratulating the United Nations
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council
on the cordial and constructive nature of the discussions
held by the two Councils in Addis Ababa, which testifies
to the strong commitment of both to address peace
and security challenges in Africa in close cooperation
and partnership. It also illustrates the recognition that
the current threats to peace and security in Africa are
so complex and interconnected, and their impact so
profound, that neither organization can resolve them
without the other. I would like to commend the two
Councils for sending the unequivocal message that a
unity of purpose between the two organizations, based
on mutual respect and solidarity and on recognition
of their respective comparative advantages, is their
strength, and should be further institutionalized
going forward.

As Council members were briefed on last week,
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission has
been growing steadily. It is now characterized by
continued engagement between peers at various levels.
United Nations Special Representatives and Envoys are
working with and complementing the efforts of their
AU counterparts in a number of critical situations,
including in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, The Gambia, Mali, Libya, Somalia, South
Sudan and the Sudan.

As I mentioned last week, United Nations and
AU special representatives now frequently deliver
joint briefings to the AU Peace and Security Council,
including, most recently, on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Somalia. During the
period under review, United Nations representatives
have also participated and made statements in more than
40 AU Peace and Security Council meetings, most of
them through the United Nations Office to the African
Union. Similarly, AU representatives have briefed the
Security Council, although more of that is needed.
At the working level, daily engagements, including
horizon-scanning, joint analysis and assessments, and
joint operations planning continue consistent with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2320 (2016),
the AU Peace and Security Council communique
of 29 September 2016 and the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.

I would like to focus on five points arising from
Council members' successful deliberations last week.

First, both Councils reiterated the principle of the
Charter of the United Nations that the Security Council
has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and also recognized
the important role of regional arrangements in dealing
with challenges related to conflict, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter. In that regard, the Councils noted
the important and critical role of the AU and its regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms,
Whose proximity to the countries and regions in conflict,
together with their in-depth knowledge of the political,
social and economic root causes and dynamics of the
conflicts, provides a unique vantage point from which
to address them.

Secondly, we welcome the consensus that
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council can be
deepened through more frequent interaction between
the two. That could include joint field missions to
conflict situations that are on both Councils' agendas.
A number of suggestions were made about how such
joint missions could be organized. It was also suggested
that the Councils could interact more frequently,
particularly in advance of mandate decisions. Such
interactions would facilitate the adoption of common
approaches to addressing conflict situations and ensure
that both Councils' instructions on implementation
to the Secretariat and the AU Commission are more
closely aligned.

Thirdly, we welcome the Security Council's
recognition that its deliberations and decisions on
peace and security issues in Africa can be enriched by
briefings from AU special representatives and envoys
alongside those of their United Nations counterparts. As
many Council members said during the deliberations,
there is a wealth of knowledge, experience and
understanding that special representatives of the
African Union and the regional economic communities
could put at the Security Council's disposal. The United
Nations Secretariat stands ready to work with the AU
Commission and the regional economic communities to
give effect to the Security Council's wishes in that area.

Fourthly, many representatives underlined the
importance of closer collaboration between the two
organizations on conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Although the United Nations and the AU have
improved their early-warning mechanisms, early action
is still a challenge, and we often tend to be reactive
rather than proactive. The United Nations and the AU
should strengthen their collaboration with the regional
economic communities, as well as with neighbours of
countries where there are conflict areas. We should
also engage more with non-State actors, such as faith-
based groups, since they have historical contacts with
the affected communities and enjoy a higher level of
trust with them.

On peacebuilding, the two Councils emphasized
the importance of paying more attention to addressing
the root causes of conflict and preventing relapses into
it. That will require sustained engagement on the part
of the United Nations, the AU, bilateral partners and
non-governmental organizations, including by building
institutional capacity in fragile States, increasing
economic opportunities and enhancing resilience. The
AU Peace and Security Council also called for greater
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Support Office, with which they
agreed in October last year to meet annually to assess
progress and plan joint work.

Fifthly, we are encouraged by the continued
commitment of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council to considering financial burden-
sharing for AU peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council in line with resolution 2320
(2016). African countries continue to argue that they
already carry the heavy burden of sending their young
men and women into dangerous conflict situations
where the United Nations cannot deploy, in addition
to promising to provide 25 per cent of the total cost
of such operations. The AU has also taken further
steps to strengthen and fully comply with its financial
and human rights accountability and compliance
mechanisms. The Secretary-General has commended
the strong political will that the leaders of the African
Union have shown, including through their payment to
the AU Peace Fund to date of 18 per cent of their 2017
target of $65 million.

As I mentioned last week, it is also essential to
ensure that the financing of AU peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council is framed within
the context of a common political strategy, agreed to
by both Councils and informed by joint analysis and
assessments of conflict situations. Between them, the
Secretariat and the Commission have launched such a
process so as to ensure that the financing of AU-led
peace support operations becomes a tool for achieving
a common political and operational strategy.

Finally, we continue to hear passionate appeals from
the AU Peace and Security Council and Commission
that the related issue of predictable, flexible and
adequate funding for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) must be urgently addressed. The
United Nations support provided through the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia is either inadequate
or insufficiently flexible for the nature of AMISOM
operations, while non-United Nations support is
uncertain beyond 2018. Members of the AU Peace
and Security Council have described the situation as
untenable, and one that could result in AMISOM's
precipitous withdrawal before the Somali national forces
are ready to take over their security responsibilities. It
would be tragic, not least for the long-suffering Somali
people, if the gains and sacrifices of the past decade
were reversed because the international community was
unable to provide adequate and predictable funding for
AMISOM. As requested by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General will present a report on AMISOM's
further funding in November, and the AU Peace and
Security Council has asked the Security Council to
take appropriate decisions to address this urgent and
critical issue.

In conclusion, I would like to express appreciation
for the Security Council's continued high-level political
support to the Framework Agreement, signed by the
Secretary-General and the AU Chairperson, which
ensures our ability to fully operationalize the strategic
partnership that the Security Council has called for.

