Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and commend its initiative to
convene today's important open debate on children
and armed conflict. I would also like to thank today's
briefers for the insightful information they shared
with us.

The Republic of Azerbaijan is a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
relative to the protection of war victims. My Government
has strongly and consistently supported international
efforts aimed at ensuring more effective protection for
the rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict.

Despite some progress made at the international,
regional and national levels in preventing and
responding to grave violations committed against
children, serious challenges remain. According to the
report of the Secretary-General,

"[v]erified cases of the killing and maiming
of children reached record levels globally since
the creation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005)". (S/2019/509, para. 6)

Effective protection efforts must be free of
selectivity and address all situations of armed conflict
without distinction, including those of a protracted
nature and having a prolonged impact on civilians and
children in particular. The wrongs of the recent past,
including attacks on schools and hospitals, the killing
and maiming of children, forced displacements and the
abduction of children, must not be neglected.

During the continued aggression by the Republic
of Armenia against my country, serious violations of
international humanitarian law have been committed,
amounting to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
acts of genocide. A scorched-earth policy implemented
by the Armenian side has involved the ethnic
cleansing of the seized territories of all Azerbaijanis
and the brutal killing and wounding of thousands of
civilians, including children. Over more than 30 years,
Azerbaijan has hosted one of the highest numbers of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, many of
whom are children.

In February 1992, the largest massacre during the
conflict was committed against the civilians of the
town of Khojaly in the Nagorno Karabakh region of
the Republic of Azerbaijan. As a result of the attack
and capture of the town by the Armenian armed forces,
hundreds of Azerbaijanis, including women, children
and the elderly, were killed, wounded or taken hostage,
while the town was razed to the ground.

As a result of the war waged against my country,
3,888 citizens of Azerbaijan were registered missing,
including 718 civilians, ofwhom 71 are children. Those
reported missing disappeared in circumstances that
raise serious concern as to their well-being, particularly
given the atrocious methods of warfare widely practiced
by the Armenian side during the conflict. Yerevan
refuses to account for the missing persons within its
control, as well as to conduct a prompt and effective
investigation into their fate.

Despite the formal ceasefire, the Armenian armed
forces have repeatedly targeted civilians and civilian
objects in Azerbaijan situated along or further behind
the frontline. Therefore, as a result ofthe heavy shelling
in April 2016, many schools in the Goranboy, Tartar,
Aghdam and Agjabadi districts of Azerbaijan were
damaged. That was verified in the assessment report
of 15 May 2016 released by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees following its
mission to the affected areas of my country.

Under international law, intentionally directing
attacks on buildings dedicated to education is a war
crime. It should also be noted that attacks on schools
and hospitals constitute one of the grave violations that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict is mandated to monitor
and report on.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, in order
to break the cycles of violence and aid prevention
efforts, respect for international humanitarian law is
imperative and impunity must end. Being an inevitable
consequence of the offences committed, accountability
is an important prerequisite on the path leading to peace
and long-lasting reconciliation.

