The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chile.

The historic peace process on which the State of
Israel and the Palestinian National Authority have
embarked is too important for us to allow it to be
threatened. We know that it is a complex and delicate
process which requires of us all an iron will not to allow
it to deviate from the commitments that have been
achieved. That is why we support all those who are
committed to peace - that is, the vast majority. But
unfortunately it is obvious that not everyone in the area
seeks peace. Terrorist acts are aimed at preventing this
peace process from moving forward and at taking the
situation back to the bitter days of war and intolerance.

 

Chile condemns terrorism as a means of political
action and in all circumstances. It is repugnant to note how
this means was used in February when suicide bombers
caused explosions which caused death and destruction, and
which have led us to today's debate. The perpetrators of
this and other attacks, which have affected Israel as well as
Palestine, must be condemned by all States.

Hence, we understand the concern of the Government
of Israel for the safety of its people. The Government of
Chile has condemned these attacks in very strong terms. At
the same time, however, the choice of measures to be
adopted to defend the security of Israel must take account
of their widespread negative impact on the daily lives of
people living in the territories under the responsibility of
the Palestinian Authority.

The international community must be concerned with
the safety of individuals throughout the area. Ultimately, it
is a matter of creating conditions in which the security of
the human being, and not only of States, may become a
reality for all of the inhabitants of the region wherever they
may be. The security of the human being is greatly affected
in the Palestinian territories by the drastic interruption in
access to jobs, freedom of movement, imports, exports and
normal ties with Israel and the rest of the world.

Information the Security Council has received from
the Secretariat points to the serious effects which the
closure of the borders of the Palestinian territories is
having.

We are therefore faced with a humanitarian and
political situation which we cannot ignore and which must
be resolved as soon as possible, thus making security a
reality for all. In this context, we consider it essential to
speed up the initial measures adopted by Israel to ease the
situation of the Palestinian population. It is not possible to
implement security measures which in fact constitute
collective punishment of innocent people. It seems to us
that the border must be reopened now in a manner
consistent with the situation and that the other measures be
reconsidered.

The international community must not allow any group
to use violence and terror as a means of imposing its views.

We express our solidarity with the Palestinian people
in its suffering, and with the families of the victims of the
attacks in Israel.

We appeal to all parties in that region which is so
dear to us all. Palestinians and Israelis alike must do
everything necessary to overcome the difficulties they are
now facing and those they will face in the future as part
of this difficult peace process which the entire world
follows with admiration and hope.

I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

