Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I thank Mr.
Guehenno for his briefing. The United Kingdom
supports the statement to be made by Denmark on
behalf of the European Union; I have only a few
comments to add in my national capacity. We believe
that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the other pillars are achieving
steady progress in Kosovo, in difficult circumstances.

We welcome the recent visits by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, to
Belgrade and the intensifying cooperation between him
and Mr. Covic on Kosovo issues, because we believe
that cooperation among Belgrade, UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is
essential.

We strongly support Michael Steiner's initiatives,
both on Mitrovica and more generally on
decentralization. We believe that it is important that the
parallel structures be dismantled in north Mitrovica and
that UNMIK be able to establish its authority. Of
course, the United Kingdom regrets the low turnout of
Serb voters in Mitrovica in the recent elections. Hard-
liners ignored advice from Belgrade and from their
own people, and they have lost an opportunity as a
result.
We support decentralization because we want to
see a truly multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo, and we
believe that local people need to take on greater
responsibility for their everyday lives to achieve that
reality. So, like others, we were pleased that elsewhere
Serbs and other minorities did turn out to vote, even if
in lower numbers in some places than we would have
liked to see. Notwithstanding those low turnouts, the
generally successful conduct of the election should
create a good basis for further progress.

The United Kingdom strongly condemns the
subsequent murder of the President of the Municipal
Assembly and of two other persons in Suva Reka. The
perpetrators of those acts must face justice. Such acts
of criminal and extremist violence are a challenge to
the international community.

The British Foreign Secretary visited Belgrade
and Pristina over the past two days. He met political
leaders in both places. He underlined our strong
support for Special Representative Steiner's "Standards
before Status" approach and the need for all sides in
Kosovo to work together. What is needed is practical
cooperation to improve living conditions, to promote
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and to encourage economic growth for the benefit of all
the people of Kosovo.

