The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, in the Council's meeting today and thank
him for his statement. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Atul Khare for his briefing and
commend him for his contributions, over the three
years since he assumed his position as head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), to the process of peacebuilding and
development in the country. As this may be the last
time Mr. Khare is attending a Council meeting in his
present capacity, I wish him still greater successes in
his future endeavours.

We align ourselves with the joint statement of the
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
to be delivered by the Ambassador of Thailand.

We are encouraged by the efforts of the
Government and people of Timor-Leste, especially in
maintaining an overall calm public security situation
conducive to the realization of the country's political,
social and economic objectives. The period under
review has seen, inter alia, the achievement of over
60 per cent of the socio-economic development targets
set for the first and second quarters of this year, the
successful commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
the popular consultation, visibly improved legislative
processes, continued dialogue and reconciliation, and
the holding of elections at the local level.

These results have been made possible thanks,
first of all, to the strong determination of the
Government and people of Timor-Leste to move the
national peace and development process forward. We
commend the Government of Timor-Leste and
President Jose' Ramos-Horta personally for their
commitment to strengthening national unity by
building consensus; enhancing political dialogue,
consultation, reconciliation and mediation; and
promoting progress in addressing the situation of
internally displaced persons, a major issue resulting
from the 2006 crisis. These measures, together with the
endorsed parliamentary plans to intensify
administrative and legislative reforms, combat
corruption and enhance capacity, will enable State
institutions to better discharge their challenging tasks
ahead with broader public support. The active and
constructive participation of people from all walks of
life in Timor-Leste in the country's political process is
more than ever of colossal significance in
implementing these measures.

We highly appreciate the efforts of UNMIT in
carrying out its mandate of providing assistance to
Timor-Leste, including in maintaining public security,
organizing local elections, and implementing legal and
police capacity-building projects with a view to
helping the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
assume its responsibilities through a gradual and
phased process. In this connection, we welcome the
smooth handover of primary policing responsibilities
in three districts and at the Police Training Center from
UNMIT to the Government of Timor-Leste. We are
convinced that reviews of this initial step by relevant
agencies will produce useful lessons on how to proceed
more effectively in the next stages of the transfer of
police responsibility to the PNTL, ultimately leading to
full ownership by Timor-Leste of its peace process.

However, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/504), the imminent challenges to the
stability and development of Timor-Leste, particularly
poverty, unemployment and the immaturity of security
institutions, leave no room for complacency. Apart
from the intensified efforts required of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste, the international
community needs to continue to be committed to the
cause of peace and development in the country, with
priority given to strengthening the security sector and
improving basic education, health care and nutrition,
child protection and rural development aimed at
meeting internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals. In
implementing UNMIT's mandate, especially in priority
areas, its coordination with the Government of Timor-
Leste and with other United Nations partners such as
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
should be further strengthened.

As a country in the region and a close neighbour
of Timor-Leste, Viet Nam has always and will continue
to support and assist the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste in their cause of peace, revival and
development to the very best of its ability.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Thailand.

