Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation takes this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We are convinced that the work of the Council,
in working for peace and security throughout the world,
will benefit from your wisdom and your wealth of
experience. You can count on my delegation to cooperate
with you to the greatest extent possible.

We take this opportunity also to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Gerardo Martinez Blanco, the Permanent
Representative of Honduras, for the sure-footed and
competent way in which he conducted the work of the
Security Council during the month of July.

My delegation would like to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom and to
pledge him our sincere cooperation.

With respect to the resolution which my delegation
has just voted in favour of, we would like first to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on UNAVEM. III
dated 17 July 1995. My delegation is always pleased
when reports like this one, with all of the impact it may
have, are presented in a positive light, without sacrificing
the truth.

 

We would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Blondin Beye, for the fruitful and delicate work he
continues to do in Angola.

My delegation also congratulates the Secretary-General
on the attention he has been paying to Africa by visiting
Angola as well as other African countries which are going
through a difficult period in their history. Indeed, it is in
misfortune that we find out who our true friends are.
However, it is likewise true that friendship is neither a
temporary nor a transient thing. This is why we believe that
this honoured visitor should become a spokesman for
Africa, so that the entire world can better understand the
countries he visited. Condemnations must become advice
and brotherhood must be accompanied by solidarity.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved by the
Government of Angola and UNITA since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 976 (1995). We regard as
positive the contacts which have been made and continue
to be made between the various Angolan parties to resolve
their problems and find common ground. We encourage
such contacts. It is true that any lasting solution can come
only from the Angolans themselves. Any outside help can
only provide a structure and framework to facilitate
reconciliation between these brothers.

This is why the Rwandan delegation is convinced that
national reconciliation goes hand in hand with national
reconstruction. Successful demobilization of the military
personnel on both sides is possible only if there are options
to be offered to the demobilized troops.

My delegation believes that mine clearance is a vital
operation for the survival of the population and one of the
most important prerequisites for the resumption of the
reconstruction of the country.

With respect to the Angolan police, which is denying
access to the civilian police, my delegation recognizes that
Angola, as a sovereign country, has the right not to expose
its police to external elements, and that it is also within its
right to organize itself as it sees fit, as any sovereign
country does, to ensure safety and security within its
borders. It is clear that the United Nations forces sent to the
country are there not to oversee or to control the host
country but, rather, to assist it.

With respect to the proliferation of weapons, it is
regrettable that the central African region has increasingly
become an area teeming with weaponry. It is well known
that no country in that area manufactures weapons, but
the arms merchants do not hesitate to provide arms to
criminals to make it easier for them to hoist themselves
to power or to keep themselves there. My delegation is
convinced that collecting arms from the population is not
enough. Rather, the problem should be attacked at its
roots: that is, we should denounce those countries which
illegally provide weapons to Africa. This profiteering to
the detriment of Africa is becoming more and more
disturbing, particularly since in some cases those who
provided the weapons in the first place are the same ones
who come to organize their collection or who send
representatives specializing in human rights.

Regarding the financial aspects, it is interesting to
note from the report that the cost of UNAVEM. III
operations is out of all proportion to the cost of the
forthcoming programme for the reconstruction of the
country which is to be presented at the round table to be
held in September. UNAVEM. III costs $25 million per
month and the round table projects a cost of $620 million,
and nothing specifies how long this money is to last or
how soon the funds will be available. It is easier to
understand now why the African countries tend to be on
the road to under-development. Funding which relates to
militarization, tribal wars and genocides is very easily put
together, whereas funding for development is virtually
denied to the African countries.

It is true that the international community is tired of
helping Africa, but it is our hope that they will take a
look at the direction in which the assistance goes. They
will find that this assistance does not necessarily go
where it is supposed to go. The international community
may be tired, but it is high time for it to ask itself whom
it is tired of aiding, and why.

After 30 years of war, the international community
has the duty to help Angola not only to achieve
reconciliation but also, and above all, to find the
necessary and adequate funds to ensure its national
reconstruction.

