Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Just five days ago
I sat in this Chamber (see S/PV.7822) and asked what it
would take to stop the horror in Aleppo. Today Russia
and its small number of followers have shown that they
have no interest - none whatsoever - in answering
that question. Instead, for the sixth time in five years,
they have chosen to block meaningful action and hold
the Security Council to ransom. In doing so, and much
more tragically, they have also held to ransom the lives
of hundreds of thousands of innocent men, women and
children currently enduring hell in Aleppo.

They will claim that we made them veto, that there
was not enough time for proper consultations, that we
forced them to a vote for political reasons. Those are
hackneyed excuses. The draft resolution (S/2016/1026)
was first circulated over a month ago. And yet for
most of that time Russia simply refused to engage,
more content to support Al-Assad's onslaught against
Aleppo than to negotiate with fellow members of the
Security Council.

Let me pay tribute to the work of Egypt, New
Zealand and Spain in seeking consensus on such a
sensitive issue. They left no stone unturned, reaching
out in particular to the Russian delegation. They put
their first draft into blue a week ago.They amended it
to take into account Russian views, and they put their
final version into blue on Friday. And that is the version
in blue that we have in front of us, dated 2 December.
I therefore urge all delegations to avoid hiding behind
hypocritical, bogus procedural arguments.

China's veto is particularly surprising. Despite
repeated pronouncements against politicization and
in favour of dialogue, China has chosen to side with
Russia ~ a party to the conflict. Put simply, they have
chosen to veto not because of a lack of consultation,
but because of their long-standing, misplaced faith in a
despot who has killed nearly half a million of his own
people, who has sanctioned the murder of civilians as
they flee the bombed-out ruins of Aleppo - a despot
who would rather reduce Syria to rubble than to
negotiate an overdue peace.
I could go on, but instead let me ask Russia another
question. What did it seek to achieve today? For the
past 71 years, the Council has been responsible for
maintaining international peace and security. Each
and every one of us in the Chamber has committed
to upholding that responsibility. And yet, through its
veto today, Russia has once again blocked meaningful,
credible action - action that could have fulfilled our
collective responsibility. How does that veto serve
international peace and security? How is it in keeping
with the principles that we are all here to uphold?

Russia claims it is fighting terrorism and that its
veto today is in pursuit of ridding Syria of extremists.
That is pure fantasy. Blocking a seven-day ceasefire - a
ceasefire that would have let aid in, that would have
fed starving children - is not fighting terrorism.
Continuing the indiscriminate bombing of civilians and
attacking medical facilities is not fighting terrorism.
Supporting a regime that uses chemical weapons and
carries out war crimes is not fighting terrorism. Russia
will claim that its intent is decent ~ humanitarian,
even. But that misses the point. Many Council members
have pledged generous amounts - the United Kingdom
has allocated $900 million. But we all know that that
money counts for so little when humanitarian aid
cannot even get in. And we all know who is obstructing
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners. We
all know who is using starve-or-surrender tactics, and
who is bombing civilians into submission.

Even if Russia will not use its influence to stop the
bombing or permit humanitarian aid to be delivered,
it is not too late for Russia and the regime to prevent
even worse atrocities. Russia can still ensure the
protection of civilians leaving eastern Aleppo. Russia
can still enable the United Nations to protect those
fleeing and allow the United Nations to have a role in
planning evacuations.

The world and the Syrian people will not forget
Russia's role in carrying out, and supporting the regime
in carrying out, such heinous crimes in Syria. Look
again at the faces of those left starving, bleeding and
dying in Aleppo. They are not terrorists. Look again
and change course. We had a chance today to help those
people, to stop the bombing and let aid in. We have once
again failed, but we must keep trying until we succeed.

