Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much indeed, Madam President, for organizing this
debate. Many thanks, too, go to the Secretary-General
and to Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Pillay for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me also echo, Madam, your warm comments
marking the fact that this is probably the last
appearance of John Holmes in the Council. He has
greatly improved the Council's understanding of the
humanitarian aspects of conflicts and crises and
thereby helped the Council to enhance its responses.
We should certainly reflect carefully on the points he
has made today about ways in which we might try
further to close the gap between norms and reality. But
above all, we thank him for the leadership and
commitment that he has shown to those who would,
but for his efforts and the efforts of his United Nations
colleagues, often be abandoned to deprivation,
devastation, depredation and, frequently, death.

Global events, many of them grimly described by
John Holmes just now, since the Council adopted
resolution 1894 (2009) have shown that the protection
of vulnerable civilian populations remains as important
as ever. The forthcoming fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica tragedy is also a powerful reminder of why
this issue is so central to the Security Council's work.

The ground is already being well covered and
time is short, but I would just like to make three brief
points.

First, United Nations peacekeepers play a vital
part in protecting civilians, and it is right that we
prioritize that task above others in certain
peacekeeping operations. But we should be clear that
the parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility for ensuring that civilians are neither
affected by that conflict nor specifically targeted.

Following the withdrawal of the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Chad - which has already
been raised by previous speakers - the Chadian
Government has undertaken to protect its civilian
population, particularly women and Children, and it
must fully honour that commitment. The work of the
joint high-level working group between the Chadian
Government and the United Nations will be important,
and the international community should monitor its
findings carefully.

Secondly, we must ensure the robust protection of
humanitarian space so that civilians who are affected
by armed conflict can access essential goods and
services. That is primarily the responsibility of States,
but when the State is overwhelmed, humanitarian
agencies must be allowed to respond to needs for
emergency protection and assistance. That is a basic
tenet of international humanitarian law, and we must
uphold it.

That is why we have long called for an
improvement in the unacceptable and unsustainable
situation in Gaza. Resolution 1860 (2009) called for
the delivery of humanitarian aid and called on States to
alleviate the humanitarian and economic situation. As
my Foreign Secretary has said and as the Secretary-
General said in his statement yesterday, Israel's
announcement on 5 July on the easing of some
restrictions on the import of goods into Gaza is
welcome and marks an important step in the right
direction. Those changes must now be implemented
swiftly.

On the same grounds, we are concerned about
poor access by humanitarian agencies to communities
in the north of Sri Lanka. Ensuring freedom of
movement for all internally displaced persons who
remain in camps and transferring camps to civilian
authority are important steps in allowing civilians to
return to normal life.

That leads me to my third point. The United
Kingdom is greatly disturbed by the continuing growth
in the number of people displaced within their own
countries as a result of conflict - a record high of over
27 million in 2009. That is an acute problem in Burma,
for example, where we remain deeply concerned about
the lack of progress towards national reconciliation.
The Burmese military regime continues to target
civilians, particularly people from ethnic minorities.
The use of rape and other forms of sexual violence
remain a serious concern, as do the use of child
soldiers and forced labour for military use. Protecting
civilians wherever and whoever they are is the best
way to prevent displacement and consequent
deprivation.
Thus, the United Kingdom continues to attach
great importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In March 2010, the United Kingdom launched
a national strategy on the protection of civilians, which
draws together for the first time our efforts to keep the
protection of civilians at the forefront of our political,
security, human rights and humanitarian work.

As Afghanistan has been mentioned by previous
speakers, I should just make the point that it is
important that the Council recognize the difference
between, on the one hand, the Afghan and international
forces, which make every effort to avoid civilian
casualties and operate under a Council mandate, and
the actions of armed groups that deliberately target
civilians as part of their attempt to undermine the
democratic process. As the Secretary-General's recent
reports have made clear, the proportion of civilian
casualties caused by the Taliban has grown
significantly.

We have seen the valuable role played by the
Security Council's informal expert group on the
protection of civilians. As its chair, the United
Kingdom remains committed to its work.

We welcome the appointment of Margot
Wallstrom as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict - an
important step in this area, as John Holmes said. We
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Radhika Coomaraswamy, which has led to much of the
progress we have seen on the protection of children in
the past year.

The United Kingdom believes that we have made
much progress on the protection of civilians since the
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) in November, in
particular our discussions in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, but we still have more work
to do on this important issue.

