Mr. De Oliveira Soares (Timor-Leste): At the
outset, on behalf of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, let me congratulate New
Zealand on its successful presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July, and to convey to you, Sir,
our appreciation for convening this important debate.

Timor-Leste emerged from centuries of
colonization and occupation, and 13 years ago restored
its independence. In that short period, we established
our critical State institutions and now enjoy political
and security stability. We are very proud of the fact
that, in December 2012, the situation in Timor-Leste
was removed from the agenda of the Security Council.
That reflects the determination of our people and
leadership to live in peace and prosperity. And we share
our success with the international community and with
the United Nations, for which I thank them. On behalf
of the Timorese people, I would like in particular to
extend our sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his personal engagement and commitment
to our peacebuilding and State-building efforts.

Small island States face multifaceted security
challenges. I shall focus on three topics that are of
particular interest to Timor-Leste.

First, climate change is a threat multiplier that has
the potential to unravel development efforts, exacerbate
tensions and lead to conflict. It has an impact on food
security and poverty, resource availability, health and
access to clean water. The rising sea level is the biggest
threat to many countries in the world, particularly
small island States. It can lead to loss of territory and is
a serious threat to national sovereignty. The pressures
of climate change will force populations to leave their
homes. That is already happening in some of the small
island developing States (SIDS), notably in the Pacific,
exacerbating existing problems in already vulnerable
islands.

This body issued a Presidential statement in July
2011 (S/PRST/2011/15) that expresses concern that
possible adverse effects of climate change may endanger
the process of consolidating international peace and
security. It is therefore vital that there be globally
coordinated actions to tackle such threats. Timor-Leste
has adopted a national adaptation programme of action
that includes nine priorities. We work closely with our
development partners in addressing those priorities, as
we are fully conscious that climate change is not merely
an environmental issue but is about our security and
survival.

My second point is that access to natural resources
and the equitable distribution of revenue among the
people are paramount to security. That is why we are
proud to be at the forefront of the world's best practices
in relation to the management of our natural resources.
We have put much effort into building our institutional
and legal capacity transparently and effectively to
manage our extractive industries. We take great pride in
complying with the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, meaning that every dollar of petroleum
revenue is publicly disclosed and matched with records
of resources companies.

While our petroleum industry is critical to economic
growth, prosperity and capacity development, however,
we are also fully aware that where local communities
fail to share the benefits of resource exploitation,
resources can be a driver of conflict. The Government
of Timor-Leste advocates the fundamental principles
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea to safeguard its sovereign rights over our national
territory, including our maritime boundaries. We
firmly believe in the respect for international law in
the peaceful settlement of disputes through multilateral
frameworks.

My third point is that, due to their geographic
constraints, transnational organized crime poses a
serious security risk to island States. Reports indicate
that Timor-Leste has been used by organized crime
syndicates as a destination and staging area for drug
and human trafficking. In that context, our Government
has enacted legislation to fight organized crime, and
has also created a criminal investigation police unit
within our national police that is mandated to fight
drug and human trafficking, money laundering and
cybercrime. The cross-border nature of this type
of crime calls for greater cooperation in the region
and globally, especially on information-sharing and
capacity-building. In that regard, Timor-Leste actively
participates in the Southwest Pacific Dialogue, a forum
for dialogue for Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and Timor-Leste to
exchange views on important issues, namely, regional
security.

These issues are transnational in nature. While they
affect SIDS in particular, they also have an impact on
global peace and security. The international community
must therefore pursue ways of addressing these issues
in a coordinated and collaborative manner. In that
context, in the spirit of solidarity and partnership,
Timor-Leste has contributed $38 million for the period
2008 to 2014. The bulk of our financial contribution
has been disbursed to assist countries, namely SIDS,
affected by natural disasters.

The international community must synchronize
actions with courage and determination. In that
context, I wish to recognize the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon today, as well as his sustained
leadership and engagement in seeking solutions to the
challenges faced by SIDS. It is critical to highlight
the importance of moving beyond political discourse
and joint statements. We need to translate our shared
visions into concrete actions in addressing the security
challenges facing SIDS and the world. Peace, security,
global progress and the very future of the peoples of
small island States depend on us all. In that regard,
let us all stand united as one voice and one action to
promote and work together for SIDS, sustainable peace
and prosperity.

