Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Mr. John Ging, Director of
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
for his informative briefing. We once again commend
the OCHA teams for their tireless efforts to alleviate
the suffering of millions of Syrian civilians.

Equatorial Guinea joins previous delegations in
expressing its deep concern over the ongoing hostilities
in several provinces in the south-west and north-west of
Syria. We condemn the terrible attacks of recent weeks
in various parts of the country on civilians and civilian
and humanitarian infrastructure in north-western Syria,
which have claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians,
many of them women and children, in the provinces of
Idlib and Aleppo.

The civilian population should not and must
not continue to be the victim and target of military
operations. In that regard, we call on all parties
and those with influence over them to ensure safe,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian assistance to
civilians and the protection of civilian infrastructure,
in accordance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

Syria is one of the most challenging and dangerous
environments for humanitarian workers. Since the onset
of the crisis in March 2011, hundreds of humanitarian
workers and service providers, including health workers,
are estimated to have been killed in the line of duty. It
is therefore urgent that all necessary measures be taken
to increase their protection and ensure the continuity
of services in support of an effective humanitarian
response to people in need.

In Idlib and surrounding areas, the threat of an
escalation of violence, similar to that seen in other
parts of Syria, will not only endanger many of the
more than 3 million civilians surviving in that densely
populated area, but will also seriously affect the
ability of humanitarian partners to deliver life-saving
assistance, and will ultimately become a genuine source
of destabilization for the region.

As we have reiterated, the humanitarian situation
cannot be addressed in isolation from the political
process. In that regard, it is essential that all parties to
the conflict and those with influence over them reach
a genuine and inclusive agreement so as to resolve
this protracted war peacefully and to avoid further
suffering of the Syrian people. We also reiterate our
firm commitment to the inclusive political process
under the auspices of the United Nations, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015).

Lastly, we hope that the talks scheduled for early
September in Geneva with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General will create the conditions necessary
to achieve a lasting solution to the conflict, which will
lead inevitably to the country's needed reconstruction
and breathe new life into its economy thanks to the
financial contributions of its strategic partners.

