Mr. Puri (India): Mr. President, let me begin by
thanking you for organizing this debate. India attaches
the highest importance to the issue of peacekeeping.
This is the second time in six weeks that I have spoken

in this Chamber on this topic, which is indicative of the
importance that my delegation attaches to engaging in
the ongoing deliberations on this subject in the Council
and in other forums. My delegation would like to take
this opportunity to align itself broadly with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

A number of initiatives, including that of the
delegations of the United Kingdom and France, are
under way with the aim of taking stock of the current
state of peacekeeping. These efforts are being
supplemented or complemented by those of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Secretariat's New Horizon project.

A number of common themes run through these
parallel efforts. The draft presidential statement
circulated among Member States, which we have
studied carefully, attempts to come to grips with some
of these issues. Without going into the merits of the
question of whether a presidential statement is the
appropriate format for addressing these issues, we
would like to express our appreciation for the work that
has gone into the document. We find some of the ideas
and recommendations useful and timely.

As a nation that has provided and continues to
provide the United Nations with thousands of soldiers
and policemen, in addition to a large proportion of
operating air assets, we feel that the nature of the
Security Council's mandates and the manner in which
they are generated represent an area of major and
continuing concern. Mandates are too broad and have
very little correlation with the ability of the
Organization to deliver. We reiterate the importance of
the recommendation contained in the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) that mandates be clear and achievable.
We also reiterate that this will not be possible without
substantively involving countries that contribute
manpower and resources to peacekeeping operations.

India is not unfamiliar with the concept of robust
peacekeeping. In December 1962, an Indian officer,
General Dewan Prem Chand, led an acclaimed United
Nations military operation, consisting largely of Indian
troops, deployed in the United Nations Operation in the
Congo (ONUC), which ended the Katangese secession
and restored authority to the Congo Government.
ONUC, in which India lost 39 peacekeepers, was the
first robust United Nations peacekeeping operation.

The Operation was conducted in response to a
clear mandate arrived at after consultations. Today, we
receive feedback from our personnel on the ground
informing us that questions of substantive
interpretation of the mandates, with repercussions
beyond the immediate, are often left to the judgement
of mission personnel on the ground. This is a difficult
situation, particularly for military officers, who operate
best when there are unambiguous instructions and
objectives. Unrealistic mandates have led to situations
in which mission personnel are forced to ask national
contingents to undertake tasks and utilize contingent-
owned equipment in a manner inconsistent with the
legal framework under which they are deployed.

We note with appreciation the thrust of the
statement on the question of triangular consultations.
We would here once again like to draw attention to our
most recent experience in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where changes in the rules of engagement
and concept of operations were communicated to the
troop-contributing countries after they had been
authorized. I reiterate that being informed is not the
same as being consulted.

We also note the Council's intention to increase
interaction with the Secretariat during the drafting of a
mandate on the rule of law and peacebuilding
dimensions of an operation. We believe that the future
effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining
peace and security in the context of peacekeeping lies
in its ability to harness national governance capacities
in affected countries. These national capacities, as the
post-colonial experience of many societies reveals,
usually exist in ample measure. The challenge lies in
applying to these situations the capacities and
knowledge of countries that have undergone successful
post-colonial nation-building exercises. The Council
therefore needs to expand the ambit of its consultations
to include these countries.

The Secretariat has a predilection for
codification. Doctrines and benchmarks are constantly
being written and updated. While we have no argument
that there is a need to set standards, we need to remind
ourselves that standards should be set in a manner that
is realistic and relevant to the operating environment in
which United Nations peacekeepers deploy. Doctrines
and standards must not become like mandates -
statements rather than a blueprint for action.

Field support needs far greater attention. It is our
view, based on our experience of supporting the large
contingents that we currently have under deployment,
that the Department of Field Support (DFS) needs far
greater internal coordination and client orientation. It
has also been our view that the Department needs to
function as a military support operation with a lean
command structure. We feel that there is a need for far
greater engagement of Member States on the question
of the functioning of the DFS.

In conclusion, I would salute the peacekeepers
from India and other nations who have laid down their
lives while serving in United Nations missions. I would
also like to reiterate India's commitment to work with
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security, including through the mechanism
of peacekeeping.

