Mr. Baja (Philippines): It is my pleasure to
address the Security Council for the first time and my
honour to do so under Pakistan's presidency and on an
issue that is central to the work of the Council.

My delegation is likewise pleased to congratulate
you, Sir, and your team on Pakistan's outstanding
leadership of the Council this month, highlighted by
the adoption of resolution 1483 (2003). We also
congratulate Mexico on its commendable presidency
last month.

My delegation also wishes to thank Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari for his statement
this morning.

This Security Council meeting is timely, coming
as it does two days before the G-8 summit to be chaired
by France, which will address the issue of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development as one of its
themes. It is also important coming on the eve of the
two Security Council missions to Central and West
Africa, to be led by France and the United Kingdom,
respectively.

In recent weeks, the Security Council has
demonstrated its unswerving commitment to
safeguarding peace and security in Africa. The
adoption of resolution 1479 (2003), which established
the United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire, and this
morning's adoption of resolution 1484 (2003)
authorizing the deployment of a temporary Interim
Emergency Multinational Force in Bunia under the
leadership of France, speak significantly loud and clear
of the Council's determination to directly address
conflicts in Africa.

The response of the Security Council to the
Ivorian and Bunia crises and the role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
facilitating the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire and of
the troop-contributing countries in the establishment of
an Interim Emergency Multinational Force in Bunia are
examples of cooperation which bear highlighting.

In this context, my delegation proposes the
following, which we believe will further strengthen the
resolution of conflicts in Africa.

First, Security Council partnership with regional
groups in Africa, notably ECOWAS and the African
Union, should be fully harnessed. In particular, the
newly established African Union Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution
offers rich resources to complement the efforts of the
Council in conflict resolution.

Secondly, Security Council missions to conflict
areas have contributed to a better understanding of the
issues. They have been useful in facilitating the peace
process and should be carried out with increased
collaboration with relevant regional groups on the
ground. In this context, my delegation strongly
supports the regional approach of the Council in
dealing with specific conflicts in Africa through the
forthcoming Council missions. We hope that these
missions will be successful in accomplishing their
objectives.

Thirdly, an integrated approach that will bring
together all relevant United Nations actors involved in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict reconstruction should be consistently adopted
in dealing with conflict situations in Africa. We
welcome the trend towards strengthened cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council in this area. In this regard, my
delegation wishes to note the success of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau. Other mechanisms,
such as the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, the
Group of Friends and the special representatives of the
Secretary-General can also contribute to this integrated
approach.

We believe that the Africans themselves have the
capacity to play the key role in promoting peace and
security in their region, and the international
community should support them in these efforts.
Through the promotion of peace and security in Africa,
the economic development and progress of the region
are also enhanced.

Finally, important as conflict resolution may be,
my delegation emphasizes the need to focus and
develop appropriate conflict-prevention strategies as
priority measures to promote peace and security in
Africa and in all regions, for that matter.

