Mr. Jacob (Israel): Israel has expressed great
regret about the tragic death of the employee of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Iain Hook,
and is engaged in a thorough investigation of the
circumstances leading to his death. Israel may make the
findings of that investigation available to the relevant
authorities once the investigation is completed.

As concerns the damage caused to the
installations of the World Food Programme, Israel and
the World Food Programme have been engaged in
discussions aimed at finding an acceptable resolution
of the issue of the food warehouse. We are confident
that a resolution can be arrived at in the near future.
Israel has no desire to exacerbate the already difficult
situation facing the Palestinian people, and we will do
our utmost to facilitate the provision of all necessary
humanitarian assistance.

While it is right and proper to scrutinize the
actions of States, the failure to hold accountable those
armed groups that abuse the protected status of
civilians and that endanger civilian life will only
encourage terrorist groups to increase their reliance on
such reprehensible tactics.
Furthermore, while we accept that attention must
be duly paid to Israel's actions, we cannot help but be
distressed at what seems to be a singular attempt to
focus on Israel to the exclusion of other parties. To take
just one example, in April this year, when a Palestinian
terrorist in a Palestinian police uniform, armed with a
Kalashnikov assault rifle, opened fire on three
members of the Temporary International Presence in
Hebron (TIPH), killing two of them, no action was
taken - and this despite undisputed testimony of a
TIPH member riding in the vehicle that came under
attack.

The State of Israel is committed to achieving a
genuine peace between ourselves and our neighbours.
We have accepted and endorsed the vision articulated
by the President of the United States in his speech on
24 June and are committed to the process he envisioned
therein leading to the establishment of two States
living side by side in peace and security.

Israel envisions a cooperative partnership
between itself and the Palestinian Authority that would
facilitate the necessary internal reforms, consolidate
the various security and intelligence organs and
collaborate in an intensive and unwavering campaign
against terrorism. These steps could lead to further
cooperation in the civil and economic area, to a scaling
back of Israeli military action and to facilitating greater
freedom and prosperity for Palestinians and Israelis
alike.

Ultimately, and in the context of peaceful
negotiations, Israel would be prepared, as it has proved
in the past, to make painful concessions to bring about
true peace and meaningful coexistence with our
neighbours, on the understanding that similar
concessions are required by other parties to the
conflict.

But no such future will be possible while the
present is defined by violence, terror and bloodshed
and while hatred and rejection of Israel and Jews is
steadily and deliberately cultivated by the highest
echelons of the Palestinian leadership and reinforced
by the educational system and in the official media.
The first step forward remains an absolute and total
end to Palestinian terrorist campaigns.

In more than two years of deliberate violence and
terrorism, countless Israelis and Palestinians have lost
their lives. Thousands more have been injured. The
once promising Palestinian economy is in a shambles.
The credibility of the Palestinian leadership is barely
greater than zero. And the establishment of a
Palestinian State, which in the summer of 2000 seemed
well within reach, has been pushed further off into the
future.

Yet we continue to play the same cynical
diplomatic games. The total lack of seriousness
revealed by this latest manoeuvre here will similarly
get us nowhere. We remain where we were more than
two years ago. The only difference is the number of
gravestones that stand as a testament to the failed
policies of the past. The path forward is predicated on
an absolute and irrevocable commitment to non-
violence and dialogue. We hope the Council will
encourage all concerned parties to contribute to an
atmosphere of peace and non-violence and to the
reinvigoration of the process of dialogue and
reconciliation.

On a personal note, I would like to say that my
term as Deputy Permanent Representative is coming to
an end. As this will likely be my last statement to the
Council - barring another initiative before the end of
the year - I would like to express, on my own behalf
as well as on behalf of Ambassador Yehuda Lancry,
who could not be here today because of the tragic loss
of his son, our sincere appreciation for the cooperation
of the members of the Council. While we have had our
disagreements, the professionalism and cordiality that
has characterized our interactions give me cause to
hope that we can still find a peaceful way forward in
the Middle East.

