Mr. Fedotov: Resolution 2036 (2012), which was
just adopted, stresses the need to investigate,
prosecute, imprison when duly convicted pirates and
those who illicitly finance, plan, organize and
unlawfully profit from piracy attacks.

It is an honour for the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to update the Council on
what UNODC is doing to address this challenge. Since
I briefed the Council on this issue last year, the piracy
threat has continued to grow. Based on our data, in
2011 pirates received about $170 million in ransom for
hijacked vessels and crews. The figure has risen since
the previous year, 2010, when ransoms paid amounted
to over $110 million. The average payment made to
pirates last year was about $5 million, instead of $4 or
$3 million in previous years. Also, as much as
$10 million was paid for the release of a tanker.

The ransom money from piracy is flowing into
the legal financial system at an increasing rate. The
laundering of piracy proceeds is causing steep price
rises in the Horn of Africa and the surrounding areas,
and the money is also being reinvested in criminal
activities that are not limited to piracy. Drug, weapon
and alcohol smuggling, as well as human trafficking,
also benefit from the proceeds of piracy.

Although UNODC is unaware of an ideological
link between Al-Shabaab, which has joined Al-Qaida,
and pirates, there is strong evidence of cooperation in
furtherance of the two groups' aims. Therefore, piracy
is creating a clear threat to the stability of the region.

I listened very carefully to the statement of my
colleague, Ms. O'Brien, and she facilitated my task. I
can speak in lesser detail, although I will quote some
figures. I hope that our figures will ultimately coincide.
UNODC Global Programme against Money-
Laundering (GPML) is engaged in cooperation with
other United Nations agencies and Member States
within Working Group 5 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The Programme is
helping to increase awareness of illicit money flows
linked to piracy. Central to GPML activities is its
support for financial intelligence units and law
enforcement agencies in East Africa. We organized two
international conferences on illicit financial flows last
year - one in Nairobi and another in Djibouti. We are
now working, under a programme with the World Bank
and INTERPOL, on a report on illicit financial flows
linked to piracy, which will be published at the end of
this year.

To make our efforts more effective, we need
broader international support beyond this region. That
is the most efficient way to sever the arteries that
sustain piracy. At the same time, of course, we are
continuing to address the crime of piracy. UNODC's
counter-piracy programme is providing support to
regional countries that agree to take piracy suspects.

We are working in particular through extensive
training programmes for police, prosecutors, judges
and prison personnel in Kenya, Seychelles and
Mauritius, as well as within Somalia itself, where
security conditions allow. The programme started in
2009 with a budget of $500,000, which this year has
expanded to $40 million. This year we will be
allocating some $16 million to cover a range of
technical assistance to the countries of the region.

Our piracy prisoner transfer programme supports
the transfer of convicted pirates back to Somalia to
serve their sentences, while building capacities to
ensure that prison conditions meet international
standards. UNODC has built a model prison in
Hargaisa, Somaliland. Construction of a prison
academy has begun in Garowe, Puntland. Construction
of a court, a farm and a 500-man prison will soon
follow. Under the programme, we are also training
prison staff, mentoring staff and prisoners, and
monitoring prisons on a full-time basis. In Kenya and
Seychelles, UNODC has refurbished prisons, built
courtrooms and provided transport.

The assistance provided is strengthening the
overall criminal justice system in those countries and
helping it to become fair, efficient and consistent with
human rights standards.

Based on our review and the latest data, which I
received just yesterday, 1,116 Somali men are being, or
have been, prosecuted for piracy in a total of
20 countries around the world, and 688 in the region. In
Kenya, 168 pirates are being, or have been, prosecuted;
50 have been convicted, and 10 have completed their
sentence; 17 have been acquitted; and the remainder
are awaiting trial.

In the Seychelles, 88 pirates are being, or have
been, prosecuted; 63 have been convicted; and the
remainder are awaiting trial.

Mauritius has signed a transfer agreement with
the European Union (EU) and will accept the transfer
of piracy suspects for prosecution. A joint EU/UNODC
programme is now being implemented that will support
the Government of Mauritius in prosecuting pirates.

UNODC's counter-piracy programme is
contributing to criminal justice systems in the region.
However, the presence of child pirates within those
systems represents a complex issue, on which I must
from time to time answer questions from Member
States. In the absence of birth certificates or any other
forms of identification, courts in Kenya and Seychelles
rely on medical advice in determining the age of pirate
suspects; as a result, they have determined that seven
of the 252 pirate suspects are under 18 - one in
Seychelles and six in Kenya.

The counter-piracy programme is currently
developing an advocacy programme to reach out to
Somali youth. It will liaise with key stakeholders,
including community leaders, politicians and religious
leaders. Television, radio and print media will be used
in the programme. Our advocacy programme
complements United Nations Development Programme
activities on alternative livelihoods that will use
microfinance projects, among others, to show Somali
youth that there are sustainable choices other than
piracy.

Overall, the issue of piracy requires a strong
inter-agency approach that addresses not only the
law-enforcement and judiciary aspects of the problem,
but its root causes in Somalia itself, as well as in the
world's financial centres.
