Mr. Carreras (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour that a countryman from our
extended homeland is presiding over the work of this
body this month. We would like to extend to you,
Mr. President, our heartfelt greetings and congratulations.
We would also like to thank Ambassador Alfredo Lopes
Cabral of Guinea-Bissau for having provided excellent
leadership during the month of September.

During the last decade, Central America suffered the
effects of the magnification of age-old socio-economic
conflicts, resulting from the global confrontation between
the two super-Powers. During that anxious time, the
Central American countries themselves, with the support
of the international community and the active
participation of the United Nations, agreed freely to opt
for the peace process known as Esquipulas II, an
instrument of our own making that enabled the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central
America.

Consequently, Costa Rica, a country that was not a
party to the conflicts in Central America, but that
nonetheless suffered their effects, accords special
significance to the agreements and commitments aimed at
promoting peace in the subregion of southern Africa,
especially the peace process in Angola, which has been
 

developed by the parties to the conflict with great support
from friendly countries and the active participation of the
United Nations. Costa Rica, which was affected by the wars
in Central America 10 years ago, understands clearly the
significance and value of the agreements for Angola's
neighbours.

For these reasons, Costa Rica has given, and continues
to give, its support and backing to the implementation of
the peace agreements and, in particular, to the full
application of the Lusaka Protocol. In this context, my
country would like to emphasize the efforts and the will
that have been shown in maintaining the agreed ceasefire.
But we would also like to express our concern about the
slow pace of implementation and what the Secretary-
General has called "the lack of significant progress"
(S/1996/827, para. 40) in implementing the Lusaka
Protocol. Costa Rica especially regrets to note the recent
attitude of UNITA and the absence of Mr. Savimbi at the
summit meeting of the States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), which was held
at Luanda on 2 October, as was reported by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report to the Council.

The experience of Central America shows that it is
only through strict and transparent adherence to agreements
and a firm desire to comply with them, without double
standards or false deception, that peace processes can attain
their goals. Absolute consistency between what has been
agreed and the behaviour of all the parties is essential;
otherwise, credibility is shaken, the peace process is
weakened and peace becomes unattainable. International
pressure is fundamental. Pressure from friendly countries,
from the media and public opinion, from the international
community and the United Nations is necessary - that has
been our experience in Central America.

For its part, Costa Rica urges the parties, especially
UNITA, to take specific and decisive action to break the
current deadlock and to ensure full implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. We also reiterate our backing for the of
the peace process being provided by the observer States,
and especially by the States of southern Africa and
Portugal, which is a brotherly country to Ibero-America. In
conclusion, we would like to express our appreciation for
the activities being carried out by the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) in all aspects
of the process, and express our confidence in its ability to
fulfil its mission.

 

