Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honor to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC group. At the outset, allow me to express to the
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt, a fellow OIC
member State, both our congratulations for presiding
over the Security Council this month, and our gratitude
for its convening of an open debate on such a timely
and important topic as countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism.

The rise and spread of violent extremism across the
world in general and Da'esh terrorism in particular, as
well as its increasing ability to reach out to the masses
through media, make it imperative to effectively
counter the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
Terrorism and violent extremism remain two of the
most serious threats to every society, as well as to the
international peace and security as a whole. Regardless
of its ethno-religious identity, geographical location,
socioeconomic conditions or political stance on the
world stage, every nation is more or less susceptible
to the growing threat of terrorism. Therefore, never in
history has a comprehensive and concerted response to
terrorism been needed as much as it is today.

The OIC believes that the first step of such an effort
should be to deprive terrorist groups oflegitimacy in the
eyes of their primary support base by repudiating the
very arguments they use to justify their criminal acts.
In this regard, it would be appropriate and necessary
to correct first and foremost a misnomer that is often
repeated, and even wrongly cited in the concept note
of this open debate (S/2016/4l6, annex). There is no
such thing as a "religiously inspired terrorist group", as
no religion either condones or inspires terrorism. Yet,
there are terrorist groups that exploit religions.

As reflected in numerous Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, the OIC member
States believe that terrorism cannot be and should
not be associated with any religion, ethnicity, race
or nationality. Accordingly, no one should refer to
Al-Qaeda, Boko Haram, Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups as being
religiously inspired. On its part, committed to fighting
terrorism and countering violent extremism, the OIC
works towards delegitimizing terrorist ideologies,
through developing counter narratives to such extremist
ideologies and propaganda by elevating credible and
authentic religious voices that support tolerance and
non-violence.

With respect to countering the appeal of Da'esh
specifically, the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers,
at its forty-second session held in Kuwait, adopted a
resolution entitled "Crimes of Da'esh" and called for
the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) in order to
prevent that terrorist group from recruiting foreign
terrorist fighters. In this regard, the OIC believes
that building the capacities and capabilities of States
is critical to the effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions. Furthermore, the resolution also
calls for the imposition of stringent measures against
social media sites that are used by Da'esh in order to
propagate its heinous ideology and recruit sympathizers.

The OIC is extremely disturbed by the fact that
terrorist groups, including Da'esh, are increasingly
exploiting cyberplatforms to spread their messages of
hatred and to disseminate their distorted interpretations
of the Holy Koran. Such messages are aimed at
exploiting the socioeconomic and political frustrations
of Muslims. It is therefore of the utmost importance that
States, within the framework of international law and
while respecting the freedom of expression, identify
and shut down such media platforms, while also
engaging with communities to counter the narratives
of terrorists and their propaganda. To that effect, the
OIC has been working to establish its messaging centre,
based at the OIC headquarters in Jeddah, as part of its
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism.

The OIC has consistently been at the forefront
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
Cooperation with key international and regional
partners in combating terrorism is among the key
objectives of the OIC Charter. Adopting its code of
conduct and its Convention on Combating International
Terrorism in 1994 and 1999, respectively, the OIC was
among the first to formulate a clear and principled
position against terrorism.

Moreover, the OIC 2025 Programme of Action,
adopted at the thirteenth session of the Islamic
Summit Conference in Istanbul last month, is yet
another important milestone. The Programme of
Action recognizes the need to improve the utilization
of information and communications technologies to
counter the exploitation of cyberspace for terrorist
purposes, including radicalization and recruitment. In
addition, the OIC Summit reaffirmed its support for
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the importance of addressing the causes of violent
extremism in a comprehensive manner.

Extremism flourishes when human rights are
violated. It is therefore crucial that collateral damage
and human catastrophe in counter-terrorism operations
be avoided, as they fuel extremism and radicalization.
The OIC is gravely concerned ovwere the mounting
trend of intolerance and discrimination against
Muslims, and the consequent surge of Islamophobia,
which is an affront to the human rights and dignity
of Muslims. The OIC believes that extremism grows
within the context of an economic, social and political
environment. It is essential that the contexts that
provide conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism, such as historical injustices,
occupation, deprivation, exclusion, discrimination and
marginalization, be addressed with equal vigor.

