Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for the quality of his
briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We also welcome
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador of the Republic of
Kosovo to the United States of America.

I will focus my remarks on both the progress
made and the challenges remaining in relations
between Serbia and Kosovo since the previous report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/76). My delegation
notes with satisfaction the ratification by the Kosovo
Parliament, on 21 March, of the Montenegro border
demarcation agreement, which is an important step in
the normalization of relations between the two countries.
My country appreciates the fact that the political parties
have managed to overcome their differences despite the
violent actions of some opposition parties in attempts
to derail the process.

My delegation also welcomes the holding, on
23 March in Brussels, under the auspices of the
European Union, of the high-level meeting between the
political authorities of Pristina and Belgrade, as part of
the political dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. My
delegation hopes that that kind of meeting will continue
to happen, in the interests of reconciliation and the
final settlement of the Kosovo question. In that respect,
Cote d'Ivoire would like to reaffirm its support for the
continuation of the political dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo under the auspices of the European Union.

Despite some progress, my delegation remains
concerned by the signs of continued tension between
Belgrade and Pristina, including the arrest and
subsequent expulsion, on 26 March, of Mr. Marko
Duric', chief negotiator and representative of Kosovo
Serbs, from northern Mitrovica. My delegation urges
Serbia and Kosovo to give priority to constructive
dialogue and to refrain from any unilateral action that
couldjeopardize the prospects for a peaceful settlement
of the dispute between the two countries. My delegation
also calls on them to observe good neighborly relations.
In that regard, my country welcomes the mediation
efforts of the European Union, whose representative,
Ms. Mogherini, travelled to Belgrade on 27 March to
meet with the Serbian leadership in order to discuss
the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina.

My delegation also remains concerned about the
slowness and lack oftangible results in the investigations
into the 16 January murder of Oliver Ivanovie, leader of
the Civic Initiative "Freedom, Democracy, Justice". We
recall the importance of consolidating the rule of law in
the framework of the fight against impunity.

Turning to the situation in Kosovo, Cote d'Ivoire
again calls for the implementation of the agreement
establishing the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo, which will
undoubtedly be a major source of appeasement and
easing of the sociopolitical climate. My delegation
urges the Kosovo political authorities to demonstrate
the necessary political will to remove all obstacles
to the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.

In conclusion, my country once again welcomes
the work done by UNMIK to stabilize the situation in
Kosovo and to bring the various communities together.
My delegation urges Serbia and Kosovo to give priority
to dialogue in order to find solutions to the problems
that hinder their good-neighbourly relations, as both
countries have the duty and the capacity to make the
Balkan region a stable and prosperous region where
their respective communities can live in peace and
harmony with respect for their political, ethnic and
cultural diversity.
