The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council strongly commends
the efforts of the African Union to achieve lasting
peace in Darfur, which have its full support. It
reiterates in the strongest terms the need for all
parties to the conflict in Darfur to put an
immediate end to the violence and atrocities;
reaffirms its concern that the persisting violence
in Darfur might further negatively affect the rest
of the country as well as the region, including the
security of Chad; and expresses its utmost
concern over the dire consequences of the
prolonged conflict in Darfur for the civilian
population.

"The Security Council regrets the decision
of the Government of National Unity not to
renew the contract of the Norwegian Refugee
Council and expresses its grave concern over the
humanitarian consequences. It also regrets the
decision of the Government of National Unity to
deny the entry of the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator to Darfur. It looks forward to
the forthcoming briefing by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and to his being able to visit Darfur
at the earliest possible opportunity. The Security
Council also calls for an explanation from the
Government of National Unity of its decision.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks on the
Conflict in Darfur in Abuja, noting that an
inclusive political settlement is key to peace in
the Sudan, that the Talks provide a mechanism to
achieve such a settlement and that the African
Union should maintain leadership. It welcomes
the timely involvement of the Chair of the

African Union and the President of Nigeria in the
Talks during their visit to Abuja on 8 April;
endorses the decision of the African Union Peace
and Security Council that 30 April 2006 is the
final deadline for reaching an agreement;
demands that all parties make the necessary
efforts to reach an agreement by this date; and
reaffirms its determination to hold accountable
those impeding the peace process and committing
human rights violations, noting the view of the
African Union that the Council has a critical role
in this respect.

"The Security Council commends the
African Union for what the African Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) has successfully achieved in
Darfur despite exceptionally difficult
circumstances, and the efforts of Member States
and organizations that have assisted AMIS. It
reiterates its welcome in resolution 1663 (2006)
of 24 March 2006 of the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council of 10 March to
support in principle the transition of AMIS to a
United Nations operation and to extend the
mandate of AMIS until 30 September 2006; calls,
therefore, on all parties to take all necessary
measures to ensure a smooth and successful
transfer to a United Nations operation; urges
Member States and international and regional
organizations to provide additional assistance to
AMIS so that it may be strengthened in line with
the conclusions of the Joint Assessment Mission
report of 10 to 20 December 2005; and calls for
the convening of a pledging conference.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the
Sudan, which will be unaffected by the transition
to a United Nations operation.

"The Security Council stresses that the
Secretary-General should consult jointly with the
African Union, in close and continuing
consultation with the Security Council and in
cooperation and close consultation with the
parties to the Abuja Peace Talks, including the
Government of National Unity, on decisions
concerning the transition; stresses that a United
Nations operation will have strong African
participation and character; recalls its request in
resolution 1663 (2006) of 24 March 2006 that the

Secretary-General expedite the necessary This statement will be issued as a document of
preparatory planning for the transition of AMIS the Security Council under the symbol
to a United Nations operation; calls in this regard S/PRST/2006/16.
for a United Nations assessment mission to visit
Darfur by 30 April 2006; and calls on
international and regional organizations and
Member States to provide every po. ible
additional assrstance to a United Nations
operation."

   

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
