Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, like previous speakers, are grateful to
the Special Coordinator and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, for his
comprehensive and objective briefing. We are once
again discussing an exacerbation of the situation in the
Middle East. Unfortunately, the Palestinian-Israeli
confrontation is taking on an increasingly dangerous
character. People are dying and serious material
damage is being done to the Palestinian territories -
indeed, a humanitarian disaster is unfolding there.

Moscow is deeply concerned about the
Government of Israel's decision to expel the head of
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Arafat. To do so
would be a serious political mistake with very negative
implications for a region where the situation is already
very complex. Such a step would erase any prospects
for a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
crisis and, at worst, could lead to developments
spinning out of control.

Russia condemns terrorism in all its forms. It is
convinced that political goals cannot be achieved
through acts of terrorism. This condemnation also fully
applies to terrorist acts carried out in Israel. We express
our deep condolences to the families of the deceased
and our sincere sympathy to all the victims. The
actions of terrorists undermine efforts to establish
peace in the region. They create further obstacles in the
road towards a political settlement. They not only
wreak devastation on completely innocent people, but
damage the national interests of the Palestinian people
and put roadblocks in the path towards Palestinian
statehood.

In order to break this Vicious circle of
confrontation, it is important for all the parties
involved to refrain from steps that harm our chances
for renewing the political process.

We call on the leadership of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to act with the utmost
responsibility. It is unacceptable for extremists to
dictate their will. The leaders of both sides must take
all necessary steps to prevent the situation from
spiralling out of control once and for all. We can only
break the back of this confrontation and put an end to
terror and other manifestations of violence through the
joint efforts of Israelis and Palestinians, who must
comply with their mutually agreed commitments. This
will require the parties to return to following the road
map, with the active support of the international
community, first and foremost the Quartet of
international mediators - Russia, the United States,
the European Union and the United Nations.

The road map is unique. It may provide the only
chance of finding a way out of the crisis and of
reaching a settlement that fully meets the interests of
both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and establishes
conditions for them to live in a secure peace. It is our
firm view that diplomatic efforts must continue with a
View to taking practical steps to find a way out of the
tragedy of the situation in the Middle East on the basis
of a renewed process towards political settlement.

Both the elimination of terror and a final
settlement, including the establishment of a Palestinian
State, would meet the fundamental interests of Israelis
and Palestinians. This can be achieved only through

peaceful means and the active cooperation of
international mediators.

We note the important constructive role to be
played by the Security Council. Russia, as a co-sponsor
of the peace process, will continue to make an active
contribution to these efforts.

