Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
convening of this timely debate, an initiative that
speaks to Libya's commitment to the efforts by the
United Nations to bring peace to the Middle East. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing.

A little more than two months after the conflict in
Gaza and a few weeks after the donor conference in
Sharm el-Sheikh, this debate should reinforce the
resolve of the international community not only to
speed up reconstruction of the war-torn Gaza Strip, but
also to advance the peace process as a whole. It is
necessary to take stock of the situation and to devise a
common strategy that allows the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State at
a very early date, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel within internationally recognized
borders.
7

This goal requires the resumption of negotiations
between the parties in good faith. Brazil welcomes the
Palestinian political forces' willingness to form a
reconciliation government. We recognize the role of
Egypt in bringing about those developments. The
expansion of settlements by Israel and the frequent use
of violence - serious obstacles to the two-State
solution - should be immediately stopped. More than
ever, persuasion from the international community is
an essential ingredient of the achievement of peace.

Brazil firmly believes that all actors in the region
that are prepared to act constructively should be given
a chance to participate in the peace process. By the
same token, bringing developing countries from
outside the region to the discussions would also add
fresh ideas to the talks. Brazil attended the Annapolis
Conference and encourages the holding of a follow-up
conference as a matter of urgency.

We expect that the new government being formed
in Israel will not only fulfil the international
commitments already in place, but also engage fully in
the peace process.

At this juncture, it is very important to support
the Palestinian Authority and to help it strengthen its
institutions and its ability to make a difference in the
everyday lives of the Palestinian population.

With respect to Gaza, all parties must fully
implement Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
without preconditions.

The reality on the ground calls for immediate
action. That includes the permanent reopening of all
crossings into Gaza, so that the flow of humanitarian
aid and of regular trade can be normalized. On the
Palestinian side, violence against Israeli civilians,
including the launching of rockets, must cease.

In the recent times of heightened tension, Brazil
has continued and even increased its cooperation
efforts with the Palestinian Authority. We emphasize
the need to bring a clear and consistent improvement to
the daily lives of the people of Palestine. During his
visit to the region during the conflict, Foreign
Minister Celso Amorim delivered, on behalf of the
Brazilian Government and people, 14 tons of food and
medicine to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.
That was not an isolated event. In the donor
conferences held in Stockholm and Paris, Brazil

donated a total of $10.5 million. Our contribution in
Paris was the largest Brazil has ever made and one of
the highest among non-Islamic developing countries.
These resources are now being employed in a wide
range of projects on the ground that are meant to have
a direct positive impact on the local population: the
construction of schools, the establishment of fish farms
and the management of communal lands, to mention
just a few. Together with our partners India and South
Africa in the framework of the IBSA Fund, we pledged
an additional $3 million over three years and are now
pursuing the construction of a sports centre in
Ramallah scheduled to start in April.

In Sharm el-Sheikh, Foreign Minister Amorim
announced the donation of a further $10 million for the
reconstruction of Gaza. On that occasion, IBSA also
announced its cooperation for the reconstruction of
Gaza. Next April, a high-level Brazilian delegation will
visit the West Bank to hold talks with the Palestinian
authorities on cooperation in the area of public policy.

In cooperation with the Department of Public
Information, Brazil will host the 2009 International
Media Seminar on Peace in the Middle East in Rio de
Janeiro next July. We hope that the event can make a
contribution to the peace process through dialogue
between the parties, including their civil societies.

Let me say a few words about Lebanon, a country
with which Brazil also has strong ties. The steady
implementation of the Doha agreement and the
scheduling of legislative elections for next June are
encouraging developments. The Lebanese people will
once again be able to solve problems in a democratic
and peaceful way. We note with appreciation the calm
situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, but we appeal to all
parties to implement in full resolution 1701 (2006).

By the end of March, the second South America-
Arab Countries Summit will take place in Qatar. We
are confident that it will help to further identify
opportunities to enhance relations and cooperation
between the two regions.

In concluding, I would say that, in recent months
there have been tragic setbacks in the Middle East. The
situation in Gaza remains intolerable. The Council and
the international community as a whole must live up to
their responsibilities. It is no longer the time for a
peace process; it is high time for peace in the Middle
East.
