Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation once again deplores the escalation of
violence in the Middle East and the loss of hundreds of
human lives. This escalation of violence and its
extension to Lebanon was provoked by an attack by
Hizbollah, an act of aggression unacceptable to any
State and which prompted a military reaction by Israel
in Lebanon.

The actions of Hizbollah aggravated the spiral of
violence in the Middle East, which has been
deteriorating since 25 June as a result of a similar act
for which the Hamas-led Government of the
Palestinian Authority was responsible.

Those abductions and attacks, whose similarity is
not coincidental, prompted in both cases a military
response by the Israel Defense Force to combat the
actions of armed groups that have not renounced
violence - groups that form the Government, or part
of the Government, of the Palestine Authority and of
Lebanon, respectively.

We recognize the right of Israel, which is
constantly being attacked by missiles launched by
Hizbollah, to defend itself. Nevertheless, it should
exercise that right while complying with the principles
and norms of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as with international humanitarian law, avoiding the
disproportionate use of force, which is causing the
deaths of many innocent civilians, damaging civil
infrastructure and creating a humanitarian crisis.

The Security Council should address the conflict
in Lebanon with a double action. The first action
should consist in achieving as soon as possible a
cessation of hostilities and, in any case, while this is
being achieved, bringing about an immediate
humanitarian truce to avoid further deterioration of the
situation of the Lebanese population.

The Council's second action should be to achieve
a lasting peace agreement, in accordance with
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) - in other
words, an agreement that re-establishes the sovereignty
of Lebanon over all of its territory, including the
disarmament of Hizbollah and of all the forces that
operate outside the authority of the Lebanese State. We
therefore support the elements proposed by the
Secretary-General and the special mission dispatched
to the Middle East, and we are confident that those
elements will be duly taken into account by all parties
concerned in order to resolve the crisis.

Likewise, with regard to Palestine, it is
indispensable to recall here that any agreement should
take into account the requirements that the Quartet has
made of the Government of the Palestinian Authority.
In other words, Hamas must recognize Israel, renounce
violence and comply with the agreements previously
accepted by the Palestinian Authority itself. A
negotiated solution for the peaceful coexistence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, with secure and
internationally recognized borders is a utopia so long
as one of the parties denies the right of the other to
ex1st.
We firmly support the actions being undertaken
through the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) to bring about the release of the Israeli soldiers
kidnapped by terrorist groups in Lebanon and in Gaza
and to secure their immediate repatriation to Israel, as
well as the freeing of elected Palestinian officials who
were recently illegally detained by Israel.

Furthermore, we are in favour of the substantive
reinforcement of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and its transformation into a force that will
help the Lebanese authorities to guarantee the full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).

While the cessation of hostilities is being
achieved, it is indispensable that we deal with the
humanitarian crisis that is being suffered by the
population of Lebanon. According to the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, there are half a
million people affected by the conflict, including those
who have been internally displaced. Further, more than
70,000 people have had to be evacuated from Beirut,
while 115,000 third-country nationals are still in
Lebanon. According to the ICRC, more than 100 towns
and cities in Lebanon have been attacked by air, sea
and land.

Also, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has gathered
information suggesting that 300 people have died and a
further 860 have been injured, including civilians and
militants, and that there has been widespread
destruction of public infrastructure, including
hospitals, road networks, bridges, fuel stores, airports
and seaports.

In the face of this dramatic humanitarian
situation, Peru calls for an immediate humanitarian
truce, a truce that would permit the establishment of
air, sea and land corridors for immediate access for the
humanitarian agencies and the evacuation of civilians
and third-country nationals. We are sure that we can
count on the cooperation of Israel and Lebanon in this.
Such a truce is necessary to avoid further loss of
innocent life and further suffering of the population. It
is also necessary to ensure that the humanitarian
agencies have access to those who need them in the
present moment. And, finally, it is necessary to take
this first step against violence.
