Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Groundhog Day. Every year on 2 February, a ritual is
celebrated in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, in which
the groundhog Phil makes a brief appearance, playing
an important but limited role in determining whether
spring will come early or winter will last another six
weeks. On that day in Punxsutawney, the local and
international press covers the event widely, but the
following day the issue disappears from the news and
we hear no more about the charming Phil until the
following year. Does anyone here know where Phil
is today?

Similarly, every year at the end of April - and
only once a year - we carry out a ritual in the Council
in which the issue of Western Sahara makes a brief
appearance in an open debate that plays an important
but limited role in considering solely the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). On this
day in New York, the local and international press
widely covers this event, but as with Punxsutawney
Phil the issue disappears from the news and no one
hears anything about it until the following year. Unlike
many other situations, the issue of Western Sahara and
the Secretary-General's report are never addressed in
open briefings of the Council.

Since this is a practice that has been going on
for more than two decades, we believe that it is not
contingent on the preferences of the elected members
of the Council, which are in no position to change
this practice during their brief tenures, however much
we may attempt to fight similar practices - as my
delegation does by insisting on taking the floor regularly
before the members in open meetings of the Council.

My delegation therefore decided over the past 12
months that we must not forget the situation to which
MINURSO was subject last year. Through other
bodies, it has regularly sought information on the state
of functionality of the Mission, which was seriously
affected by the expulsion of its entire civilian staff
in March 2016. Finally, three days ago on Tuesday,
25 April, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Ms. Kim Bolduc, orally
reported in consultations to the Council that, with the
return to Western Sahara of the last 17 officials, the
Mission had resumed full functionality.

Let me repeat yet again that peacekeeping missions
are established by the Security Council. The mandates
determined by the Security Council, as well as status-
of-forces and status-of-mission agreements, are binding
contracts between the troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations. What is more, they are guarantees
that protect the personnel that countries voluntarily
contribute to peacekeeping missions. It is therefore
obvious that these commitments can be altered only
by those endowed with the corresponding international
legitimacy, which in this case is the Security Council.
No Member of the United Nations can unilaterally
change these commitments and obligations. The
return of the civilian staff to Western Sahara and the
resumption of the full functionality of MINURSO are
proof of that.

Since 1963, 54 years ago, Western Sahara has
been recognized by the United Nations as a non-self-
governing Territory in the process of decolonization.
We must recall that MINURSO was established with
a mandate to carry out a referendum to determine
the final status of the non-self-governing Territory
of Western Sahara so that its people can exercise
their right to self-determination and choose between
independence, association with an independent State
or integration into an independent State. We fully
support the commitment of the Secretary-General to
finding a solution to the question of Western Sahara
and his express intention to propose the resumption
of the negotiating process with a new impetus and a
new spirit.

In that regard, we encourage the parties to take
positive steps and to launch a dialogue that will lead
to a just and lasting political solution acceptable to all
parties and guarantee the free self-determination of
the people of Western Sahara. The difficult situation
in which the population of Western Sahara finds itself
deserves the heightened attention of the international
community, and of the Security Council in particular.

Last but not least, my delegation thanks you, Madam
President, for guiding the work that led to the adoption
of resolution 2351 (2017) at all levels, from the experts
in your delegation to the Permanent Representatives.
Throughout a number of days of arduous work, we were
able to participate directly in finding a solution that, as
demonstrated by the unanimous vote, resulted in the
successful drafting of the resolution.

