Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Malaysia for convening this open
debate, and the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for
their respective briefings.

My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.

Mexico condemns any activity that violates the
rights and well-being of children and adolescents,
including situations of armed conflict, where the
essential rights of children are especially affected.

Today's debate is particularly relevant, as it
celebrates the twentieth anniversary of the introduction
of the issue into the agenda of the Security Council. At
that time there emerged a consensus and an international
awareness regarding the importance of preventing and
addressing recruitment and use of children by armed
groups under any circumstances. In the 20 years since
then, we have made significant progress, such as the
inclusion of the lists of perpetrators of grave violations
against children in the annexes to the reports of the
Secretary-General.

Nevertheless, we are also aware that there remain
worrying challenges, as is the case with the noted
increasing intensity of serious violations in various
armed conflicts, the prolongation of such conflicts and
the resulting increased forced displacement of children,
and the use of violent extremism and the recruitment of
children by different parties to armed conflict.

These facts must serve to reaffirm our collective
determination to keep the subject at the centre of the
international agenda. The Government of Mexico
reiterates its support for the important work of the
Office of the Special Representative. It is essential
that the work of the Office, in particular through the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, be respected by
all involved. Reports should be accepted and valued,
because their content constitutes transparent and
objective advocacy for the best interests of children in
situations of particular vulnerability.

We also express our deep concern over the
consequences of the increase in recent years of forced
displacement of children. Displaced and refugee minors
are doubly vulnerable to becoming victims of serious
human rights violations. It is essential that the Council
reiterate its calls for all parties to a conflict and the
international community to respect international law
and the human rights of children, who are the main
victims of conflict and violence.

That is why Mexico has agreed to be one of the
pathfinder countries of the Global Partnership to End
Violence Against Children, an initiative that seeks
to ensure the conditions for children to enjoy a life
without violence. We reiterate the commitment of
our Government to work outside and within Mexico
to promote this global initiative. We also reiterate
our support for the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
launched in 2014 by the Office of the Special
Representative and UNICEF, and our unwavering
commitment to achieve its goals.

We welcome and will follow up in a timely manner
the measures taken by the Organization to prevent
and combat violence and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel in peacekeeping operations
of which children have been the unfortunate victims.
We consider it essential to ensure compliance with the
policy of zero tolerance for exploitation and sexual
abuse committed by civilian or military personnel of
peacekeeping operations or any other force authorized
by the Security Council, and to bring to justice those
who have committed them.

We reiterate our call on the members of the Council
to promote measures that contribute to full respect
for international law; include specific provisions for
the protection of minors in peacekeeping operations
and special political missions by mainstreaming child
protection in the field; encourage warring parties to
include in peace talks or negotiations measures for the
protection of children; require the sanctions committees
that have not done so to include in their work criteria
for serious violations of the rights of children in order to
strengthen measures against systematic perpetrators of
these violations; and provide more systematic follow-up
to the decisions and recommendations of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, particularly
when considering conflict situations under its agenda.

Finally, I wish to reiterate that full respect for the
rights of children can be achieved only in peace and
security. The prevention of conflicts and the search
for sustainable peace must therefore be priority
objectives of the international community. We need to
redouble our efforts, in line with the objectives of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), to find long-term solutions
to mitigate the causes of armed conflict, care for the
most vulnerable populations and mitigate the harm
done to victims of serious violations of international
humanitarian law in post-conflict settings. In that
regard, Mexico's priority before the Council will be to
continue to prevent and alleviate the suffering of those
who are the future and present of our societies. Our
ethical and moral obligation is to protect the rights of
children in all circumstances and to turn environments
of adversity into environments of opportunity for all
children around the world.

