Mr. Nambiar (India): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during a month charged with a full
agenda, coinciding, as it does, with the General
Assembly and with the first anniversary of the 11
September attacks. We thank you for convening this
emergency open meeting of the Council on the serious
situation in the Middle East, which allows us to take
stock of the recent developments.

Although in the month leading up to 17
September, 56 Palestinians and five Israelis lost their
lives, the six weeks from 4 August to 18 September
were unique in that they represented the longest period
without a suicide bombing or major Israeli military
activity since September 2000. Six weeks of relative
quiet in the Middle East gave rise to hopes for the
possibility of progress in addressing the conflict raging
in the region. The decision of the Quartet, in its
meeting of 17 September, to come up with a three-
phase road map for achieving a two-State solution
within three years, as well as the Quartet's meetings
with the Foreign Ministers of countries in the region,
were positive signs. Unfortunately, recent
developments, including the two suicide attacks inside
Israel, the bomb blast in a Palestinian school and
subsequent Israeli action in Ramallah, have worked to
negate all efforts towards reconciliation.

The reoccupation of the headquarters of the
President of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah on
19 September and the wanton destruction of property
around the President's headquarters by the Israeli
Defence Forces (IDF) serve no constructive purpose.
Israeli forces have also reacted strongly to spontaneous
Palestinian protests against Israeli actions in President
Arafat's compound, leading to the deaths of more
Palestinians and injuries to several others. The
incursions of the IDF into Palestinian-controlled areas
of Gaza and the reimposition of curfews and closures
in all Palestinian cities, with the exception of
Bethlehem, have taken the region back to the situation
of six weeks ago and have set back the political
process.

My Government strongly deplores Israeli
retaliatory measures against President Arafat and
believes them to be counterproductive. We believe that,
far from contributing to Israel's security, they can only
jeopardize efforts towards peace. President Arafat
remains the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, and any attack against him would seriously
undermine ongoing efforts to find a solution to the
conflict. We call upon the Israeli Government to
completely withdraw its forces from President Arafat's
compound forthwith and to work with the Palestinian
Authority in de-escalating the situation.

The extent of the continuing humanitarian crisis
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has been highlighted
by the Secretary-General's Personal Humanitarian
Envoy, Catherine Bertini, who visited the region last
August and, more recently, by the release of the report
of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
(UNSCO) for the Middle East peace process on the
impact of closure and other mobility restrictions on
Palestinian productive activities. The UNSCO report
shows that the Palestinian economy is in a severe
depression, with only international aid stemming a
possible total breakdown. According to the report,
unemployment in the occupied territories is around 50
per cent and poverty levels have reached 70 per cent in
Gaza and 55 per cent in the West Bank, while income
losses are estimated at $7.6 million a day, with a total
loss of $3.3 billion since October 2000. The Secretary-
General has reported that, despite high-level Israeli
assurances of increased cooperation with the aid
agencies, there have been only marginal improvements
on the ground.

We urge the Government of Israel to do all that is
possible to alleviate the social and economic plight of
the Palestinian population by lifting closures and
blockades, by allowing unhindered access to
humanitarian supplies and by releasing the balance of
funds due to the Palestinian Authority.

The resurgence of violence threatens to derail
efforts towards peace, as do the military measures of
the IDF. The resumption of suicide bombings by
militant groups are an act of random violence designed
to torpedo the progress by the parties concerned
towards arriving at conciliatory measures. We condemn
the suicide bombings and the violence against innocent
civilians. It is our belief that no situation, however
difficult, can justify acts of violence against innocent
civilians, be they Israelis or Palestinians or any other
people of the Earth on which we cohabit.

Another crossroad has been reached, requiring
another debate in the Security Council on the
Bengalese issue. The answer lies in all concerned
persevering in their efforts towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict, and in not allowing vested
interests to derail a process designed to bring peace,
security and economic well-being to an entire
generation of people in the region.

India joins the rest of the international
community in calling for continued forward movement
in realizing the vision of two States, living side by side
within secure and recognized boundaries, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002).

