Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings on the
alarming situation in parts of eastern Ukraine.

In line with General Assembly resolution 68/262,
adopted by an overwhelming majority on 27 March 2014,
let me reiterate our full support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Let me be clear:
we will not accept the redrawing of borders in Europe
with the use of military force by Russia. Its actions are
in direction contravention of international law and in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations.

I will focus on three issues - first, elections;
secondly, the humanitarian situation; and, thirdly, the
security situation in the broader Black Sea region.

My first point concerns the announcement of local
elections in the non-Government-controlled areas in
eastern Ukraine. We condemn those illegitimate so-
called elections. If held, those fake elections would
contravene commitments made under the Minsk
agreements and would violate Ukrainian law. In line
with the Minsk agreements, local elections in certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk can take place only in
accordance with Ukrainian legislation. Any such illegal
elections would be incompatible with the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Further talks on a
peaceful settlement should take place on the basis of the
Minsk agreements. Let me recall that resolution 2202
(2015) calls on parties to fully implement the Minsk
agreements. In that regard, the so-called elections are
not only illegitimate, but also run counter to the letter,
spirit and commitments of the Minsk agreements and
are a clear setback to the peace process. The Minsk
agreements remain the only viable and accepted path
to peace.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls on the
parties involved to refrain from any actions, such as the
holding of so-called elections, that would obstruct the
implementation of those agreements. We call on Russia
to bring its considerable influence to bear to stop the
so-called elections from taking place, in the interests
of the peace process and of the civilians who suffer the
daily consequences of the conflict. Russia must play
its part by ending its financial and military support to
the separatists and by withdrawing its armed forces and
military equipment from Ukrainian territory.

My second point pertains to the humanitarian
situation in the non-Government-controlled areas.
The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has made tireless efforts to ensure that all
parties respect the Minsk agreements, including the
ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons. We
commend the courageous work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in often dangerous circumstances.

Meanwhile, the population in the affected areas
continues to suffer. In its latest report, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recorded a 30 per cent increase in civilian casualties
as compared to the previous reporting period. Both
landmines and unexploded ordnance remain an
everyday threat to civilians in the conflict area. Civilian
infrastructure has been heavily damaged. Power and
water supplies are insecure. In the 6 June presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/l2), the Council called for
United Nations agencies to address the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands calls on all parties to ensure that the United
Nations and international humanitarian organizations
can be fully operational in the non-Government-
controlled areas. As Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller said today, civilians are not a target.

My third point centres on the security situation in
the broader Black Sea region in the wake of the Russian
Federation's illegal annexation and militarization
of the Crimean peninsula. The Russian military
presence in the Sea of Azov increased recently. The
militarization of the Sea of Azov can only destabilize
the delicate security situation in the wider Black Sea
region. Additionally, the Russian Federation has started
inspecting commercial vessels in the Sea of Azov
heading to and from Ukrainian ports. The resulting
lengthy delays only add to the economic damage
inflicted on south-eastern Ukraine by the illegally
constructed Kerch Strait Bridge. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes Ukraine's decision to seek
arbitration under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. We hope for a peaceful settlement of
the dispute. In the meantime, we call on all parties to
take all the necessary measures to de-escalate military
tensions in the Sea of Azov.

