The President: I should like at the outset of the
meeting to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of Sweden
to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Hans Dahlgren.
We look forward to cooperating with him in the Council's
work.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should also
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Peter Osvald, former
Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of July. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Osvald for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic

Identical letters dated 18 July 1997 from the
Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
the Central African Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council (S/1997/561)


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
Central African Republic, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Kpongo
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them identical
letters dated 18 July 1997 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of the Central African
Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council, document 8/1997/561.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/613, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Central African Republic,
Egypt, Guinea-Bissau and Kenya.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/543, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 July 1997 from the President of
Gabon addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


