Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretaries- General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their briefings. The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) represents a genuine and valuable opportunity to help the Sudan achieve lasting peace. The fact that the Mission has the unanimous support of the Security Council should not be taken for granted. However, the Mission is facing many challenges in achieving its objectives. The Sudan is in the midst of political reform and faces intense pressure from the Sudanese people to meet their needs. That is in addition to the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the effects of climate change and an increase in humanitarian needs, driven primarily by an increase in intercommunal violence. According to the most recent reports, 2.8 million people currently face a food crisis or levels of emergency food insecurity in Darfur, and almost 400,000 people have been affected by heavy rains and flooding. Insecurity and human rights violations are also increasing, affecting vulnerable populations, especially women, who continue to be affected by high levels of sexual and gender-based violence in some areas during the COVID-19 lockdown. In that regard, we welcome the recent legal amendments for the protection of the most vulnerable populations, including the eradication of cultural practices against women and girls through the prohibition of female genital mutilation and the abolition of the death penalty for persons under 18. We add our voice to calls for the allocation of adequate resources to continue child protection efforts and to enable UNITAMS to fully implement its child protection mandate. It is essential that child protection advisers be provided and that they have adequate funding and sufficient seniority, as well as a monitoring and reporting mechanism. We recognize the Sudan's efforts to advance the transition and welcome the decision of the parties to maintain their commitment to the Juba process and the decision of the Sudanese Government and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front to sign a comprehensive peace agreement in Juba on 3 October. All the parties in the Sudan, including armed groups, must remain committed to addressing the root causes of the conflict in order to establish a safe environment for all Sudanese, especially the most vulnerable. In that regard, the focus of UNITAMS in supporting the Government in the protection of civilians is vital. All efforts to protect civilians must be a priority and a shared responsibility. The transitional Government's initiative of a national plan for the protection of civilians is a positive step in that direction. It is our hope that the support of UNITAMS in this area will provide new opportunities to ensure that the unarmed protection of civilians is a more widely implemented approach. While we acknowledge the improvements in the protection of women's rights and gender equality in the comprehensive peace agreement, we remain concerned that women's formal participation in peace talks has been marginal in most cases. We also encourage the Government to continue its efforts to improve humanitarian access and call on non-State armed groups to allow the safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians in need. Finally, the political transition of the Sudan remains fragile. The recent increase in intercommunal violence is of great concern and calls for a comprehensive response that addresses the urgent need for peace of the Sudanese people. As the Sudanese transition evolves, tangible progress on human rights, justice and inclusive governance will ultimately determine whether the aspirations of the Sudanese become a reality. It also represents a crucial opportunity for the United Nations and the Council to support the search for peace in the Sudan, and we believe that UNITAMS is a useful means to that end.
