Mr. Martin Prada: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, the Republic of
Moldova, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine also align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, the Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and the President of the Financial Action Task Force,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, for their contributions to this
debate. Combating the financing of terrorism remains
an utmost concern for the EU and its member States.
We very much welcome this opportunity to discuss this
important topic today.

I would like to start by thanking France for
putting terrorism financing in the spotlight with the
organization of the Arria Formula meeting in January
and for introducing resolution 2462 (2019), which was
adopted today as a concrete follow-up to the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the
theme "No money for terror". The resolution has clearly
given new political impetus to policies on the counter-
financing of terrorism. It is important to maintain this
political momentum, and the European Union is ready
to contribute to it.

The resolution adopted today is an opportunity
to reaffirm the principles and obligations already
established under the existing counter-financing of
terrorism framework, which deals with terrorism and
its financing and has been effective in limiting the
capacity of terrorist organizations to finance their
activities. It is also an opportunity to respond to the
evolution of the threat. Terrorism financing is a
dynamic and continuously evolving phenomenon. New
challenges emerge constantly and terrorists change
their modus operandi to be able to circumvent existing
controls. Terrorists use new financing streams, such as
through small foundations; they use new techniques,
such as crowd-funding platforms; and they also use
new sources, such as organized crime. We therefore
need to be vigilant and update our counter-measures
where necessary.

For the European Union, it is important to improve
the transparency of the beneficial ownership of
companies and trusts, as criminals are known to exploit
opaque structures as a means to hide their sources of
funding or circumvent sanctions regimes.

It is also very important to enhance inter-agency
cooperation. In that regard, the EU has strengthened its
anti-money-laundering directive and the criminalization
of terrorism financing; developed a new asset-freezing
regime against Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in 2016; and is in the process of
adopting legislation to ensure that law enforcement has
access to bank account information in specific cases
of serious crime or terrorism and to promote stronger
cooperation between law enforcement and financial
intelligence units.

Terrorist attacks by small cells and small actors
have been carried out in the European Union with
very small amounts of funding. Those low-amount
transactions may not be easy to detect by financial
entities. Therefore, we need to bridge the intelligence
gap and improve the use of financial information
in counter-terrorism investigations. In that respect,
we support intensifying and accelerating the timely
exchange of information and financial intelligence, as
reflected in resolution 2462 (2019).

Several countries have established public-private
partnerships in the area of financial intelligence, such
as among public prosecutors, the police, financial
intelligence units and private companies. The
European Union is providing substantial financial
support to projects looking at the developments of
such partnerships in the EU and beyond, and we are
glad to see that resolution 2462 (2019) also calls for
the establishment of public-private partnerships in the
financial sector.

While it is important to counter the financing of
terrorism, we should ensure that any measures taken
do not limit the space in which humanitarian actors
can operate in a principled manner, in particular in
high-risk and fragile contexts in which their assistance
is greatly needed. We therefore underline that the
implementation of measures to counter the financing of
terrorism should be in full compliance with international
law - in particular human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law - and
that mitigating measures, including where there are
relevant humanitarian exceptions, should be introduced
to reduce the impact on humanitarian actors.

Moreover, all States should ensure that activities
by non-profit organizations, including those working
on gender-related issues and women's rights as
well as reconstruction and stabilization, are not
unduly restricted.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
coordination and international cooperation between
Member States and United Nations entities in the field
of counter-terrorism are key to learning from each
other and supporting targeted technical assistance and
capacity-building efforts. We believe that combining
our international efforts can help us all to move closer
to our objective, which is to prevent and counter the
financing of terrorism.

