The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan, and Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Bangura,
who is joining today's meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/708, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.

I now give the floor to Ms. Lej.

Ms. Lojz I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan
(S/20l4/708). I will provide a brief update on the most
recent developments since the report's publication,
on 30 September, and highlight some of the major
challenges facing the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) at this time.

On the security front, small-scale skirmishes have
continued between the two parties to the conflict.
Two weeks ago, the opposition forces mobilized from
the Canal area of northern Jonglei state and attacked
and captured Doleib Hill, to the south of Malakal, in
Upper Nile State. The Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) subsequently recaptured Dolieb Hill and pushed
the opposition forces back into Northern Jonglei. In
Unity state, tensions remain high, particularly around
the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu, with the SPLA
continuing to allege that the UNMISS protection site is
an opposition stronghold.

Outside of the traditional conflict zone, we are
paying close attention to Lakes state, as intercommunal
violence continues, which, in the most recent spate,
left 30 dead in Rumbek Centre in early October. The
Government is deploying additional security forces to
Rumbek in an attempt to bring the security situation
under control, and UNMISS is looking into ways to
support the efforts of national authorities to end the
violence and foster intercommunal reconciliation.

There was an outbreak of violence in Chukudum,
Eastern Equatoria, this month between the SPLA and
the local community, following the killing of an SPLA
soldier by an unidentified attacker. Tensions are also
continuing in Western Equatoria as a result of the influx
of pastoralists from Jonglei and Lakes states, whose
cattle are destroying the crops of the mainly farming
communities in the Mundri area. On a more positive
note, however, the Greater Pibor Administrative Area
in Jonglei state remains calm and UNMISS and the
United Nations country team are looking into ways to
contribute to the consolidation of peace in the Area.

The humanitarian situation across the country
remains dire. Over 1.8 million people have been
displaced - 1.35 million internally and another 453,000
to neighbouring countries. Around 4 million people,
close to a third ofthe population, are facing serious food
insecurity. Aid agencies are working hard to support
those in need, with over 3.2 million people having been
reached with some form of humanitarian assistance
over the course of the year. UNMISS will continue to
support the humanitarian community to ensure the key
needs of the people of South Sudan are met. During the
dry season, requests are likely to increase for UNMISS
to provide force protection to relief convoys and sites
where relief is prepositioned and stored. The arrival
of the remainder of the authorized surge capacity,
including the proposed riverine capacity, will be key to
respond to those needs. However, no amount of aid can
solve the crisis or convince people to return home. Only
peace and reconciliation can and, sadly, in the absence
of both, the aid operation will have to be sustained if
we are to continue to prevent the humanitarian situation
from further deteriorating.

UNMISS continues to provide protection to about
100,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in nine of
its protection-of-civilian sites, including about 49,000
in Bentiu, 28,000 in Juba and over 18,000 in Malakal. To
improve living conditions in UNMISS protection sites,
UNMISS and humanitarian partners have invested
substantial resources on existing site enhancements
and the construction of new sites. In Juba, two thirds
of the internally displaced persons - that is, over
10,000 - have been moved from the UNMISS base
in Tomping to the new site in United Nations House.
Within the Malakal site, almost 14,000 persons have
been relocated to areas with improved living conditions,
while construction work continues to accommodate the
remaining 5,000 persons. In Bor, the relocation to the
new site started on 9 October, with approximately 1,200
persons, about 40 per cent, relocated thus far. In Bentiu,
prevailing physical conditions and the lack of financial
and engineering resources have limited options for the
reconstruction of a new site, but planning for necessary
drainage and other works to be carried out during the
dry season is ongoing.

The approaching dry season offers an opportunity
to pursue sustainable solutions for the plight of the
IDPs in our camps. The United Nations family in South
Sudan is working on a comprehensive strategy for
such sustainable solutions. In that regard, discussions
are under way between UNMISS, United Nations
agencies, the Government and all the relevant partners
to commence the process of facilitating voluntary
returns where security conditions allow. I would like to
underline that any return will be voluntary and based
on humanitarian principles.

With regard to the human rights situation, UNMISS
continues to receive reports of gross violations of
human rights, indicating that conditions remain unsafe
for civilians in many parts ofthe country. In the Greater
Upper Nile area, UNMISS investigated allegations of
civilians killed in the context of hostilities in Renk
during the latter half of September. Likewise, the
Mission is monitoring closely the aggressive posture
of the SPLA towards internally displaced persons
sheltering in the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu,
The recently adopted national security bill, if enacted
into law, could also potentially further undermine
fundamental rights and freedoms and narrow the
political space in the country.

I must say that since I have been on ground, I have
been shocked by the complete disregard for human
life. Those responsible for committing atrocities and
human rights violations must be held to account and
face justice. In that connection, I look forward to the
findings of the African Union Commission of Inquiry
on South Sudan.

As of 21 October, the UNMISS troop strength
stood at 10,488 military personnel, and its police
strength at 890 police officers, including 363 formed
police unit personnel. With the arrival of additional
troops, UNMISS has been exerting all efforts to
expand its reach, including through the establishment
of forward bases, proactive patrolling, both military
and integrated, and, where possible, on foot, in order
to provide protection to vulnerable civilians beyond the
UNMISS premises.

The deployment of the remaining authorized
personnel, as well as equipment, therefore remains
vital for the Mission to more effectively deter violence
against civilians. We therefore continue to work with
our Department of Peacekeeping Operations colleagues
and troop- and police-contributing countries to
accelerate the process. I wish to thank all the troop-
and police-contributing countries for their continued
support to UNMISS and I urge them, as well as other
Member States with the means, to help equip and
accelerate the deployment of UNMISS personnel and
resources.

The Mission continues its strong advocacy with all
the relevant authorities to ensure unfettered freedom of
movement and access for UNMISS peacekeepers and
other personnel, particularly in areas at high-risk of
conflict and with large displaced populations. Although
the relations between the Mission and the national
authorities have improved at the political level and the
number of violations of the status-of-forces agreement
has decreased over the past couple of months, violations
continue.

In that respect, I am seriously concerned by the
recent spate of unlawful arrests and detentions and
abductions targeting United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. Two of our national staff have remained in
detention since August. On 10 October, three UNMISS
individual contractors were abducted at Malakal
Airport, two of whom have since been released, but
the third person is yet to be found. On 16 October, a
United Nations agency national staff member was
abducted at Malakal Airport by unknown persons. I
urge Government authorities to do everything within
their power to see that the captured UNMISS individual
contractor and the United Nations agency staff member
are freed quickly and unharmed.

The monitoring and verification teams of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
continued to focus on monitoring and reporting on
the cessation of hostilities violations. Eight IGAD
monitoring and verification teams are now deployed,
with one mobile team based in Juba and the Akobo
team operating from Bor. UNMISS is providing the
necessary support, including logistical and force
protection, to facilitate the work of the monitoring and
verification teams, which are Vital for the monitoring
of the cessation of hostilities agreement. It is important
to encourage IGAD to continuously take stock of
the operations of its monitoring and verification
mechanism, especially the monitoring and verification
teams, with a view to enhancing their effectiveness
so that their presence can help reduce conflict on the
ground.

There is no alternative to silencing the guns and
concluding, without further delay, a comprehensive
peace agreement in order to return the country to
the path of peace and stability. This is the message I
have consistently conveyed to all my South Sudan
interlocutors, including President Kiir and opposition
leader Riek Machar. I have told them that the guns must
be silenced; peace cannot be delayed even for one more
day. The untold suffering of the people of South Sudan
must stop. After only six weeks in South Sudan, I am
convinced that every day without a political agreement
contributes to a further deterioration of the situation on
the ground. This complicates the work of the Mission
and risks negatively impacting the region. I therefore
call on the Council, regional leaders and all friends
of this young nation to remain fully engaged with
the warring parties so that they make the necessary
compromises required to translate their public
statements of commitment to peace into actions on the
ground. The people of South Sudan deserve no less.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Laj
for her briefing.

I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.


