Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The flames of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina
died out a year ago. During the past year, through the
efforts of the parties concerned and with the assistance of
the international community, the implementation of the
Peace Agreement has been going well. The elections held
in Bosnia and Herzegovina went smoothly and the
constitutional institutions at various levels have begun to
be formed. The Chinese delegation welcomes these
positive developments.

Peace is not easy to achieve, and it is even harder to
consolidate. Events have demonstrated that, as long as the
parties concerned display sincere political will and an

 
earnest desire to implement the agreements reached, not
only can peace be achieved but it can also be maintained.

The achievement and the consolidation of peace in the
former Yugoslavia, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
are not only consistent with the fundamental interests of the
peoples of the States of the former Yugoslavia and the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is also conducive to
the peace and stability of Europe and the whole world.

We hope that the parties concerned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to move the peace process
forward in order to achieve genuine national reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina at an early date.

On the basis of China' s consistent position of principle
of supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's peace process, and
also taking into account the requests of the parties
concerned and the actual situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Chinese delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution.

At this time when the Security Council is about to
adopt the draft resolution, I wish to point out the following.

First, the deployment of the multinational Stabilization
Force (SFOR) is an important, major operation following
the Implementation Force (IFOR). It should accept the
political leadership of the Security Council and should
report on schedule to the Security Council on its
performance of its tasks.

Secondly, with regard to the draft resolution's
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter, regarding the
authorization of enforcement measures and the use of force,
China continues to have reservations. It is our view that
SFOR must maintain strict neutrality and fairness and must
not misuse force, and in its operations and should
steadfastly promote peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Thirdly, it is the understanding of the Security Council
is that the paragraphs of the draft resolution that invoke
Chapter VII of the Charter do not apply to part III.

