Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to provide an
update of developments in Kosovo since the members
of the Council were last briefed by Mr. Steiner on 24
April. Let me begin with the provisional institutions of
self-government.

On 9 May, the Kosovo Government submitted to
the Assembly its draft programme, which is based on
the agreement of 28 February that formed the
Government. Priorities highlighted in the programme
include consolidating democratic structures, improving
education and health care and promoting economic
development. It also focuses on the protection of the
rights and interests of communities - including the
right to return - and regional integration, including
meaningful dialogue with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Unfortunately, the Kosovo Serb Return
Coalition - known by its initials, KP - has not so far
put forward candidates for the three government posts
allotted to it. Although three names appeared in the
local press on 7 May following a KP meeting in
Leposavic, it appears that the issue of candidates has
become stuck in Belgrade. This is regrettable. First, it
means that the Kosovo Serbs are still not part of the
decision-making process and did not participate in the
talks on the government programme. Secondly, it tends
to undermine the KP Assembly members.

As was to be expected, the division of
responsibilities between the provisional institutions of
self-government and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
Constitutional Framework is causing some friction. For
example, on 9 May the Assembly debated two issues
that lie within the responsibilities reserved for the
Special Representative: the security situation in
Mitrovica, and the border demarcation agreement
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Intervening in that debate, Mr. Steiner recognized
the natural desire of the elected representatives to
discuss issues important to them. In order to uphold the
division of responsibilities outlined in the
Constitutional Framework, the issues were discussed in
an informal session of the Assembly. At the same time,
Mr. Steiner underlined that such discussions should not
sidetrack the Assembly from focusing on the many
urgent matters for which it does have responsibility. He
drew the Assembly's attention to some of the critical
remarks made by members of the Council during the
last meeting - regarding, for example, the lack of a
multi-ethnic civil service and the unacceptable living
conditions of minority communities - and asked the
Assembly to focus on those areas.

I can report that the situation in Mitrovica has
now calmed down somewhat. UNMIK is continuing its
dialogue with local representatives in northern
Mitrovica and with Belgrade and is working closely
with KFOR to maintain calm. Regarding the border
with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
UNMIK is working in the Joint Expert Committee to
find practical arrangements that will allow Kosovo
Albanian farmers access to their lands on the border
with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

I would now like to turn to the municipal
elections, which, as the Council knows, were originally
scheduled to take place on 21 September. Due to a
delay in approving the election budget - which was
approved by the Permanent Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on 19 April - the elections will now take place on 26
October. An important element of this year's election is
the increase in responsibilities undertaken by the local
electoral bodies. For example, the municipal election
commissions have assumed responsibility for
appointing and training some 8,000 polling station
committee members, and work has begun to establish
the provisional electoral management body.

This year's municipal election will provide an
opportunity for those communities that boycotted the
2000 elections, particularly the Kosovo Serb
community, to participate. The aim is to have all
municipal assembly members elected, not appointed as
in some cases, for the next mandate period, which will
be four years.

(spoke in French)

Turning now to rule of law issues and public
order, I would like to inform the Council that a panel of
international judges in Pristina handed down the first
sentence on terrorism-related charges on 10 May. The
defendant, who was charged with the murder of the
head of the Yugoslav passport office in Pristina last
April, was sentenced to 23 years' imprisonment. Also,
another panel of international judges recently handed
down a 15-year sentence to a Kosovo Albanian for the
murder of an elderly Kosovo Serb woman in Prizren.

Effective maintenance of law and order requires
UNMIK to look beyond the boundaries of Kosovo. It is
for that reason that, at the end of April, an agreement
was reached with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia on a draft
agreement on police cooperation that lays out an
effective framework for a more systematic sharing of
information on a range of law enforcement issues.

On 10 May, UNMIK hosted a regional ministerial
conference in Pristina on cigarette smuggling that was
attended by representatives from Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania and
Serbia, and by the Minister for Finance of Kosovo's
provisional institutions. In the Pristina declaration
issued at the end of the conference, the participants
agreed, among other things, to pursue their efforts to
harmonize excise rates, to establish greater
coordination of efforts to regulate the movement of
goods in the region through improved exchange of
information, and to a common approach to improve the
collection of customs fees and various taxes. An
agreement was also reached on holding a follow-up
conference in Zagreb in September that will also
include the participation of representatives responsible
for the implementation of the Stability Pact.

On 29 April, UNMIK's Institution-Building Pillar
published its fourth review of the criminal justice
system in Kosovo. The report concluded that, while
areas of concern remain, the foundations of a
sustainable system based on human rights and access to
justice have been laid. Outstanding areas of concern
include the independence of the judiciary, conditions of
detention and mental health issues.

(spoke in English)

On the issue of returns, UNMIK, together with
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), briefed donors on 7 May on the
principles guiding the returns process and outlined the
financial requirements for 2002, which amount to over
16 million euro. The aim is to achieve increasing
returns this year in order to create momentum for more
significant numbers of returns during 2003 and 2004.

In its draft programme, the Government of
Kosovo has committed itself to demonstrating its
willingness to address the wishes and concerns of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Mr. Rexhepi,
the Prime Minister, attended Serbian Orthodox Easter
celebrations in the Pec' Patriarchate, spoke with Ashkali
families that had returned to Vucitrn and visited the
mixed municipality of Strpce. He made statements of
support for the right of all internally displaced persons
to return to their places of origin and called for the
removal of enclaves. For the first time, a Kosovo
Albanian representative took part in a "go and inform"
visit to internally displaced persons in central Serbia.
At the same time, there were again acts of intimidation
and violence against members of the minority
communities, including the stoning of nuns from the
Decani Monastery and the desecration of several
graveyards during the Orthodox Easter period.

There have been several recent indications of a
desire on the part of members of Kosovo's non-
Albanian communities to integrate into municipal life:
several groups have begun Albanian language lessons,
including the monks in the Decani Monastery, in the
Pee region. In Kamenica, in the anilane region,
Kosovo Serb physicians participated in a "go and see"
visit to the anilane hospital with a View to working
there at least once a week.

Efforts have continued to determine the fate of
the missing of all communities, which, as members
know, remains one of the major obstacles to
reconciliation. At the beginning of May, a group of
international forensic experts began work at the former
morgue run by the International Criminal Tribune for
the former Yugoslavia in Orahovac, with the aim of
identifying the remains of approximately 1,250 people
by the end of the year.

Finally, I would like to report on an event that
took place on 24 April and that therefore could not be
included in the last briefing: an earthquake measuring
5.4 on the Richter scale hit Kosovo, causing particular
damage in the anilane region. One person died and
more than 100 people were injured. The Kosovo
Protection Corps, which in the anilane region now has
seven members from minority communities, responded
swiftly and effectively. More than 100 of its members
were directly engaged, working together with UNMIK
and KFOR. An inter-municipality committee was set
up to coordinate the responses of the four
municipalities most affected, and an emergency fund
was established, for which 500,000 euro has been
allocated from the contingency fund of the Kosovo
consolidated budget. That response is a good example
of every level, both local and international, pulling
together for the benefit of those affected in all
communities.

That example of pulling together for the benefit
of all communities is one that we would like to see in
the provisional institutions of self-government. That is
where an example of working side by side for the good
of Kosovo should be set. It is therefore essential that
before any more time is lost, the Kosovo Serb
representatives take up their rightful places in the
Government. All sides need to help one another to find
common ground solutions so that many of the complex
situations Kosovo faces - requiring concessions on all
sides - can begin to be tackled in a way that will
prove effective and sustainable.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
