Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have listened carefully to the discussion
today. We have just as much interest in it as the other
member States of the Security Council. Many people
today have asked us to reveal our plans for Idlib. We too
would like the coalition to share its plans for Syria with
us, but frankly neither the plans announced by high-
level representatives of the coalition members or those
expressed during today's meeting give us much hope.
We have heard concrete threats against both a sovereign
State and Russia that, incidentally, are actually not
directly linked to the possible use of chemical weapons.

When we discussed that issue here in the Chamber
on Friday, I could see that nuances in how our Western
partners expressed their positions had appeared. The
alarm bells sounded with the statement of the principle
that force could be used against the sovereign State of
the Syrian Arab Republic in response not just to the
alleged use of chemical weapons but also to the launch
ofa military operation in Idlib. I would like to ask you,
Madam President, not to try to swap these terms. We are
talking about an anti-terrorist operation in Idlib, not a
military operation. There have been constant references
to the de-escalation zones, but I want to once again

emphasize that they were intended to be temporary, not
something that would be there forever. Sooner or later,
they were to be replaced by local truces, and where
that did not occur, by anti-terrorist operations. That is
what has happened in other de-escalation areas now
under the control of the Syrian authorities and to which
Syrian civilians are now returning.

Both today and on Friday, I have also seen something
else, which is that some of my colleagues have been
stubbornly trying to divide the Astana guarantors.
They will not succeed. Some of them would very much
like the Astana process to collapse, and my American
colleague said that the process has failed. Perhaps you
would like that, Madam President, but I must disappoint
you, because the Astana process is ongoing. And I am
sure that with its help we will achieve tangible results
in Syria.

I have said it before and I will say it again.
Everything that is going on, and all the invocations we
have heard about Idlib, are not so much out of concern

for the civilian population there - and, incidentally,
whose existence we are also aware of and about
which we are no less concerned than you, Madam

President - as they are attempts to find any way
possible to preserve the last major terrorist enclave in
Syria and thereby prevent the Syrian Government from
regaining full control of its own territory. We continue
to call on you to drop these attempts and work on the
real process of reaching a political settlement. And you
can be certain that we are in close contact both with our
partners in the Astana process and with those who are
in control of the situation on the ground in Idlib, so that
we can prevent the civilian population from suffering
as a result of an anti-terrorist operation as much as we
possibly can.

