Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): | would like at the outset to thank the United Kingdom, the penholder on Yemen, and all members of the Security Council for the efforts they made to adopt resolution 2511 (2020), which we welcome, on the renewal of the sanctions regime in Yemen. The conclusions reached by the Panel of Experts on Yemen reflect the important role that the Council should play in putting an end to the humanitarian tragedy and the disastrous effects of the war that the armed Houthi militias have been waging against the people of Yemen, with Iran's support, for more than five years now. Indeed, the violations committed by the Houthi militias are not new. They contravene the endeavours and efforts made by the Security Council and the United Nations to achieve peace. The militias even try to flout their obligations under the Stockholm Agreement. They continue to welcome Iranian experts and receive military support and weapons from Iran, which constitute flagrant violations by those militias and the Iranian regime of Security Council resolutions on the arms embargo. We would have liked resolution2511 (2020) to include clear wording and a firm position of the Council on these violations. The Yemeni Government condemns all Houthi practices and violations that contravene international humanitarian law and international human rights law, including aggressions against Yemeni women such as arrest, arbitrary detention, looting, sexual assault, beating, torture and rape in secret Houthi prisons. The Yemeni Government calls for those responsible for the violations to be held accountable and for the militias to be condemned and held to account for abducting children from schools and sending them to the front lines of combat without the consent or even knowledge of their parents. We thank the Panel of Experts for the facts cited in its report (see S/2020/70) on this issue. We have often - indeed, time and again - drawn the Council's attention to the practices of the armed Houthi militias against humanitarian organizations and personnel, including theft, looting, the blocking of humanitarian assistance, giving benefits to people who are not entitled to them and the exploitation of human suffering in order to achieve political gains. Addressing those practices requires a firm response so as to put an end to them and punish the perpetrators. We stress the importance of the Panel of Experts being able to reach areas under the control of the Houthi militias so as to carry out its mandate, as provided for under the resolution just adopted. The Yemeni Government holds the Houthi militias responsible for the serious threat of an oil spill from the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We emphasize that access must be given to the United Nations technical team to assess the situation of the oil tanker as quickly as possible. We call on the Council to take a firm stance in order to prevent an environmental catastrophe from taking place. I reaffirm once again the importance of letting the United Nations technical team reach the oil tanker before a potential environmental disaster occurs. The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
