Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I want to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. We would also
like to thank the many Council members who have on
principle defended the truth and demonstrated that they
have memories extending beyond the past 24 hours.

Time and time again we have come to the
Security Council to appeal to its members to act with
responsibility, in line with their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the Council's own numerous resolutions, to address
the dire situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Today is no different, as we
continue to face a protracted and deepening protection
crisis, a human rights crisis and ajustice crisis and their
devastating impact on our people.

We come again to this Chamber two weeks
following the 14 May massacre by Israel, the occupying
Power, against Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip
and following a barrage of Israeli military strikes
against Gaza in the past 24 hours that have heightened
tensions and are a cause for alarm, creating even greater
urgency to reign in Israel's warmongering and defuse
the current crisis.

Faced with the potential of yet another act of savage
Israeli aggression against the occupied, besieged and
blockaded Gaza Strip, we must make the same appeal
we made two weeks ago (see S/PV.8256) and at all prior
junctures: we urge the Council to act now to de-escalate
this dangerous situation, to avert a descent into more
violence and chaos and to prevent the occupying
Power from further terrorizing the Palestinian civilian
population and endangering innocent civilian lives.

Once again, we plead with the Council to act to
save civilian lives and to respond to such threats to
international peace and security. We call on the Council
to protect the defenceless, to stand firmly on the side of
international law, with a steady moral compass, and not
to fall prey to the cynical narrative that is constantly
dragging us to the brink of war and thwarting all efforts
to find ajust solution to this horrific injustice.

We totally reject that narrative driven by Israel,
the occupying Power, which remains unrelenting in its
attempts to obscure and distort the realities we face,
repeatedly casting itself as the victim when it is in fact
the occupier, aggressor and oppressor and has appointed
itself judge, jury and executioner of the Palestinian
people - international law and human rights be
damned, and no less the authority and credibility of the
Security Council.
It is our hope that such strong messages will
reinforce the efforts under way to ensure a ceasefire for
the sake of saving civilian lives and sparing our people
further suffering and yet another month of Ramadan
filled with anguish and despair. We hope that the
ceasefire holds, and we commend the serious efforts
of Egypt in that regard, in addition to its efforts on
Palestinian reconciliation.

We appeal for conscience and reason to prevail.
We cannot act as though further escalation and
deterioration of the situation are inevitable; they are
not. We must act to avert the worst-case scenarios, for
the risks are immense.

The international community and, at the forefront,
the Security Council, long ago created the tools and
laws both to prevent and resolve conflict, as well as to
ensure the protection of civilians. It is past high time
to use those tools and to implement those laws when it
comes to Palestine. The exceptionalism and impunity
too long accorded to Israel must stop.

It is time to stop making excuses for why the time
is not right or why it is not possible or convenient to
act, while continually absolving Israel of its crimes and
facilitating its evasion of accountability, when so many
human lives are at stake, and indeed the existence of
an entire nation is at stake. It is time for the Security
Council to act to ensure international protection for the
Palestinian people for as long as this illegal, abhorrent
Israeli occupation continues and their rights continue to
be violated, including the rights of our refugees.

The draft resolution that has been presented to
Council members by our brothers in Kuwait, as the
Arab representative on the Council, represents a
modest, first step in that regard, and we urge everyone
to support it. It is inexcusable for the international
community to continue standing idly by, expressing
only regret yet failing to act, even as the rights, safety,
well-being and dignity of our people continue to be so
grossly and systematically violated by what amounts to
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

As many Council members have said, it is time to
address the root causes and underlying issues of this
situation, not just the symptoms or a few selective
events. It has been repeatedly stated in these halls
that the Palestine question remains a litmus test for
the efficacy of international law and the international
system's authority, and that the failure to justly resolve
it remains a stain on the international conscience. It is
time to right that historic wrong.
The harsh lessons of the past should have
been learned by now. Proper redress that is just,
comprehensive and lasting can be found only on the
basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the long-standing international consensus; it cannot be
detached from them in a politicized and biased manner.

We have been brought to this Chamber today
precisely because of the constant mistake of detaching
developments from the root causes and the reality of the
existence of the Israeli occupation, dispossession and
colonization of the Palestinian people and their land by
the most forceful and repressive means, in grave breach
of international law. That detachment is most often
coupled with erroneous attempts, including malicious
propaganda by Israel, to characterize the situation as
being one of terrorism, while completely twisting the
facts and undermining efforts, including by concerned
States and the United Nations, to address the many
serious issues before us.

Accusations of a double standard when it comes
to the question of Palestine, regrettably, are not new
in this Chamber, and they will only be reinforced by
the hypocrisy on display today, namely, bringing us
here to address the recent Israeli air strikes and rocket
attacks from Gaza when the grave events that preceded,
and may follow, remain unaddressed as the Council
continues to be paralysed, and therefore prevented from
carrying out its esponsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.

It is hard to understand the attempts for a reaction
from the Council to yesterday's events, as if those
events are somehow unrelated to those that preceded,
including when three previous attempts, led again by
our brothers from Kuwait, for an appropriate Council
reaction to the killing, injuring and maiming of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupying forces
were summarily blocked by one Council member.

Perhaps some have already forgotten the slaughter
of unarmed Palestinian civilians, including innocent
children, that was committed on 14 May - the same
date as the provocative and unlawful transfer of the
United States Embassy to Jerusalem. Perhaps they have
forgotten that Israeli soldiers perched at Gaza's borders
deliberately shot at peaceful protesters from hundreds
of meters away, in a craven and punitive show of force
that obviously intended to cause bodily harm and death
and sow fear and terror among the population.

But we have not forgotten, and neither have the
families who are today mourning, and will forever
mourn, the 118 Palestinians killed, among them 15
children, since the Great March of Return protests began
on 30 March. Nor has it been forgotten by the thousands
who have been injured by the Israeli occupying forces.
They number at least 13,000 civilians, including
children, women, medics and journalists, among them
thousands still in need of surgery and medical treatment,
and hundreds who have been disabled for life.

They were pleading for their voices to be heard,
their human rights to be respected and an end to the
miserable isolation and desolation imposed on them
by more than a decade of the Israeli blockade and
wars and a dire humanitarian crisis that is worsening
by the day. Yet Israel chose to silence them, as usual
deciding to respond with a heavy hand by using lethal
and indiscriminate force against thousands of peaceful
civilian protesters and setting off another cycle of
Violence.

Our people have remained bravely steadfast and
resilient in the face of all of that. But the suffocating
Israeli blockade has depleted their coping capacities
and intensified their despair. Their suffering endures
in a multitude of agonizing ways, as they continue to
be denied even the most basic life needs - a constant
reminder of the occupation's cruelty and criminality.
Do not minimize their suffering: it is deep, traumatic
and unbearable. It is the incubator in which anger and
bitterness fester and hopes diminish, especially among
the youth, for a more peaceful and just future in the
glaring absence of accountability and genuine remedies
for their plight, including in the immediate term for an
end to Israel's punitive and inhumane blockade.

That is the backdrop and context for recent
developments. The events of the past days did not
occur in a vacuum. The latest cycle of violence has
been fuelled and incited by a series of Israeli acts of
aggression and rhetoric, particularly from 30 March
onwards, including the massacre on 14 May and the
killing of three other Palestinians by Israeli forces on
28 May, just prior to yesterday's escalation.

We reiterate what has been repeatedly affirmed
by the Palestinian leadership, including President
Mahmoud Abbas: we do not condone and we reject and
condemn all violence against civilians. International law
must be respected by all and under all circumstances.
I challenge those who have memories from 24 hours
ago to repeat that same commitment of condemning
the killing of all civilians from all sides for whatever
reasons to also include the Palestinian civilians. We
have no problem whatsoever with the application of
international law to our situation, as long as it is applied
evenly, fairly, consistently and judiciously at all times,
not selectively and not as a means to exempt Israel from
the law and absolve it of its crimes, while it manipulates
the law to suit its distorted narrative and unlawful
claims.

At the same time, we remain insistent that all
people seek, and are entitled to, security. Israel cannot
claim exclusivity to the right to security; the Palestinian
people also have a right to security. We cannot be
excluded from that. Only the Israelis currently have
security and we have no right whatsoever to it. Security
should be for all, including the Palestinians. Attempts to
justify illegal actions in occupied Palestine, including
East Jerusalem, under the pretext of security are totally
unacceptable. Equally, we firmly reject attempts to
frame that issue as one of terrorism. The lines should
never be blurred between actions that can be taken
by States to ensure security, as per the Charter and
international law, on the one hand, and actions that are
in violation of the law and fundamental human rights
and constitute war crimes, on the other.

Faced with that reality, we will persist with our
efforts to secure protection for the Palestinian people
to ensure their safety and well-being, in accordance
with international law, including humanitarian law
and human rights law. We appeal to Council members
to favourably consider the draft resolution now being
negotiated, with the aim of addressing the protection
needs of our occupied and besieged people.

While we continue our endeavours in that regard,
alongside all of our efforts to realize justice and
fulfil the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and freedom, we call
on the Security Council to act, in line with its legal
obligations, resolutions and commitments, to address
the crisis and reinforce our faith in international law,
including for the protection of the most vulnerable
among us.

