I thank Russia for having organized this debate. I also thank the Secretary- General and the speakers for their presentations, and the countries of the region and the regional organizations present for their participation. This debate is important because the risk of destabilization in the region is real, given the many challenges that the region is facing - security challenges with a risk of nuclear proliferation, the illegal acquisition and transfer of arms, terrorism and several conflicts at the very gates of the Gulf, which are sometimes the scene of rivalry between Powers from the region and elsewhere. There are political challenges as well, with the peoples of the region, particularly young people and women, aspiring to peace, democracy, respect for human rights and economic and social well-being, which insecurity, the coronavirus disease and climate change are putting to the test. In the face of those challenges, it is necessary to work to stabilize the regional situation by rejecting polarization and to work together to build the regional security architecture of tomorrow. To do so, international law and commitments must first be respected. I would like to stress two points in that regard. First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) have provided a concrete and effective solution to the Iranian nuclear- proliferation crisis. France welcomes the fact that the Council almost unanimously reaffirmed its support for the JCPOA in August and September. Resolution 2231 (2015) must be fully implemented by everyone. Iran must therefore put an immediate end to the violations of its nuclear commitments and take no further measures that would aggravate the nuclear situation. Similarly, restrictions on the development of missiles that are nuclear-weapon delivery systems must be respected. Secondly, I would like to recall that the expiry of the conventional arms embargo does not in any way mean that all restrictions on the supply, transfer or purchase of arms to or from Iran are now completely lifted. Certain restrictive measures, starting with the European arms embargo and the planned restrictions on missile transfers, will be maintained in accordance with the JCPOA and remain in force until October 2023. We will ensure that those provisions are strictly respected. We also call on all participants in the JCPOA, as well as possible suppliers and recipients from Iran, to exercise the utmost restraint and responsibility in considering the consequences that possible transfers could have for regional security and stability, and to draw the necessary conclusions. The Security Council has also strictly controlled arms and missile transfers in the region to non-State actors in Iraq, Yemen and Lebanon and has adopted other general restrictions on such transfers in the framework of resolution 1540 (2004). Those regimes must be fully respected. Their violation, in particular by Iran, has been widely documented, including in the latest report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531). Together with our E3 partners, Germany and the United Kingdom, we also strongly condemned, just over a year ago, the attacks on the facilities of Saudi Aramco, for which Iranian responsibility was established. All of those violations and actions are unacceptable. They must stop, and we must collectively consider how to stop them. Regional security and the authority of Security Council decisions are at stake. We are continuing our efforts in that regard to identify concrete and ambitious solutions to meet the challenges posed by the lifting of the United Nations embargo. In order to work to de-escalate tensions, a framework for structured dialogue could make it possible to break the spiral of mistrust that threatens the security and stability of the region. It could help develop regional and bilateral initiatives on transparency and confidence-building measures. The Secretary-General can legitimately organize this regional dialogue and propose options for moving forward towards the establishment of a security architecture in the region. Along with its European partners, France is already involved in this collective undertaking. Almost a year ago we launched the European initiative for maritime surveillance in the Strait of Hormuz, and we will continue, on that basis, again with our European partners at the forefront, to support the regional dialogue for stability in the Gulf. Working for security in the Gulf requires a commitment in good faith by all regional and international players to resolve the crises on its doorstep, which often reflect or even deepen regional tensions. Putting an end to the war in Yemen would first and foremost lead to finally putting an end to the suffering of the Yemeni population and would also help to set in motion a positive dynamic in the region. We call on the parties to cease hostilities and to engage in good faith in the talks led by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths to reach a comprehensive and inclusive political agreement under the auspices of the United Nations. Peace in Yemen is possible. If all the countries gathered here today work together, it can become a reality. International cooperation is precisely what made it possible to defeat Da'esh militarily in Iraq and Syria, in support of the Iraqi authorities and the Syrian Democratic Forces. The fight must continue, because the terrorist threat persists and in some places is becoming increasingly present once again. Iraq must now also be supported in its efforts to achieve stability, development and reform. It is that support that my authorities expressed yesterday to the Iraqi Prime Minister during his visit to France and which must be shared by all players, first and foremost by Iraq's neighbours. It is essential to find a political solution to the Syrian crisis that complies with the parameters of resolution 2254 (2015) and is fully inclusive. Faced with the humanitarian catastrophe that has characterized that conflict for the past 10 years, Russia and Iran have a responsibility to put pressure on the Syrian regime to take this path. Finally, I would like to say a word about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is undermining regional stability. France welcomes the normalization of relations between Israel and two Gulf countries, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. We welcome its contribution to Israel's security and to peace and security in the region. But we hope that it will also contribute equally to the resumption of Israeli- Palestinian negotiations, with a view to implementing the two-State solution and Israel's definitive renunciation of its plans to annex all or part of the West Bank. The task is immense, but it is essential. It will have to be carried out gradually because confidence is built step by step on the basis of deeds. The Council can count on the commitment of France and its European partners to contribute to it.
