Mr. Ladsous: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to update the Council on the
political and security developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the issuance of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/ll30).

As the Council is aware, on 31 December, under
the auspices of the National Episcopal Conference of
the Congo (CENCO), a political agreement was signed
between the signatories and non-signatories of the
political agreement of 18 October. That signing took
place at a critical juncture in the political life of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, when political
tensions were growing and violent incidents had taken
place in certain areas in the country following the
expiration of the second and final mandate of President
Joseph Kabila, on 19 December.

The signing of this agreement represented a major
contribution to improving the situation, which, let us be
clear, could have erupted, because the political players
who had rejected the political agreement of 18 October
had maintained their position that the national and
provincial institutions would, on the evening of
19 December, become illegitimate.

It should also be pointed out that certain political
players have not yet signed on to the agreement, such
as the Mouvement de liberation du Congo (MLC),
although it recently indicated its readiness to do so in
the near future. It has stated that it has been reluctant
to sign on to the agreement because it believed that the
Rassemblement would benefit disproportionately from
the political transition arrangements, which currently
propose to give the post of Prime Minister and head
of the follow-up committee to representatives of
the Rassemblement.

In addition, members of the opposition, headed by
the current Prime Minister, Mr. Samy Badibanga, are
also showing some reluctance, maintaining that some of
the provisions of the 31 December agreement, namely,
those concerning the electoral process, are not realistic.
Prime Minister Badibanga and his Government are
clearly concerned about the political consequences for
them if a new Government of national unity were to be
put in place under the leadership of the Rassemblement.

For its part, the presidential majority has itself sent
mixed signals regarding its support for the agreement. It
signed the agreement with reservations that have yet to
be clarified, and then criticized the agreement, stating
that the text was not inclusive enough - specifically
because the MLC and the members of the opposition
who are close to Prime Minister Badibanga had not yet
signed it.

I would also note that prospects for a December
2017 election have finally improved. Major political,
financial, technical and logistical support will be
needed. Delays in bringing the voter register up to
date, in setting up a transition Government and in
implementing the provisions of the 31 December
agreement could negatively affect the current timetable.
We must therefore do our best to prevent delays in the
electoral process.

Nevertheless, the signing of the agreement opens
up new possibilities for a peaceful resolution to the
political deadlock. We must therefore spare no effort
in ensuring that all stakeholders commit to it and that
it is implemented in good faith. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Secretariat
will remain active but discreet in their support for the
Congolese political actors and will encourage them to
continue to demonstrate their flexibility and ability
to compromise.

CENCO, which has made commendable efforts
in that regard, will continue to enjoy our support in
ensuring that all Congolese stakeholders adhere to the
agreement, for barring that, its implementation would
be difficult, and that could only have negative political
and security consequences.

(spoke in English)

Before I turn to the security situation, I wish to
express my deep concern about reports of human
rights violations and acts of violence in Kinshasa and
other cities across the country on 19 and 20 December.
As indicated in separate reports, the repression of
demonstrations by national security forces and clashes
between those forces and demonstrators resulted,
allegedly, in the extrajudicial killing of at least 40
civilians and the death of two police officers - one
killed by demonstrators and the other by a stray bullet.
We know that some demonstrations turned violent, with
demonstrators looting and destroying public property,
resulting in at least 140 people injured and 683 people
arrested by national security forces - 291 of whom
have since been prosecuted or released.

It is important to encourage the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to initiate a full
investigation into the events that led to the excessive
use of force and loss of life, and to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable.

I will now turn to the security situation in the
eastern part of the country, which remains very fragile.
In addition to the threat posed by foreign armed groups,
name1y the Allied Democratic Forces (ADP) and the
Forces democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), the activities of militia groups are on the
rise in many parts of the country. That phenomenon is
driven, in part, by the escalation of deep-rooted, long-
standing conflicts among ethnic communities. It is also
driven by the mobilization, particularly in December,
of militia groups, some of which have links to political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the diaspora.

The spillover effects of the instabi1ity in
neighbouring countries, notably South Sudan and
Burundi, are already being felt in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with a risk that they will
continue to grow. There are now around 70,000
South Sudanese refugees who entered Haut-Uele and
Ituri provinces over the past six months, resulting in
significant humanitarian challenges. Continued reports
of infiltration by elements of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition into refugee
camps and elsewhere in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo represent a major cause for concern. Efforts are
under way to relocate refugee sites further away from
the border.

MONUSCO, acting in support of the Congolese
national security forces, continues its efforts to counter
the destabilizing activities of armed groups such as the
ADP and the FDLR. Limited progress has been made
in that regard, although much remains to be done to
sustainably degrade the capacity of those groups. That
will ultimately require long-term military engagement,
combined with efforts by the national authorities to
address issues linked to the longer-term stabilization of
the country and the extension of State authority.

In conclusion, I would encourage Council
members to continue calling on Congolese political
actors to swiftly endorse and agree on implementation
arrangements for the 31 December agreement, and to
put in place a transitional Government of national unity.
Failure to do so risks delaying the holding of elections
and greatly increasing the risk ofrenewed political crisis
and increased violence across the country. Needless to
say, regional and international actors should maintain
strong support for the implementation of the agreement
and the holding of elections, as soon as feasible.

MONUSCO, for its part, will continue to work
closely with the authorities to address the increasing
threat posed by armed groups to the civilian population,
through a combination of political and security
initiatives, since many of the security issues in the east
of the country can only be resolved through meaningful
political engagement by authorities at all levels.
MONUSCO will continue to support those efforts.

We will engage with Council members, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government and
other key partners in the coming weeks to determine
how the Mission should adjust to the prevailing political
and security situation and how it can support the timely
implementation of the 31 December agreement. We will
return, in due course, with our recommendations for the
Security Council's consideration, while also working
with MONUSCO to adjust its priorities and posture,
within the existing mandate, so that it can provide the
best support.

