Mr. Thoms (Germany): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis,
Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador Tanin for
their respective statements.

I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The year 2014 is crucial for Afghanistan. It should
mark the first peaceful transfer of power in Afghan
history. In the recent elections, millions of Afghan
women and men have shown their commitment to
actively shape the future of the country. They want
their voices to be heard, and they want to see an end to
violence.
I congratulate the voters on their courage in the
face of threats and violence as well as the Afghan
National Security Forces, which were well prepared and
effective in securing the democratic process. We now
call upon both presidential candidates to respect the
authority of the Afghan Electoral Commission and to
accept the final outcome once all complaints have been
effectively adjudicated. I call to mind the statesmanship
of the candidates, displayed in accepting the first round
of results. The electoral process is not yet complete. As
this is an Afghan-led process, we urge all stakeholders
to promote national unity and to avoid appeals to ethnic,
tribal or factional interests. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has stressed, at this critical juncture the need
is for statesmanship, not gamesmanship.

The numerous positive developments in
Afghanistan, including the elections on achievement
first and foremost of the Afghan people and its
institutions, will require our continued solidarity and
commitment. This includes support for the Afghan
National Security Forces. The signing of the relevant
security arrangements by the new Afghan Government
is a necessary condition for continued military support,
including through the Resolute Support mission.
As future international support will concentrate
increasingly on civilian assistance, United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
have a central role to play in coordinating those efforts
in support of the new Afghan Government.

No doubt, grave challenges lie ahead. That should
also caution us against overburdening UNAMA. The
Mission needs to be adequately resourced and present
throughout the country in order to fulfil its mandate.
The new Afghan Government will face a host of
significant challenges. We encourage our partners in
Kabul to include all members of society, especially
women, in decision-making processes and to continue
all efforts to protect and promote human rights; to
increase coordination and efficiency of international
support; to promote national reconciliation and fight
corruption as well as to implement its commitments
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

In conclusion, I wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubis for his dynamic
leadership and want to assure the Afghan people and
the Secretary-General of Germany's steadfast support.

