Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar for his statement.

We believe that the Secretary-General's timely
visit to Myanmar represented an important milestone in
his good offices efforts in that country. Previous
gestures - in particular, the repeated visits undertaken
by Mr. Gambari - have embodied the international
community's response. The Secretary-General's
messages, we believe, have been especially apposite
and address the international community's concerns. A
response to these messages would lend new impetus to
a process that should ultimately lead to the
normalization of national life and development in
Myanmar.

In that regard, Costa Rica is grateful for the
Secretary-General's commitment to the ideals of the
United Nations, but regrets the behaviour of the
Government of Myanmar. We can neither claim that the
release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi would be the sole
benchmark of change within the Government, nor
ignore the fact that the Nobel Peace Prize laureate is a
disturbing symbol of the Government of Myanmar's
oppressive response. Furthermore, the constant rise in
the number of political prisoners runs counter to the
continual demands of the international community.

While Costa Rica believes that there must be a
gradual shift from sanctions and isolation towards a
model of greater participation and international
cooperation that seeks to open doors, build bridges and
create opportunities for inclusive dialogue, reconciliation
and democracy, we also believe that such a shift will
depend on whether the Government of Myanmar works
actively to increase the international community's
confidence in its political plans, particularly in the
areas highlighted by the Secretary-General.

A lasting peace and economic development in
Myanmar will depend on participation and joint action
by all social sectors without exclusion. Costa Rica
welcomes the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar that his Government places
priority on the transfer of power to a civilian
Government after next year's elections. However, it
must be made clear that such a transfer will be
legitimate domestically and internationally only if it is
the result of a process that respects the rights of all and
provides guarantees for participation by all.

The day will come when power cannot be based
on the repression and denial of rights. Repression must
be ended. Costa Rica calls for the release of all
political prisoners and for the restoration of all rights
to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We believe that those are
the urgent steps required in order to begin a vigorous
process of national reconciliation leading to legitimate
elections next year. Those are basic prerequisites for
future development.

I conclude by expressing appreciation for the
Secretary-General's concern that there be greater
access for humanitarian assistance, which continues to
be sorely needed. My delegation thanks him for his
efforts.

