Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis
Quecedo, who is presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council, and we appreciate the convening of
this open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and on resolution 1540 (2004). We
also thank the Spanish chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for its effective and dynamic leadership of
that subsidiary body of the Council.

The country now holding the Council presidency
has been tasked with an important and complex mission,
namely, to lead the comprehensive review of the progress
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As we
see it, the Spanish diplomats have done an outstanding
job in fulfilling that task. A substantive final report
has been prepared, which notes the successful progress
made by countries in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) over a five-year period.

The Security Council hasjust unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which determines the road map
for the future work of States, the 1540 Committee and
other relevant actors for the period up to 2021.

TheRussianFederationhasactivelyandconstructively
spoken out in all non-proliferation platforms. Combating
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
a priority of Russian foreign policy. We are interested
in finding common positions with our partners in
order to promote the non-proliferation agenda as soon
as possible. The global non-proliferation architecture
is based on three pillars, namely, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention.

Resolution 1540 (2004) also occupies a special
place in that architecture. It is aimed at establishing
a lasting legal and enforcement barrier in order to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, including terrorists.
The main outcome of the comprehensive review, as
we see it, shall be to confirm the relevance of all the
stipulations set forth in resolution 1540 (2004) and to
confirm the preventive nature of resolution 2325 (2016)
and its reasoning, which is based on cooperation.

Another important conclusion is the need to
maintain the positive momentum in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) and the readiness of everyone to
work thoroughly over the long haul, given the long-term
nature of this process. We understand that the process
will require concentrating our attention and all the
internal resources of Member States and cooperating
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

In the context of the resolution that we have just
adopted today, the Russian Federation is ready to
consider ways to make additional efforts to identify
more active dynamic methods of work in order to
achieve the goals outlined by the 1540 Committee. An
innovative aspect of the new resolution is the appeal
to States and to the Committee to consider, where
applicable, the evolution of the risks related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well
as the rapid development of science, technology and
international trade, which can be used by non-State
actors for proliferation. What is most important is that
those subjects should be closely linked to the tasks
surrounding implementation.

Also, the new resolution proposes to more actively
engage national and regional bodies in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), including the exchange of best
practices, holding training seminars for focal points
and regional forums and conferences on facilitating
those issues. The benefits of such events are obvious.
This past summer Russia held a seminar for focal points
in Kaliningrad under the auspices of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. We are
exploring the possibility of continuing that practice.

The resolution also focuses a great deal of attention
on assisting countries that require assistance. Russia
is providing assistance to member States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States by regularly
organizing seminars under the auspices of the Russian
Federal Service for Technical and Export Control, which
we intend to continue. We also welcome the resolution's
focus on making greater use of the capabilities of
international and regional organizations and on getting
them to coordinate their work plans with the efforts
of the 1540 Committee and the needs of States. We
also support the involvement, where it is warranted,
of academia and the business community. Of course,
all of that should take place under the leadership and
oversight of Government offices.

In the light of the ongoing terrorist activity in
Syria and Iraq by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and other terrorist groups, that have learned how
to produce chemical weapons and are actively using
chemical weapons , the importance of resolution 1540
(2004) is only increasing. The 1540 Committee, in the
framework of its mandate, will continue cooperating
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee on those issues.

Violating resolution 1540 (2004) is unacceptable.
Reports of non-State actors acquiring access to
chemical weapons require thorough investigation and
rapid reaction by the Security Council. We have often
heard about the use of industrial chemicals or chemical
warfare agents by ISIS fighters and other terrorist
groups. There is evidence of terrorists having access
to technology and infrastructure that enables them to
produce chemical weapons. The threat of chemical
and biological terrorism is reaching a wider scale and
becoming transboundary in nature.

It is extremely urgent to combat acts of terrorism.
The tools provided by resolution 1540 (2004) fulfil
a very important function, yet those instruments
and the instruments of other resolutions, focused on
their specific subjects, are clearly inadequate. In that
regard, we need a global, comprehensive and holistic
approach. Guided precisely by such considerations,
Russia proposed an initiative, at the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva, to develop an international
convention to combat acts of chemical and biological
terrorism. We note with satisfaction that that initiative
is gaining more and more proponents. We call on our
partners that have not made up their minds yet to once
again consider the Russian proposal and respond to it in
a positive manner.

Russia is interested in strengthening the regime set
up to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and will do everything possible to achieve
that and will actively cooperate with its regional and
international partners.

