Mr. Kirn (Slovenia): In the interest of time, I
will deliver a shortened version of my statement; the
full text will be distributed.

It is my honour to speak on behalf of the Human
Security Network, namely Austria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the
Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand and
Slovenia, and South Africa as an observer.

Let me begin by thanking the presidency of the
Security Council this month for organizing this
important and timely open debate. I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her briefing this morning, and for
the submission of the first report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2006/389). I also
thank Ms. Ann Veneman, the Executive Director of
UNICEF, for UNICEF's engagement in providing
special protection for children who are affected by
armed conflicts.

The Human Security Network supports the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, as defined in resolution 1612 (2005), with
its specific focus on children in disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
processes. We also encourage follow-up reporting,
particularly on demobilized children.

The creation of the Security Council Working
Group reflects the international community's
commitment to address the issue at the highest level.

We fully support the Working Group's efforts to
address country-specific cases and to respond with
concrete recommendations for action. That includes
applying targeted and graduated measures and
mandating peacekeeping missions, as appropriate. We
acknowledge and appreciate the commitment of the
Working Group to examine information on progress
made in ending the recruitment and deployment of
children in armed conflicts, and other violations
against them, and appeal for a maximum of
transparency in their work.

The Security Council's role in addressing the
plight of children affected by armed conflict is an
integral part of its peace and security responsibilities.
In that regard, the Network further encourages the
Council to take up the issue when considering
resolutions on specific conflict situations or when
planning Security Council field missions. A positive
development over recent years is the deployment, on a
case-by-case basis, of child protection advisers into
certain United Nations peacekeeping operations. These
United Nations country teams should be working with
national and local authorities to develop time-bound
action plans as mandated in resolution 1612 (2005).
The action plans will allow the Working Group to
review progress in specific conflicts and to use them as
a basis to recommend further action.

Atrocities committed against children in armed
conflict pose a profound challenge to international law.
Massive and gross violations of the rights and dignity
of the child continue unabated. Impunity for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, specifically
against children, must end. Effective prosecution of
perpetrators must be ensured by taking measures at the
national level and by enhancing international
cooperation. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court recognized that conscripting or
enlisting children under the age of 15 years into armed
forces or armed non-State groups, using them to
participate actively in hostilities, as well as sexual
violence as a method of warfare, are crimes against
humanity and war crimes. The Network reiterates the
importance of the International Criminal Court in
prosecuting such crimes and bringing an end to
impunity.

Respect for relevant international and regional
norms and standards on human rights and humanitarian
law is a prerequisite for the effective protection of
children affected by armed conflict. We urge all States

that have not yet done so to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
International Labour Organization Convention on the
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and
other relevant international legal instruments, and to
further confirm their commitment by effectively
implementing those instruments.

We attach great importance to the active
involvement and the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations in preventing and
suppressing violations and abuses committed against
children in situations of armed conflict. We fully
support all endeavours of the Office of the Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other
entities of the United Nations system and other
relevant international and non-governmental
organizations in this field. It is also important to
strengthen the local structures on the ground and to
develop local and national mechanisms for early
responses to abuses that can feed into the international
response.

Let me conclude by saying that the Human
Security Network fully supports the recent focus of the
Security Council on implementation of past resolutions
and tangible responses, with a View to achieving the
goal of ending serious violations and abuses of
children's rights in armed conflicts. Furthermore, we
encourage ongoing dialogue and cooperation at the
local and national levels, with the aim of reducing and
eliminating the plight of children in armed conflicts.

