Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
end of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE), eight years after its creation and
eight years after the end of the war between the two
countries, is an important decision for the Security
Council.

The border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea
remains unresolved, and the United Nations is
withdrawing without having been able to help the two
countries find common ground, but not without having
tried everything possible to achieve that. Neither the
good offices of the Secretary-General nor the
constructive proposals presented to the parties by the
Council were able to attain their objective.

Unfortunately, the work of UNMEE is coming to
an end not because its mandate has been accomplished,
but because that mandate has become impossible to
carry out. As a peacekeeping mission, UNMEE was
increasingly restricted in its freedom of movement by
Eritrea, to the point that it was compelled to leave the
buffer zone that it was initially supposed to monitor. As
an administrative and logistical support mission for
border demarcation, UNMEE was also hindered in
fulfilling that area of its mandate by Ethiopia's refusal
to implement the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission.

The responsibility for the current impasse rests
with the parties and with them alone. Only they can
decide to emerge from the vicious circle by ending the
fruitless game of mutual accusations and by choosing
the path of dialogue, in the primary interest of their
populations and in the interest of peace in the Horn of
Africa. The international community remains ready to
assist them in doing so.

Despite the substantive impasse, Belgium, like
the vast majority of other Council members, would
have preferred to maintain a United Nations presence
on the ground as a tangible signal of the availability of
the United Nations to work for a balanced and lasting
solution. In fact, the two countries reject such a
presence.
Belgium hopes that, once the tension created by
the turmoil surrounding UNMEE and its future has
abated, an atmosphere more conducive to dialogue will
emerge. The resolution that we have just adopted calls
on the Secretary-General to continue his efforts and to
keep the Council regularly informed.

The Algiers Agreements and the decisions of the
Boundary Commission remain the legal basis upon
which dialogue will have to be built. The Council calls
firmly on Ethiopia and Eritrea to cooperate in the
process of terminating UNMEE and to scrupulously
avoid any hindrance to the smooth functioning of that
process.
As the Mission closes, Belgium gratefully thanks
the troop-contributing countries and all the military
and civilian personnel involved in its work.

