Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): First, allow me to
express my delegation's appreciation both to the members
of the Independent Inquiry - Mr. Carlsson, Mr. Han Sung-
Joo and General Kupolati - for what is commonly called
the Carlsson report, and to the Secretary-General for having
taken the initiative to set up this Inquiry.

The objective of our contribution to this debate is to
share with the Council a number of thoughts that have
crossed our mind while reading the Carlsson report. Some
of these thoughts may be relevant to what we are doing in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We do not expect to come up with answers during this
meeting. An open Council meeting may be the appropriate
forum for articulating questions; finding answers will
require more time for careful study. We hope that all the
questions that remain unanswered today will be addressed
by the panel chaired by Mr. Brahimi, which has been asked
to conduct to a major study on United Nations peace
operations.

As we are reminded in the Rwanda report, there is
also a Srebrenica report, and both are relevant to the
present analysis. For obvious reasons, my delegation is
acutely aware of this. But in the report before us, we are
also reminded of the responsibility of the great majority of
United Nations Member States, which were not prepared to
send any troops or materiel at all to Rwanda. A similar
observation could, of course, be made about Srebrenica.
Accordingly, instead of criticizing anyone, we would like
to begin by commending Ghana and Tunisia, which allowed
their troops to remain in Rwanda throughout the terrible
weeks of the genocide, despite the withdrawal of other
contingents.

Next, we would like to make some observations on the
issue of feasibility. The report poses what it terms the
"natural question": why a force numbering 2,500 could not
stop the actions of the militia and Rwandese Government
Forces soldiers that began setting up roadblocks and killing
politicians and Tutsi in the early hours after the plane crash
which killed the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi. The
question becomes even more pertinent if we ask ourselves
what could have been done if the 11 January cable of
Brigadier General Dallaire had been handled properly. In a
case of such urgency, simply replying that the proposed
action would clearly go beyond the mandate entrusted to
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) under resolution 872 (1993) does not, in our
view, constitute proper handling. It is true that Rwanda's
membership of the Security Council complicated matters,
but we feel that the other 14 Council members should
have been informed without delay. Of course, the need to
protect the informant required a high degree of
confidentiality, but if that was the Secretariat's primary
concern it might have been safer to inform 14 Permanent
Representatives than President Habyarimana.

The point we wish to make is that feasibility
depends on timing. Action which is feasible one day may
not be feasible a month later. Once the window of
opportunity has passed, the need to intervene will usually
increase in inverse proportion to a dwindling political will
to do so. It is not our intention to apportion blame, for
almost all of us live in a glass house as far as action or
inaction in the field of peacekeeping is concerned.
Besides, as for timing, Dallaire's 11 January cable was by
no means the first warning signal.

How had the international community reacted to the
events of 9 March 1992, when a systematic slaughter of
the T utsis in Nyarnata was aborted thanks to the Italian
lay sister Tonia Locatelli, who succeeded in alerting the
international media by radio but was then brutally
murdered herself? The initial indignation caused by that
event had soon died down because killings in Rwanda
were seen as an age-old phenomenon, best viewed with
a degree of even-handedness and not too much emotion.
Tutsis were at risk in Government-controlled areas, and
Hutu lives were in peril where the Rwandese Patriotic
Front was in control. On 4 August 1993, the Arusha
Peace Agreement was welcomed with a sense of relief
because it gave the international community a peace
process to support, as the perfect expression of its even-
handedness.

This may explain why, one week later, hardly
anyone paid any attention to the report of Mr. Waly
Bacre Ndiaye, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions. Mr. Ndiaye reported so many massacres of
Tutsis that he asked himself whether the term "genocide"
might be applicable. It is clear why a report of that nature
was not immediately welcomed by an international
community which had just placed its trust in the Arusha
Peace Agreement. What is disconcerting, however, is that
for so long afterwards - even after the genocide had
begun - many protagonists continued to focus on the
risk of jeopardizing the Arusha Peace Agreement, as
though that accord were of a higher value than the
thousands of people who were meanwhile being killed.

 

On 15 April 1994, after the Interim Government had taken
office and already fled from Kigali, the President of the
Security Council made a statement to the press which made
no mention of the ongoing massacres but reaffirmed that
the Arusha Peace Agreement was the only viable
framework for the resolution of the Rwanda conflict. The
Council therefore demanded that the parties agree to an
immediate ceasefire and return to the negotiating table.

This statement was made at a time when, according to
an estimate of Human Rights Watch, killers carried out the
most devastating massacres of the genocide, in some cases
slaying hundreds or even thousands of people in one or two
days. Obviously, this unworldliness of the Council could
not last. On 28 April, Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria
complained that too much attention was being paid to the
ceasefire negotiations and too little to the massacres. Two
days later, on 30 April, the Council issued a presidential
statement which admitted for the first time that killings of
civilians had taken place especially in areas under the
control of members or supporters of the Interim
Government of Rwanda. Even in that statement, however,
the word "genocide" did not appear.

We see a number of lessons to be learned from this
part of the report. First, we should not treat a peace process
as something of a higher order than the populations of the
countries concerned. Secondly, we should not clutch at a
peace process that has ceased to be relevant. A peace
process may be dead, in which case it is the conflict that
demands our attention. Thirdly, we should pay more
attention to non-governmental organizations and, perhaps,
somewhat less to countries with experience in the region.
Most non-governmental organizations have a wealth of up-
to-date information from the ground. On that basis, they
tend to have a fresh approach and an open mind and are
unlikely to mistake killers for victims. Fourthly, even-
handedness is not a virtue when genocide is going on.

It is pointed out in the report that the credibility of the
United Nations requires that troop contributors refrain from
withdrawing unilaterally from a peace operation if that
withdrawal may be expected to jeopardize the operation in
question. It is understandable, but unfortunate, that a troop-
contributing country which suffers heavy casualties will
inevitably find itself under pressure from its parliament and
its media to withdraw its contingent. The more this reflex
can be counted on, the greater the likelihood that precisely
such a contingent will be targeted by parties opposed to the
peace operation. We have no solution for this problem, but
it raises a discomforting question as to the suitability of
democratic countries for peace operations. We recall how,
in the case of Sierra Leone, Nigeria suddenly found it
more difficult to play its leading role in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) after it had restored
democratic rule.

We have already referred to the complicating factor
that, during the genocide, Rwanda was a member of the
Security Council. The report recommends that further
study be given to the possibility of suspending the
participation of the representative of a State member of
the Security Council in similar circumstances. We would
not object to such a study, but we believe that it would be
difficult to define the nature and scale of the occurrence
that might justify such a suspension. Moreover, quite
apart from the issue of Council membership, we are
concerned about the general reluctance to acknowledge
that, in the event of massive human rights abuses taking
place in a given country - especially if they have given
rise to armed rebellion - the Government of that country
may be in the wrong. We believe that the unwillingness
to condemn the Interim Government of Rwanda for the
genocide it was directing was due not only to its Council
membership.

As for the role of the individual members of the
Interim Government, the report raises the question of
whether their accountability was made sufficiently clear
to them at the time. This question is of immediate
"lessons-learned" relevance for the situation in Sierra
Leone. Can we trust all the actors in that country to be
fully aware that the amnesty provisions of the Lome
Accord do not apply to human rights abuses committed
after the signing of that instrument and are not binding on
non-parties, anyway?

Equally, in the context of lessons learned, we would
like to point out that the report briefly touches on the
origin of the problem in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which rightly finds itself at the very top of the
Council's agenda. The outflow from the humanitarian
protection zone under Operation Turquoise is described as
the starting point of one of the most complicated and
sensitive humanitarian emergencies of recent years: the
huge exodus of Rwandan refugees into Zaire, whose
camps were to become infiltrated by the Interahamwe and
other forces behind the genocide.

In this connection, we would like to comment briefly
on some of the recommendations contained in the report.
We agree that the United Nations should acknowledge its
part of the responsibility for not having done enough to

 

prevent or stop the genocide in Rwanda. We have noted
with deep respect the statement made by the Belgian Prime
Minister on the occasion of the sixth anniversary of the
beginning of the Rwanda genocide. Belgium, of course, is
not alone in having failed. The whole international
community should acknowledge its share of the
responsibility. But the best way of doing so today is to
show understanding for Rwanda's legitimate security
concerns.

Similarly, my delegation fully subscribes to the
recommendation that the international community should
support efforts to rebuild Rwandan society after the
genocide, paying particular attention to the need for
reconstruction, reconciliation and respect for human rights.

We also agree that everything must be done to prevent
future catastrophes of the type that took place in Srebrenica
and in Rwanda. We support the proposals for enhancing
early warning and early response capacity. It is at least
equally important, however, that we be aware that with all
the training of staff at Headquarters, in agencies and in
programmes, and, not least, of personnel in field missions,
we cannot rule out that people may once again expect a
degree of protection from a United Nations peace operation
that the latter cannot deliver.

We should not forget that this is what Srebrenica and
Rwanda had in common. No matter how much we may
increase the robustness of our mandates or how widely we
may broadcast their strict limitations, we can never be sure
that frightened civilians will not force their way into the
compound of a United Nations peace operation and then
expect protection beyond that operation's legal mandate or
physical capacity. Such a situation could once more lead to
a humanitarian tragedy. We would not like to give the
impression that we have already found a way of making
sure that something of the sort will never happen again.

The Rwanda report is at its most poignant where it
describes the false expectations aroused by the United
Nations presence, for instance among the people who had
sought refuge at the Ecole Technique OfficieIle. The
essence of the Srebrenica tragedy is of a similar nature.
This may well be the most important problem to be studied
by the Brahimi panel, for as long as it is not solved it
jeopardizes the whole concept of peace operations. Hence,
it must be solved. The inarticulate urge to do something is
a notoriously bad motivating force, but the solution cannot
be that we do not do what needs to be done.

