Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of my African colleagues in the Council and all
the members who participated in the recent Council
mission to Africa, I would like to thank our team

leaders, Ambassador Jones Parry and Ambassador De
La Sabliere, for their intrepid leadership during the
mission. They were firm in conveying the Council's
central objectives while extending the hand of
partnership to our hosts. They kept the team focused
and united, despite a gruelling timetable and the fact
that we were dealing with politically sensitive issues.

We should also like to thank the representatives
of the Secretary-General and their teams in the field for
the excellent preparations they made for our visit, as
well as the Secretariat staff who accompanied us. The
interpreters had to endure unusually long hours, while
the security personnel left no detail to chance. On
behalf of the Council, I thank all of them.

Overall, our mission advanced to new levels the
objectives that we set ourselves in the places that we
visited. Our challenge is to retain the initiative and
accomplish the objectives within very tight time lines.
The Sudan in general and Darfur in particular will
remain the most difficult areas. The visit took place
against the background of an uneasy relationship with
the Security Council, as we adopted tougher
resolutions to protect civilians, address impunity,
facilitate humanitarian assistance in Darfur and push
the peace negotiations in Abuja. The unanimous
adoption, just before the mission took place, of
resolution 1679 (2006), with its necessary but perhaps
premature reference to Chapter VII, set a difficult stage
for our mission. It provided an excuse for the Sudan
Government to take a harder line on the proposed
transition from the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) to a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Darfur in implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement.

There is open resistance to the transition, and
negative perceptions have been created among the
general public regarding the intentions of the Security
Council. On the other hand, the Government of the
Sudan needs the Darfur Peace Agreement, with a weak
implementation mechanism in the form of AMIS,
which, following its initial but limited success, is
unable to undertake, alone, added responsibilities.

The Security Council team conveyed to the
Sudanese authorities - and tried to convince them -
that transition from AMIS to a United Nations force is
not an option, but an obligation. The invocation of
Chapter VII is not against the Government of the
Sudan and its people, but is a necessary reserve option

to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement, especially
in the disarmament of entities like the Janjaweed and
rebel groups, to ensure the protection of civilians and
to maintain unimpeded humanitarian access.

We should continue to explain and justify Chapter
VII beyond the need to maintain credibility before the
international community. The Government of the
Sudan maintains that it cannot yield its obligation to
disarm the Janjaweed under the Darfur Peace
Agreement and should not be treated as a failed State.
Given that atmosphere of suspicion, a number of steps
should be taken.

The talking and consultations at the diplomatic
level should continue as the assessment mission
continues. The operational necessities of the
assessment team will demonstrate the necessity of an
additional United Nations presence. The African Union
should be making the case for a more robust mandate
and predictable funding and the political case for
partnership through the Security Council. The
operational success of AMIS, with implementation of
the Darfur Peace Agreement, would create incremental
confidence in the United Nations presence in the
Sudan.

The planned visit of President Konare after the
assessment mission and before the African Union
summit should be used to push further the case for
international burden-sharing in implementing the
Darfur Peace Agreement. The same message should
come out of the Banjul summit.

In the days to come, it will be necessary for the
Security Council to ensure the continuing
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the south. That is of paramount
importance, because as we succeed in deploying and in
working with the Sudanese Government and the
southern Sudanese government, we are creating an
atmosphere of confidence and mutual trust between the
Security Council and the United Nations on the one
hand, and the authorities in Khartoum and Juba on the
other. The implementation of the Abuja Peace
Agreement will very much depend on the success of
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the south.

It should also be taken into account that the
implementation of the Agreement is very much behind
schedule. That is not because of the problems
associated with the United Nations, but because of the

internal constraints within the Sudanese Government
and the southern Sudanese government. Nonetheless, I
should highlight the following areas, which are of
critical importance in sustaining the viability of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

The first area is the need for expeditious
demarcation of the boundaries that define the south.
The second is the speedy negotiation and resolution of
the controversial status of Abie, where oil resources are
the centre of the controversy. The third is the clear
demobilization and redeployment of forces, as set out
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The Sudan is
a unique case under the Agreement, because it is going
to retain three armies: the armed forces of the Sudan,
the remnants of the Sudan Liberation Army and the
integrated army. I should add that in addition to those
three recognized armies, there are still militias in the
South whose status remains controversial and needs to
be defined if the Comprehensive Peace Agreement is to
be stabilized.

Among the militias that are creating concern is
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Although it has
crossed borders to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, it has only made the problem regional and
has in no way helped the people of southern Sudan. We
continued to receive reports of civilian atrocities,
which are of great concern to the government and the
people of southern Sudan.

When we were in Juba, we were told that a
delegation of the LRA was there and that a delegation
from Uganda was being awaited for negotiations under
the auspices of the government of southern Sudan. We
were curious, wanting to know the status of the five
indicted leaders and whether they would be part of the
negotiations. The leadership was careful to make a
distinction between negotiations for peace with the
LRA and the culpability of the five indicted leaders.
Although we were unable to obtain definite positions
on what would happen, they agreed in principle on the
need to apprehend the indictees and to hand them over
to the International Criminal Court.

Ambassador Jones Parry has outlined our visit to
Addis Ababa in great detail. Let me emphasize the
following.

We had the first meeting ever between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. That offers an opportunity for
continued partnership between the two organs of the
organizations under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.

Secondly, the African Union has gone well
beyond endorsing in principle the transition from
AMIS to the United Nations; it is actually urging a
more expeditious United Nations deployment.
President Konare has even written to NATO to ask for
logistical support to strengthen the African Union
forces in Darfur without actual ground deployment of
NATO, only as an intermediary step while waiting for
an expeditious transition to the United Nations
peacekeeping force.

We were also encouraged by the African Union
not only to continue working on the political and
operational aspects in the partnership with the United
Nations Security Council, but also with regard to the
need to stabilize hard-won peace and peacekeeping
initiatives and especially the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in subsequent cases in various parts of the
continent.

As Ambassador Jones Parry pointed out, the issue
of Somalia was drawn to our attention as fighting was
raging in Mogadishu and beyond.

At this stage, the hope for moving the Abuja
peace process forward resides with the African Union.
We hope that there will be positive outcomes from the
assessment mission and that President Konare's visit to
Khartoum before the summit in Banjul will push the
Sudanese forward and convince them of the need for a
greater United Nations presence.

As Ambassador de La Sabliere pointed out, our
visit to Darfur and across to Chad was important in
three main respects. The first is the presence of Darfur
refugees in Chad, whose loyalty is reflected in the kind
of leadership that was participating in Abuja. In the
camps that we visited, we saw the contradictory
position of demonstrating against the Abuja process
and the Abuja Peace Agreement because of the
compensation component - which was lacking - and,
at the same time, demanding a United Nations presence
in Darfur. It should be noted that that can come about
only if the United Nations is allowed to participate in
the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement.

The second challenge is related to the civilian and
humanitarian character of the camps. It was scarcely 15
years ago that the Security Council faced a similar
situation in the Great Lakes region. Although the

situation has not reached that level of insecurity,
reports of recruitment and of frequent attacks from
across the border make a strong case for serious
consideration of how to strengthen the civilian and
humanitarian character of these refugee camps in a
very volatile situation. President Deby himself has
admitted that he is unable to provide the necessary
security to the humanitarian staff and the refugees in
the camps.

Third is the tension developing between Chad
and the Sudan. President Deby expressed his intention
to register his concerns with the Security Council in
writing. This is going to be a difficult issue in an
already complicated environment, which the Council
must continue to follow.

Ambassador de La Sabliere took us to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This case is
probably one of the most difficult United Nations
operations, but could also turn out to be one of the
most successful. The parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are united on the date of
30 June for the elections. There are concerns about
campaigning and access to the media for small parties,
but there was almost unanimous agreement that there
should be adequate consultations in the next few weeks
before the elections so that the issues of access and
intimidation are appropriately addressed. The presence
of the 17,000-strong force of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), a European force and the
African Union's panel of wise men will be powerful
factors in maintaining stability during the elections and
during the interim period between the first and second
rounds of elections.

There are still concerns about the professionalism
and the competence of the newly integrated brigades of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but we were
encouraged by the firm commitment of a number of
countries and partners in the international community
to build a viable national army.

There is still a lot to be desired, especially in the
management and governance of the military
establishment, particularly the payment of salaries, but
this was eloquently brought to the attention of the
authorities, and it will continue to be an issue on the
agenda well beyond the election period.

We had fruitful discussions with international
monetary institutions, in particular the World Bank and

the International Monetary Fund, on issues of
governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The issue is on the agenda, but we are dealing with a
deeply entrenched culture of non-transparency and
opaque administration.

In our discussions, we were confident that, after
the elections, these issues would continue to be
addressed. We were gratified by the great confidence
shown in the Security Council and by the fact that the
support that the Security Council is receiving from
neighbouring countries is bringing about a unique
opportunity for a peaceful transition and the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

To sum up, I would say that this mission,
covering several countries in a very few days, did
10

indeed advance our objectives, and the challenge
before us would be to catalyse bilateral diplomatic
initiatives in connection with the United Nations and
the African Union, to see how the Abuja peace process
can be moved forward and also to ensure that the
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
goes according to schedule.

