Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): For countless
years, in numerous Security Council meetings, the
international community has utilized this forum to
express its anger and disappointment at the senseless
loss of life and the cruelty and barbarism meted out
to women, men and children by warring factions
that refuse to acknowledge the reality that peace will
reign in the Middle East only as a result of peaceful
negotiations, justice and fairness. On numerous
occasions, the international community has reiterated
its position that the conflict between Israel and Palestine
can be resolved only through a two-State solution, with
a viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
and its other neighbours.

South Africa wishes to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and
on having convened such an important debate. We also
extend our gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing today and express our appreciation
for the role that he plays in upholding the principles
of the United Nations and in his involvement in the
resolution of conflict in the Middle East. My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier
by the representatives of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community and of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

This morning, we listened attentively to the
briefing of the Secretary-General on his recent visit
to the State of Palestine, including the Gaza Strip, in
which he told us that he had witnessed first hand the
massive destruction in those areas. South Africa, for its
part, believes that such visits are helpful in drawing the
attention of the international community to the reality
of the horrific killing and the suffering of civilians in
Palestine.

We also listened to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations, who
told us that Palestinians now face the mammoth task of

rebuilding their lives after the deaths of 2,180 people,
the majority civilians, including 516 children and 283
women. Clearly, we should unreservedly condemn such
a situation in the Council. At the same time, we equally
listened to the representative of the State of Israel, who
pointed out Israel's readiness to find a lasting solution
to the conflict. In order to demonstrate its seriousness,
we believe that the starting point should be the lifting
of the seven-year blockade on Gaza.
We are also pleased that the Palestinians and
Israelis have concluded a ceasefire agreement. We are
hopeful that the ongoing negotiations will lead to a
permanent ceasefire arrangement. South Africa, for its
part, believes that now is the time for our readiness to
be put to the test and that attempts should be sought
to indeed seek a genuine solution to the long conflict.
South Africa is ready to support a Security Council
resolution that will compel both Israel and Palestine to
negotiate a framework for a two-State solution within
a specific time frame. In that regard, we welcome the
attempts of the Group of the Arab States, which is
making an effort in that regard.

Lastly, South Africa very recently pledged its
support for the ongoing humanitarian assistance effort
taking place in Gaza. We are indeed pleased that the
international community is making efforts to try and
restore conditions in Gaza. In that regard, we have
pledged 10 million South African rand, or $1 million,
as a contribution to that end. The funds pledged by
South Africa will be transferred to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. We stand ready to be of assistance, if called
upon, to share our experience in national reconciliation,
nation-building, constitution-building and post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

