Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): The last two years have
definitely been very difficult for the Secretary-General.
But we all followed his courage, determination and
candidness in presenting suggestions and making
changes, starting with the appointment of the
Independent Inquiry Committee. I think his statement
today proves what Ijust said.

We thank Mr. Volcker and the other members of
the Committee for today's briefing and their
submission of the Committee's report to the Security
Council. If I had to judge it simply on its size, the
report would certainly appear to reflect more than a
year's work done by dozens of attorneys, investigators
and forensic specialists. However, regardless of the
size of the report, what is important is what it contains.
As to its contents, we have been given a small insight
by both the preface, which was posted yesterday on the
web page of the Independent Inquiry Committee, and
Mr. Volcker's briefing this morning.

It is understandable that, in order to do justice to
the extensive work done by the Committee as well as
in order to draw possible lessons for the future, we
have to study the report carefully and scrupulously
examine the findings contained therein. Needless to
say, that will take some time, but no matter how long it
takes, something needs to be done, and in a coherent
and level-headed manner.

We must not be too quick to draw conclusions
under pressure as to whether the credibility of the
United Nations has been seriously undermined by the
workings of the oil-for-food programme. One should
not forget that, as the Committee states, the programme
served well the nutrition and health needs of the Iraqi
people, which were disregarded so much and so
continuously by Saddam. At the same time, the
programme prevented Saddam from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction.

I suspect that much of what is contained in the
report reflects essentially the nature of the beast - that
is, the nature of the United Nations itself. We must not
forget that the United Nations is a unique Organization,
unlike any other in the world. It is the sum of all its
parts, and its parts include, inter alia, 191 sovereign
Member States and countless different bodies,
specialized agencies, commissions, and so on.

The inquiry into the oil-for-food programme
provides us with valuable information as to how we
can improve the workings of this common
Organization. I am confident that all of us will take
those findings into serious consideration in our shared
desire to ensure that the optimum effectiveness of the
Organization in all areas - especially in the fields of
management, transparency and accountability - is
being realized as we all strive to do in our respective
countries.

