Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank the presidency
of Japan for convening this debate, as well as the
Secretary-General for his remarks.

Long-term, comprehensive solutions to conflict
and crises remain elusive. Addressing increasingly
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security requires change in our approach.
As we advance reform of the United Nations system
and adapt our tools and policies, we must adopt new
ways of working. Today, I will address three areas that
Australia sees as particularly important: a focus on
prevention and sustaining peace, women's participation
in peacebuilding, and current efforts towards United
Nations reform.

First, prevention approaches must become
embedded across all United Nations operations and
programmes, and across pillars, in line with the
resolutions on sustaining peace. This cannot be led
only from the top; all staff across the Organization need
to show leadership to embed these approaches, as well
as be empowered to do so. Planning and programming
must account for, adapt and respond to conflict
risks. Respect for human rights, as well as integrated
humanitarian and development programmes, are core
to these efforts.

Secondly, our efforts to support peaceful societies
must be inclusive. We welcome the joint United Nations-
World Bank study on conflict prevention and support
its focus on how successful prevention is inclusive,
based on broad coalitions reaching into civil society
and the private sector.

There is clear evidence that the meaningful
participation of women in peace processes leads to
more durable outcomes. In our efforts to address
complex security challenges and sustain peace, we
must continue to strive to secure women's full political
and economic participation. We acknowledge the
practical steps undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Support Office in
2017 to improve women's participation in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.

Finally, Australia strongly supports the Secretary-
General's efforts towards reform, including reform of
the peace and security pillar of the United Nations,
and we are pleased that these reforms have advanced
to the next stage today. The Security Council's ongoing
support for the peace and security pillar reforms is
vital. To overcome fragmentation, empower the field
and improve United Nations effectiveness in assisting
efforts to sustain peace, these reforms are needed.
We must improve coordination and cooperation
between departments and agencies, between field and
Headquarters, and between policy and programmes.
Cultural, process and structural reforms based on the
sustaining peace resolutions are all crucial. Our reform
objective should be to deliver a nimble, innovative
United Nations that engages with conflict risk,
rather than merely to bring about structural changes
at Headquarters.

We must prioritize prevention and inclusive
peacebuilding to improve our ability to address
contemporary conflict issues. Australia strongly
support the Secretary-General's plans to take forward
an ambitious reform agenda. Our words are pointing us
in the right direction but we need our actions to follow.

