Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing and for your contributions as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia. The United States is encouraged by the coordinator of the Panel of Experts' recent travel to Somalia and meeting with the national security adviser to the President. We hope that the visit will serve as a building block to re-establish important information-sharingand constructive working relations between the 751 Committee and the Federal Government of Somalia. This positive step comes at a critical time, as Somalia continues to suffer from a lack of overall security and faces significant humanitarian challenges. Al-Shabaab, the Islamic State in Somalia and other actors continue to threaten the peace and stability of Somalia and the surrounding region. Disrupting and ultimately eliminating sources of financing for these groups is crucial in this fight. Addressing the issue of financing and other ongoing threats will require close cooperation between the Federal Government of Somalia, international partners and members of the Panel of Experts. The United States is committed to working with our partners and Member States to utilize the 751 Somalia sanctions regime to its full extent and reduce Al-Shabaab's ability to conduct attacks. This includes providing technical assistance to counter the financing of terrorism, support in tackling the threat of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), and capacity-building to help the Somali security forces secure and properly manage their conventional-weapons stockpiles. The United States continues to support the arms embargo so as to prevent Al-Shabaab and other actors from accessing weapons and related materials. We emphasize that the arms embargo does not prevent the Federal Government of Somalia from obtaining the military equipment that it needs; the embargo requires only that arms shipments follow the required notification process for transparency and tracking purposes. Effective enforcement of the 751 sanctions regime requires the Committee to act expeditiously on the nomination of individuals. When Member States identify and nominate individuals engaged in the arms-trafficking and illicit charcoal trade, the Committee should act quickly on such nominations. We urge the Member States that have placed holds to lift them immediately so that those individuals may be properly sanctioned. Finally, we urge Member States to support ongoing Committee measures and sanctions designations and to implement fully resolution 2498 (2019), which outlines the arms embargo provisions and, importantly, places a ban on IED components. We must continue to work together and employ all available tools to ensure peace and stability in Somalia and in the region to achieve a better future for all Somalis.
