Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank your country, Mr. President, for
organizing this important open debate, which deals
with one of the highest priorities on the agenda of the
international community, namely, the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution. That topic is being discussed
in the context of reforming the international peace and
security system of the United Nations and promoting
the concept of preventive diplomacy.

We thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States for their valuable briefings this morning.
We also associate ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

There is no doubt that Cote d'Ivoire embodies one of
the success stories in the maintenance of peace and the
peaceful settlement of disputes through the utilization
of available United Nations tools. That begins with
the activation of peacekeeping mechanisms, followed
by peacebuilding and strengthening reconstruction
and development, and culminates in the achievement
of peace and its sustainability. President Alassane
Ouattara described that positive example in detail when
he presided over yesterday's productive meeting (see S/PV.8413).

We all feel that we need more support for the efforts
being made in Africa to ensure a more integrated and
comprehensive approach in dealing with the challenges
and the root causes of the problems. In that regard, I
would like to mention that Cairo stands ready to host
the headquarters of the African Union Centre for Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development.

Egypt is also preparing to preside over the African
Union at the beginning of next year. We express our
commitment to leading the efforts of the African Union
in order to establish a real partnership with the United
Nations and Africa's main partners, with a view to
supporting a more coherent and practical approach
in dealing with the countless challenges facing the
continent.

Egypt is especially committed to the African Union
concerning participation in revitalizing and adopting
a framework of action for the African Union and its
policies with regard to post-conflict reconstruction
and development. We seek to encourage an approach
that focuses on sustaining peace in order to ensure that
we can adopt a long-term vision for dealing with the
challenges facing the relevant African States.

We believe that a partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations based on a stronger
sense of ownership by the African Union would help
to advance the implementation of the relevant United
Nations plans and strategies. We must consider those
plans and strategies as a whole and as a comprehensive
framework that aligns the various initiatives and
strategies focusing on Africa's real needs and priorities.
In an attempt to achieve that, Egypt held a workshop
on the Sahel region in Cairo on 15 and 16 October in
order to entrench that approach at the regional and
international levels. Various relevant stakeholders from
the Group of Five for the Sahel met with representatives
of the African Union Commission, the United Nations
and other major partners. Egypt continues to play a
constructive role and to be active as a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We would like to highlight the following points for
the Council's consideration.

First, the complex, multidimensional and regional
nature of the challenges facing peace and security in
the world today, in particular in Africa, makes it all
the more difficult to move from short-term stability to
long-term peace and development.

Second, the real challenge facing us is how to
translate political and strategic commitments into
concrete programmes and practical projects that deal
with the root causes of instability, while focusing
particularly on marginalized border areas in conflict
zones.

Third, international assistance must prioritize pilot
programmes aimed at strengthening institutions and
national and local capacities in the areas of security
and socioeconomic development. Such an approach
would ensure sustainability and feasibility of collective
investment in international peace.

Fourth, we should adopt an approach that focuses on
people, including all local communities and population
centres, and gives priority to the empowerment of
women and young people, while ensuring the inclusion
of all sectors of society in the peacemaking operations
and their engagement in the future of their country.

Fifth, despite is extreme importance with regard to
saving lives and meeting urgent demands, humanitarian
aid must not be to the detriment oftechnical cooperation
aimed at the capacity-building of the relevant countries.
Once again, long-term sustainability requires
investments in the areas of capacity-building and
governance.

Sixth, partnerships and resources must be based
on long-term strategies for reconstruction and
development. It is therefore important to mobilize
and allocate predictable and sustainable resources in
order to ensure the implementation of peacebuilding
programmes.

Seventh and lastly, as Cairo prepares to inaugurate
the African Union Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Centre, we stress that the new Centre
should be a foundation for planning and for supporting
partners.

In conclusion, in September my country endorsed
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as part of the
Secretary-General's Action for Peace initiative, as well
as the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.
That is an affirmation of Egypt's continued commitment
to achieving more effective peacekeeping operations in
the future.
In November, the Foreign Ministry of Egypt and
the Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution
hosted a high-level regional conference on improving
the performance of peacekeeping operations with the
participation of senior United Nations officials. Its goal
was to build on the Declaration of Shared Commitments
and to provide troop-contributing countries with the
opportunity to participate in the relevant discussions on
developing peace operations. Under its chairmanship
of the African Union next year, Egypt will continue
to focus on deepening the strategic partnership with
the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and post-conflict development and
reconstruction in Africa. We look forward to further
international cooperation in order to pool efforts for
achieving peace, stability and security in our continent
and throughout the world.

