Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Let me
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. You
wear it well, and we look forward to your leadership.
I also thank the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy for her
comprehensive briefing.

One of the great honours and pleasures ofbeing the
United States Permanent Representative to the United
Nations is working with nations and organizations that
share our commitment to freedom, prosperity and human
dignity. We deeply appreciate the European Union
and its member States' leadership and cooperation in
promoting peace, security and human rights in Europe
and around the world.

Today, as we take stock of our global priorities,
I am struck by how often the United States and the
European Union partner to amplify each of each
other's important efforts. In Syria, the European
Union is a close, reliable partner as we work together
to end the conflict there and address the human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
of the Al-Assad regime. The humanitarian assistance
provided by the European Union and its member States
in that and other crises across the globe has been vital
to relieving suffering. That support has complemented
the United States humanitarian assistance to Syria,
which has amounted to more than $6.5 billion since
the start of the crisis. In the longer-term, the European
Union's commitment to support serious reconstruction
once a political settlement is reached will be invaluable
not only to the Syrian people, but to the region and the
world. But to get to that point, imposing sanctions on
individuals and entities connected to Syria's chemical
weapons programme is necessary. The United States
has sought to expand United Nations sanctions on
known suppliers and facilitators of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme. We appreciate the European
Union's cooperation in levying Syria-related sanctions,
but we need to do more. We call on the European Union
and the United Nations to apply more rigorous sanctions
to deny Al-Assad and his regime the means to commit
further war crimes.

Ukraine is another area in which we have worked
defectively together. The European Union has played
a critical role in holding Russia accountable for its
actions in Ukraine. The United States and the European
Union should remain united in their resolve to keep
sanctions in place until Moscow fully honours its
Minsk commitments.

One of our most fruitful areas of cooperation
has been in our effort to bring greater focus on the
relationship between human rights and international
peace and security. We commend and share the
European Union's emphasis on accountability and its
efforts to fight impunity for human rights abuses and
violations. Together we are fighting not only to hold
violators accountable, but also to ensure that victims
receive the proper treatment, care and justice. I am
hopeful that we will begin to see greater support from
European Union member States at the Human Rights
Council as we work to prevent the ongoing anti-Israel
bias in that forum.

We remain deeply concerned about the migrant
situation in Libya and the central Mediterranean region.
We recognize the challenges that the European Union
and its member States, especially Italy, face with the
continuous flow of refugees. We commend them for
their sustained efforts to counter migrant smuggling
and human trafficking.
Other bright spots in our partnership are in conflict
prevention, security assistance, counter-terrorism and
peacebuilding. In Africa, we commend the European
Union's missions on the ground. We also greatly
appreciate its partnership with the United Nations and
the United States in the nine United Nations missions
in Africa, especially in Mali, Somalia and the Central
African region. The European Union's financial
contribution to the African Union forces in Somalia in
particular has been central to the significant security
and political progress there.

Elsewhere in the world, we look forward to further
support from European partners. In Asia, the European
Union has played a key role in supporting United
Nations efforts to establish the necessary incentives for
North Korea to address urgent non-proliferation and
humanitarian crises and human rights violations. The
only path to a secure and prosperous future for North
Korea is to comply fully with all ofits obligations under
international law. North Korea must abandon its reckless
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons. We call on the European Union and
all countries to exert maximal pressure on North Korea
to change course. We urge European Union member
States to rigorously implement Security Council
resolutions, impose tough, autonomous measures that
go beyond the resolutions, and downgrade diplomatic
and economic ties with North Korea. Stronger action on
North Korea from the European Union and its member
States will assist in securing peace in the region.

With regard to Iran as well, we look forward to
deepening cooperation with the European Union to
counter Iran's destabilizing activities and to hold
the Iranian Government accountable for its actions.
Resolution 2231 (2015) must be fully implemented,
including provisions regarding the transfer of weapons
and the launching of ballistic missiles. The European
Union can, and should, do more to underscore to Iran
that its destabilizing actions in the region, including
support for extremists and terrorists groups, must cease.

In conclusion, the United States shares deep bonds
of history and principle with the European Union and its
member countries. We reiterate our firm commitment
to working closely with the High Representative in
support of United Nations priorities. We look forward
to continuing our valuable partnership and support for
our shared values.

