Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Minister for External Relations of
Brazil, who is unable to participate in today's meeting
as he had hoped, due to unforeseen circumstances that
required his presence in Brazil. I will now proceed to
read out his statement.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation)

"I congratulate Your Excellency and the
Portuguese delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November and in particular for your initiative
in promoting this timely debate on the protection
of civilians.

(spoke in English)

"I would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his very informative briefing. I
would also like to extend warm greetings to High
Commissioner Navanethem Pillay and thank her
for her presentation. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Catherine Bragg and to Mr. Philip Spoerri
for their briefings.

"On the occasion of today's debate, I would
like to propose a reflection on how the
relationship between the maintenance of
international peace and security and the
protection of civilians has recently evolved and
how to build upon the existing conceptual
framework to deal with the many challenges
confronting us. My remarks are meant as a
constructive, conceptual contribution to help
develop our collective thinking on a very
important issue that will continue to be of
concern to this Council and to the international
community as a whole.

"No issue could be more deserving of the
attention of the Security Council than the need to
protect civilians in situations of armed conflict.
We are all well aware of the plight of refugees,
displaced persons and all the innocent victims of
war. I also take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the work carried out by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and all
other relief workers on the ground, who, often at
great personal sacrifice, dedicate their best efforts
to the protection of civilians.
"At the outset, let us bear in mind two
different sides of the question of the protection of
civilians. On the one hand, there is the imperative
need to prevent violence against civilians in the
conduct of hostilities - I would even venture to
say to prevent violence against non-combatants in
general - and the need to ensure accountability.
On the other, there is the need to guarantee,
especially in situations of armed conflict, that
persons in need have access to humanitarian
assistance and emergency relief. Blocking access
to humanitarian aid can be just as lethal as
pulling a trigger.

"On all counts, the most important task, as
stressed in the various reports prepared by the
Secretary-General on this question, is that of
ensuring compliance with the rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. That, of course, is easier said than done, but
we can derive some reassurance from the fact that
the issue is now high on our agenda, and this
meeting is eloquent proof of that.

"The Secretariat has produced a number of
studies that have increased our understanding of
this complex question, and presented us with a
number of useful recommendations that have
enriched the work of the United Nations aimed at
improving the situation of civilians in armed
conflicts.

"Brazil has a strong interest in the work of
the Security Council on the protection of
civilians. We have made significant progress
since 1999, when discussions on this issue began
to receive more focused attention. We support the
statement to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Protection of Civilians.

"The plight of innocent civilians and the
need to prevent the impunity of perpetrators of
the most serious crimes is what led the United
Nations to create the International Criminal Court
(ICC), of which Brazil is currently a full member.
Supporting the work of the ICC is one of the most
effective ways to enhance accountability and to
deter future crimes.

"A few years back, in September 2005, an
important step was taken when the Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1) of the World Summit
was adopted. It established the responsibility of
States to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Additionally, it mentions the
responsibility of the international community to
act collectively, through the United Nations,
should national authorities manifestly fail to
protect their populations. Indeed, no one can be
indifferent to the fate of those who are under the
threat of such heinous crimes.

"The recognition that there is a
responsibility to protect was a milestone. It
should be stressed that the same World Summit
declaration that established a consensus
formulation of the concept of the responsibility to
protect also clearly stated that that responsibility
must be exercised, first of all, through the use of
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful
means, and that only in those cases in which
peaceful means prove to be inadequate should
coercive measures be contemplated. Along with
that process, it is essential to distinguish between
collective responsibility, which can be fully
exercised thorough non-coercive measures, and
collective security, which involves a case-by-case
political assessment by the Security Council.

"Before embarking upon military action, the
international community is expected to conduct a
comprehensive and judicious analysis of all
possible consequences. The use of force always
brings with it the risk of causing unintended
casualties and spreading violence and instability.
The fact that it is employed with the aim of
protecting civilians does not make the collateral
casualties or unintended destabilization less
tragic.

"That is why, in our view, it is necessary to
take an additional conceptual step in dealing with
the protection of civilians. I would like to take
this opportunity to offer a new perspective on the
question that, we believe, has become essential in
16

approaching our common objective.

"The point was made by President Dilma
Rousseff in her opening statement at this year's
general debate at the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.11), when she referred to an indisputable
and disturbing fact. The world today suffers the
painful consequences of military interventions

that have aggravated existing conflicts, allowed
terrorism to penetrate into places where it
previously did not exist, given rise to new cycles
of violence, and increased the vulnerability of
civilian populations. She added that much had
been said about the responsibility to protect, but
very little about the responsibility while
protecting.

"Because the United Nations can authorize
the use of force, it is under the obligation to fully
develop an awareness of the dangers involved in
such use and to set up mechanisms that can
provide an objective and detailed assessment of
such dangers, as well as ways and means of
preventing harm to civilians.

"Our collective point of departure should
resemble the Hippocratic principle of primum non
nocere - first, do no harm - with which doctors
are so well acquainted. That must be the motto of
those who are mandated to protect civilians. It
would also be most unfortunate, ultimately
unacceptable, if a United Nations mission
established with the aim of protecting civilians
were to cause greater harm than that that it was
enacted to prevent.

"But we must aim for a higher level of
responsibility. One casualty is one too many, no
matter how noble the intentions. The Brazilian
delegation will shortly circulate a concept paper.
It elaborates on the idea that the international
community, as it exercises its responsibility to
protect, must demonstrate a high level of
responsibility while protecting. Both concepts
should evolve together, based on an agreed set of
fundamental principles, parameters and
procedures, of which I will mention a few.

"Prevention is always the best policy. It is
the emphasis on preventive diplomacy that
reduces the risk of armed conflict and the human
costs associated with it. The international
community must be rigorous in its efforts to
exhaust all peaceful means available in the
protection of civilians under threat of violence, in
line with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, as embodied in the
2005 Outcome Document. The use of force must
produce as little violence and instability as
possible. Under no circumstances can it generate
more harm than it was authorized to prevent. In
the event that the use of force is contemplated,
action must be judicious, proportionate and
limited to the objectives established by the
Security Council. Enhanced Council procedures
are needed to monitor and assess the manner in
which resolutions are interpreted and
implemented to ensure responsibility while
protecting.

"We hope that United Nations members
contribute to elaborating the concept of
responsibility while protecting. We are convinced
that, if we succeed in that endeavour, we will
make the Council stronger and better equipped to
carry out its responsibilities under the Charter.

"The Security Council can no longer
postpone a serious discussion of such issues. We
are aware that it is not an easy task and may
require the adoption of new procedures, but we
can do no less."

