Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by commending the Permanent Mission of
Bolivia on its competent management of the work of
the Security Council for the month of October. I wish
it every success. I also congratulate the delegation of
the United States on its outstanding efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month.

A few weeks ago, the leaders of our States met
at the high-level segment of the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly. The statements of many of
them reflected the real concerns of the international
community about the future of multilateralism and
the urgent need to maintain, defend and promote. The
clearest manifestation of that need is embodied today in
the Palestinian question.

The intensity, immensity and complexity
of conflicts and tensions in the Middle East are
growing at an unprecedented rate. The Palestinian
question is currently at a critical juncture. In fact,
the agreed principles for a political solution, based on
international law and many international resolutions,
are being systematically undermined. We must raise
our voices from this very Chamber to underscore
that multilateralism is the only way to resolve the
problems facing the world, on top of which is the
Palestinian question.

Lebanon has always considered the two-State
solution to be the only sustainable political solution to
this conflict, based on all resolutions of international
legitimacy. That entails ending the occupation and
establishing an independent State of Palestine within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, while
fully ensuring the right ofreturn of Palestinian refugees
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). The foundations ofjust and comprehensive peace
are completely embodied in the Arab Peace Initiative.
Peace is long overdue, and the Security Council must
use its influence, authority and tools to achieve peace.

Despite delays, Lebanon is working hard to form
a Government of national unity following the most
recent parliamentary elections. We hope that the
new Government will represent another important
step towards strengthening the State institutional
structure. Lebanon is currently undertaking a series
of important commitments, in particular by following
up on the recommendations emanating from the
support conferences held earlier this year in Rome,
Paris and Brussels. Lebanon seriously looks forward
to implementing those recommendations meaningfully
and optimally in order to support its security
and economy.

Everyone knows that Lebanon continues to
face major challenges as a result of regional crises,
in particular the Syrian crisis. We continue to host
more than 1.5 million displaced Syrians, which is
significantly straining our economy, society, security
and infrastructure.
The funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
puts more pressure on Lebanon, as it continues to host
hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees, while
the chances of a political solution for the Palestinian
question are dwindling, as we have heard today. In
addition, Israel continues to violate the sovereignty of
Lebanon and threatens its security through its ongoing
occupation of Lebanese territory and daily air, land and
sea violations.

On 31 August, the Council sent a strong message
of support on the stability and sovereignty of Lebanon
by adopting resolution 2433 (2018). That resolution
once again reflected the united position of the Council
and the international community on the priority need
to preserve the stability of Lebanon by maintaining
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). The Government of Lebanon
stresses its full commitment to resolution 1701 (2006).
In that context, the Lebanese Armed Forces are making
great efforts to build and develop their capacities in
order to ensure that they fulfil their role completely.
They are cooperating on an ongoing basis with UNIFIL
to implement Lebanon's relevant commitments,
hoping to reach a permanent ceasefire, as stipulated in
the resolution.

Lebanon is working with the Tripartite Mechanism
to decrease tensions and preserve the security and
stability of its southern borders. Despite that, in the
General Assembly last month (see A/73/PV.10), the
Prime Minister of Israel implicitly threatened to target
Lebanese civilian and Government facilities, such as
the international airport and national stadium. His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs responded
to those threats by organizing a field visit for the
diplomatic corps in Lebanon.

Nevertheless, Lebanon stresses from this Chamber
the need for the Council and the Organization to
prevent Israel from using any pretext to launching new
aggression against Lebanon, which threatens the lives,
safety and future of the Lebanese people.

