The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of C6te d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council heard a briefing by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria,
Mr. Oluyemi Adenidji; the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union,
Mr. Said Djinnit; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Pierre Schori; and the
High Representative for the Elections,
Mr. Antonio Monteiro, during its meeting on
13 October 2005.

"The Security Council appreciates the
efforts of the African Union, in particular
President Thabo Mbeki of the Republic of South
Africa and President Olusegun Obasanjo of
Nigeria, Chair of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the leaders of the region, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
High Representative for the Elections to promote
peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire, and reiterates
its full support for these efforts.

"The Security Council endorses the decision
of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire adopted at
its fortieth meeting at the level of heads of State
and Government held on 6 October 2005 in Addis
Ababa (S/2005/639), expresses its intention to
take rapidly the necessary measures to support as
appropriate its implementation in order to
organize free, fair, open, transparent and credible
elections as soon as possible and no later than 30
October 2006, and looks forward to regular
reports on its implementation in accordance with
paragraph 10, article (v) of the decision of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

"The Security Council takes note, in
particular, of the Peace and Security Council's
request for an increase in the strength of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI), without prejudice to any future
decision or commitment of the Security Council
in this regard. The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider whether to provide
additional resources to UNOCI, based on careful
study of conditions in the country and of
evidence of meaningful progress towards
implementation of long-standing commitments
under Linas-Marcoussis and other relevant
agreements.

"The Security Council reaffirms that it
endorsed the Linas-Marcoussis, Accra III and
Pretoria Agreements, and demands that all the
parties signatory to these agreements, as well as
all the Ivorian parties concerned, implement fully
and without delay their commitments under these
agreements, in accordance with the decision of
the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.

"The Security Council welcomes the
forthcoming visit of a high-level delegation led
by Presidents Olusegun Obasanjo and Thabo
Mbeki to cote d'Ivoire, expresses its full support
to it, and urges all the Ivorian parties to cooperate
fully and in good faith with this delegation, in
particular in order to ensure the rapid
implementation of the decision of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the
early appointment of a Prime Minister acceptable
to all parties, and to guarantee, with the support

of the United Nations, the organization of free,
fair, open, transparent and credible elections.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the forthcoming visit to the region of
the

the Chair of the Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004), and
underlines that the purpose of this visit is to
assess the progress made by all parties towards
the implementation of their commitments,
bearing in mind the Committee's mandate under
paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004),
and to remind all Ivorian parties of their
responsibilities for the full and rapid
implementation of the peace process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/49.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15p.m.

