We are grateful, as ever, to Mr. Chambas for his report on the situation and for the activity of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel during the first six months of its new three-year mandate. It is clear from Mr. Chambas' briefing that coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added a further layer of complexity to an already difficult situation, and the United Kingdom appreciates that he is having to adjust in the face of this new dynamic. I am also very grateful to Ms. Ibrahim for transposing the analysis we read in the reports into a real human story. She brought into stark relief the challenges of climate change for societies in the region and the need for good governance, as well as development and security. There is also, as she put it, the need for a green deal. Those are issues that the United Kingdom cares about as the forthcoming host of the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the "rebuilding better" strand of our financing for development work. We know that the confluence of negative factors in the Sahel presents a unique and complex challenge: chronic underdevelopment, extreme poverty, marginalization, insecurity, governance vacuums easily filled by malevolent actors, and competition over resources exacerbated - again, as Ms. Ibrahim said - by climate change. The COVID-19 pandemic risks exacerbating those issues, but it did not create them, and it remains critical that we sustain efforts to address the underlying drivers of poverty and instability in the region. The United Kingdom is deeply troubled by the deteriorating humanitarian situation outlined by Special Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas. With more than 15 million people in need of humanitarian assistance and more than 3 million displaced in the Sahel alone, it is critical that our response be able to reach those most in need. In this context, we urge all parties to ensure unhindered humanitarian access and movement in order to allow the delivery of essential goods and services. Without this, food insecurity and protection needs will continue to rise. That is particularly the case for women and girls, who are facing increased exposure to gender-based violence and other human rights abuses. The United Kingdom shares others' concerns about the deteriorating security situation, particularly in Mali and Burkina Faso. We call on all parties to respect human rights law and international humanitarian law. In that respect, we should be mindful of the tragic consequences of violations, both on a human level and as a driver of further violence. We call on all the Governments of the Group of Five for the Sahel to undertake fair and transparent investigations into alleged violations by State security forces and to hold those responsible to account. The rise in extremist and terrorist violence in the Lake Chad basin, including the recent targeting of a United Nations humanitarian facility, is also deeply troubling. Such attacks threaten to increase displacement and the number of people in camps for internally displaced persons further still. With presidential elections fast approaching in a number of countries, it has never been more important to prioritize prevention and preserve stability. The United Kingdom is particularly alarmed by violence in Guinea in recent months and by the prospect of seeing more as we approach those elections. Preventing backsliding on governance, accountability, access to justice and human rights is critical to ensure environments conducive to free, fair, timely and credible elections. So it is our sincere hope that, as Mr. Chambas said, 2020 will be defined by democratic consolidation and credible, inclusive and peaceful elections and that where those who are required by those elections to leave power ensure a smooth transition of power. Returning to the global coronavirus pandemic, the United Kingdom is clear- eyed about the challenges faced by vulnerable countries across West Africa and the Sahel and is working hard to support those most in need. We are committed to a global response. Last month, the United Kingdom hosted the Global Vaccine Summit, raising $8.8 billion to support the immunization of 300 million children. We have announced a total of almost $1 billion for the COVID-19 response, including $20 million for the African Union's response fund. Of course, the international response to COVID-19 should not divert vital resources from other critical work that seeks to tackle the underlying drivers of poverty and instability, so we were grateful to hear that United Nations-wide coordination with regard to the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has improved. It is essential that the entire United Nations system, including critical development entities, such as the United Nations Development Programme, mobilize in support of peacebuilding efforts in the region. Mr. Chambas and the United Nations system across his area of responsibility have an incredibly difficult job in a region with a complex nexus of challenges. We thank him for all that he and the United Nations operations across the region are doing to tackle those challenges. It is critical for the people of the region that we succeed.
