Mr. von Ungern-Sternberg (Germany): First of
all, I would like to thank the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities, Ambassador
Mufioz, as others have already done, for his
comprehensive briefing, for his personal commitment
and for his very hard work. We also thank the
Monitoring Team for their instructive report.

As Germany fully subscribes to the forthcoming
statement by the presidency of the European Union, I
can limit my intervention to the following three points.

First, the sanctions regime needs and deserves the
active support of all United Nations Member States.
The terrorist threat remains imminent on a global scale,
as the most recent attacks in Jakarta and Beslan
tragically demonstrated. Let me again express
Germany's sincere condolences to all the victims and
their families, and to the Governments of Indonesia,
Australia and Russia.

As all States are targeted by such heinous crimes,
all bear a common responsibility to act. The Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions regime is an essential legal and
logistical framework for such action, and it is, in our
view, a successful one. Although the amount of assets
frozen and the number of targeted individuals stopped
at border crossings may be limited, the preventive
effect of the measures should not be underestimated.

My second point concerns the Consolidated List.
Completing and updating the List is essential. The
sanctions regime is far from perfect. Its central tool is
the Consolidated List. We share the view of the
Monitoring Team that the List needs to be constantly
completed and updated with the assistance of Member
States. The List can only be as good as the data
provided by States. Germany has identified a number
of individuals for inclusion on the List. In every case,
we have provided extensive identification data and
well-documented information about their criminal
background, including their link to Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. The revised guidelines for the Committee's
work, which we hope will soon be finalized, are
intended to further facilitate close interaction between
Member States, the Committee and the Monitoring
Team.

My final remark concerns delisting. The issue of
delisting is of growing importance, in particular as
regards justly listed individuals who later turned their
backs on terrorism. Listing and delisting are two sides
of the same coin. We are convinced that if an
individual's name must be put on the sanctions List on
account of his terrorist crimes and links, his name
must, following the same logic, be removed from the
List if and when he credibly and durably changes his
life and firmly rejects all such terrorist actions and
affiliations.

Such delisting is, on the one hand, an issue of
material justice and due process in relation to the
individual concerned. It is, at the same time, an issue
pertaining to the clarity and correctness of the List
itself. Moreover, the prospect of being delisted can be
an important incentive for the individual concerned to
cooperate with counter-terrorism investigations. That
positive potential of the sanctions regime deserves
careful consideration.

We therefore welcome the Monitoring Team's
intention to review current delisting procedures and to
develop proposals for their clarification and
transparency. We are convinced that all that will
enhance the credibility of the sanctions regime and
improve proactive cooperation of States with the
Committee.

In conclusion, I would like to underline
Germany's determination to continue to interact
closely with the Committee and with all concerned,
with a view to further improving this important
instrument for countering terrorism worldwide.

