Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Gambari for his monthly briefing
and for his update on the current situation in the
Middle East.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union.

Less than two weeks ago we had a useful and
constructive debate on the current developments in the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute (see S/PV.5564). The
ongoing developments on the ground, unfortunately,
only lead us again to reiterate our deep concern about
the escalating tensions and increased violence in Gaza
and the West Bank. We strongly deplore any action that
causes civilian casualties. We therefore call on both
parties to exercise the utmost restraint and do
everything possible to calm the situation and prevent
further dangerous escalation that will only lead to
suffering and loss of life. Mutual violence must stop,
for there is no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute.

In this regard, we call on Israel to end its military
operations that endanger Palestinian civilians and to
take every possible measure to protect their lives.
Although we believe Israel has the right to self-defence
against terrorism and its perpetrators, its response must
always be proportionate and in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We also repeat our call
for the immediate release of Palestinian ministers and
legislators detained in Israel. At the same time, we
expect the Israeli Government to continue its
commitment to peace in the Middle East, based on
principles laid out in the Road Map, and to refrain from
such steps and activities that threaten the viability of an
agreed two-State solution.

On the other hand, we urge the Palestinian
Authority to undertake all necessary measures and
make all efforts to find and release the kidnapped
Israeli soldier and to prevent further military and
terrorist attacks on Israel, notably the launching of
rockets against Israeli population centres. We support
the efforts and leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas
to achieve that goal and to foster national unity among
Palestinians.
In this respect, we support the efforts of President
Abbas to form a government of national unity that will
be committed to the Quartet principles, have a political
platform that will enable early engagement to achieve
peace and to continue the dialogue on a solution to the
Middle East conflict.

We also remain deeply concerned at the economic
and humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank.
In this regard, we highlight the importance of the
temporary international mechanism, which enables the
channelling of resources and deliverance of assistance
directly to the Palestinian people and thereby address
their urgent humanitarian and financial needs. To this
end, we urge Israel to resume transfers of withheld
Palestinian tax and customs revenues and encourage it
to carry out those transfers by way of the temporary
international mechanism. We also call for full
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access and ask that the Rafah, Karni and other border
crossings remain permanently open.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
Middle East conflict, based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions and negotiations between the two
sides.

Turning to the latest development in Lebanon, we
were deeply shocked this morning to learn of the
assassination of the Minister of Industry of Lebanon,
Mr. Pierre Gemayel. We condemn that horrible crime
as an attempt to destabilize the situation in Lebanon
and to disrupt the process of reconciliation in that
country. We urge the Lebanese authorities to undertake
all necessary measures to investigate this crime and to
bring the perpetrators to justice. This pattern of
politically motivated killings and violence in Lebanon
must be stopped. We express our deepest condolences
to the Government of Lebanon and to the Lebanese
people on their tragic loss.

We fully support the Lebanese Government,
which was legitimately elected last year through free
and democratic parliamentary elections, in its efforts
and in the steps it has taken to regain control and
authority over its whole territory and to re-establish
stability and security within the country. Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence have to be respected by everybody.
Lebanon and its people have already suffered enough,
and further destabilization should not be allowed. The
national dialogue has to continue, with the aim of
reaching consensus on several important issues,
including the disarmament of all militias in the
country, which, through their offensive acts, represent
a constant threat to the stability and security of
Lebanon and its neighbours. The Lebanese
Government has to be the sole authority, with a
monopoly on the use of force within its territory.

In this respect, we would also like to emphasize
the importance of ensuring full compliance with the
arms embargo imposed through resolution 1701 (2006)
and of progress towards the normalization of relations
between Lebanon and Syria, as well as the delineation
of their common borders, including in the area of the
Sheba'a farms. We are convinced that the resolution of
these issues would significantly contribute to the
stabilization of the situation in the region.

Last but not least, we should also not forget about
the need to release the two abducted Israeli soldiers
kidnapped by Hizbollah on 12 July 2006. We also
understand the need to resolve the issue of the
Lebanese prisoners, and we encourage the respective
authorities to make progress on that issue.

We fully understand that the situation in Lebanon,
and in the whole region, is complicated; it will take
time to make progress on certain issues. However, we
wish to underline that all of this can be achieved only
through peaceful means and negotiations. As has
already been proven on several occasions, there is no
military solution to any conflict or dispute.
Reconstruction of the country and further development
can proceed only in a peaceful environment. A stable
and prosperous Lebanon would significantly contribute
to the stabilization of the situation in the entire Middle
East region. That is why we call on all countries in the
region to contribute positively to the peacebuilding
process in Lebanon.

