Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank
Ambassador Mufioz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for presenting the report of the
PBC (S/2009/444) and for his outstanding leadership
of the Commission. We commend him and we
commend the respective Chairs of the country-specific
configurations and of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, as well as the Peacebuilding Support Office,
for their good work and their achievements during the
reporting period.

The Peacebuilding Commission is playing an
important role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding. We
are convinced that greater priority and more resources
should be devoted to peacebuilding. It is the foundation
for sustainable security, stability, economic growth and
development in post-conflict situations. As we pointed
out during the thematic debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding in July (see S/PV.6165), the United
Nations system and the wider international community
need to put greater focus on ensuring better coherence
in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development.

Uganda welcomes the PBC's increasing
engagement with countries on its agenda, through
facilitating strategic coordination and the alignment of
political and financial support to nationally agreed
priorities. In that regard, we have seen commendable
progress in Burundi and Sierra Leone. In the Central
African Republic and Guinea-Bissau, the PBC's efforts
in the coordination and mobilization of support to
address specific challenges, such as security sector
reform, are promising.

National leadership and ownership are of
paramount importance in any peacebuilding endeavour.
The national authorities must take primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions
for security, governance and economic recovery, with
the support of the United Nations and international
partners. It is therefore important for the PBC to
prioritize its engagement with countries on its agenda,
building on existing national strategies and capacities.

We are encouraged by the initiatives for
flexibility and the responsive funding being undertaken
through the Peacebuilding Fund and the launching of
its country-level multi-donor trust funds. We look
forward to operationalization of the Fund's revised
terms of reference to facilitate expeditious funding of
peacebuilding activities.

The Peacebuilding Commission also needs to
strengthen its monitoring and review of mutual
commitments of national and international actors. The
forthcoming 2010 review of the Commission's
founding resolutions will provide an opportunity to
take stock of its work and to focus on how to further
enhance its effectiveness in fulfilling its role and
mandate.

