Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba wholeheartedly endorses the statement made by
the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

At various times of the year, the Security Council
resumes this cyclical debate on the Middle East, but
the problems persist or, worse still, deteriorate. The
situation in the Middle East remains deplorable. Israel's
ongoing occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories is the main obstacle to achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution in the region.

Palestinian families suffer the consequences of
the Israeli occupation. Each year, the relevant agencies
of the United Nations receive reports of flagrant
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian people,
including children, women and the elderly. Recently,
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the occupied Palestinian territories reported
that, in the course of this year, the Israeli authorities
have demolished more than 330 structures, and that
half of the 536 Palestinians displaced in 2012 are
children. This situation is unacceptable. Thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners remain injail, victims of
the arbitrary actions of the Israeli authorities. Several
have gone on hunger strike in order to denounce the
exactions and injustice inflicted upon them.

None of these facts generates headlines or
campaigns in the major international press, nor are they
presented to the Council by members that encourage
wars and occupations against countries of the South,
giving no thought to the consequences of their actions
for the very civilians whom they claim to protect. The
Security Council must play its due role in defence of
international peace and security by adopting concrete,
practical measures to ensure that Israel ends its abuses
against the Palestinian people.

Israel's conduct deliberately flouts the resolutions
of the United Nations and international law. It poses a
threat to regional and international peace and security,
and violates the human rights of an entire people with
flagrant, systematic and inhuman abuses that this organ
should condemn. Israel must immediately withdraw its
illegal presence in the Palestinian territories it occupies,
ignoring the demands of the international community. It
must cease the construction of settlements in occupied
Palestine. It should end its attacks and indiscriminate
use of military force against Palestinian civilians,
and unconditionally and fully lift its cruel and illegal
blockade of Gaza.

Cuba reiterates its support for Palestine's request
for admission as a full State Member of the United
Nations. That request has so far come to naught because
of the threat of a veto from one permanent member of
the Security Council, despite the fact that the State of
Palestine already enjoys the recognition of more than
130 countries in all regions of the world. The Security
Council must without further delay take a positive stand
on this issue, in accordance with the manifest wish of
the overwhelming majority of the States Members of
the Organization.

The complicit silence of some Powers on the
Council perpetuates the current state of impunity
enjoyed by the Israeli Government. Cuba reaffirms
its rejection of the illegal construction and expansion
of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
which violate international law and the Charter and
resolutions of the United Nations.

Cuba reaffirms its position in support of a just and
lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle East that
would end Israel's occupation of all Arab territories
and guarantee the exercise of the self-determination of
the Palestinian people through the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Cuba is closely monitoring the situation concerning
Syria and its international repercussions, aware that
the information available is disparate, imprecise and
frequently manipulated. We are alarmed by the appeals
of those who champion regime change in Syria and
advocate the use of force and violence, rather than
contributing to dialogue and negotiation among all
the parties. Cuba reaffirms its rejection of policies
of interference and destabilization in Syria aimed at
imposing regime change.

The Security Council was not conceived as and
cannot act as an instrument for triggering regime
change in any country. Its obligation is to promote
peace, not violence; it is to avoid destabilization and
protect the innocent, not to exploit and manipulate them
for geopolitical ends. These are also the responsibilities
of the United Nations as a whole. We support the
endeavours under way to achieve a peaceful settlement
of the situation in that country, in full respect for
its sovereign rights. The Security Council should
unanimously direct its efforts to that end.

Cuba shares the concern over the loss of innocent
life in Syria and elsewhere. At the same time, we
reiterate our categorical rejection of any form of
external interference, direct and indirect alike,
including logistical support for irregular armed groups.
An intervention by external forces in Syria would
have grave consequences for international peace and
security, especially in the Middle East. Taking into
account the experience of and precedents set by recent
cases, in which clear manipulation ofthe United Nations
Charter, double standards and flagrant violations of
international law have been in evidence, we reaffirm
our rejection of any attempt to undermine Syria's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The role of the international community, at this time
of difficulty for one Member State, is to help safeguard
peace and stability in that country. We reiterate our
confidence in the ability of the Syrian people and
Government to resolve their own internal problems
without external interference. We demand full respect
for the free self-determination and sovereignty of that
Arab country.

