Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will add our voice
to all those welcoming the Special Envoy and thanking
him for his briefing.

I think that there has been a lot of identity of view
today, and it is all centred around our support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. I just
want to note that, to date, we have had resolutions, we
have got principles, we have got baskets, we have got
pillars and we have not had any meaningful progress,
in particular with regard to the notion of a political
settlement. I believe therefore that the most useful thing
I can do today is to add the United Kingdom's voice
to all those pledging to support the Special Envoy, as
well as to highlight one theme that I think nearly every
speaker has touched upon.

As the Special Envoy said, that concerns the critical
importance of an eventual settlement that is inclusive
of all the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people,
which is related to what the German Ambassador just
said about reconstruction. For Syria to be rehabilitated
within the international community in the way
that we all want to see, there needs to be a political
settlement firmly based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
a representative set of politics in Syria that address all
the underlying issues that led to the crisis in the first
place. We are not going to get there quickly, and I am
not going to talk about the constitutional committee,
which has bedevilled the Security Council for far
too long. I am going to say that we trust the Special
Envoy to use his very best efforts to make progress on
that absolutely critical part.

To avoid any doubt, there is nothing ideological
in the United Kingdom's position on this. We want a
political settlement that is inclusive and credible and
one that will last. We will support the Special Envoy
to the hilt in reaching that settlement. I would like to
put that on the table because I think it is a very critical
point. I join all those speakers who have called on
members of the Council with strong influence on the
Syrian authorities to use that influence to support the
Special Envoy in making serious progress, because the
situation has gone on too long. I really hope that by the
time the Special Envoy returns next month, there will
be something more to say than the messages that we
have repeated for so many months and so many years.

The other point I wanted to make is about Idlib.
I agree with other speakers who have made the very
important point about our concern for Idlib and for the
safety of civilians there. The fight against terrorism is
not a license to harm civilians, and I think that point
bears repeating. I endorse what other speakers have
said about humanitarian access.

Lastly, I would like to make common cause with
the French representative and his remarks about
north-eastern Syria. We too welcome the American
announcement. It is very important. There is more to be
done against Da'esh, even as the territorial manifestation
of Da'esh is being defeated. I hope that we can continue
to collaborate on combating terrorism but that ought
to be in the context of assisting an overall political
settlement in Syria. I repeat that it is not an excuse or a
justification to be used by the Syrian authorities to go
after the Syrian people.

