Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me take this
opportunity to welcome you, Sir, in your role as President
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
commend you for the start that you have made, and I
support your proposal for a draft presidential statement
on this important issue.

As our briefersmade clear, Sir, we begin your
presidency - sadly - in troubling times for eastern
Ukraine. The worrying upsurge in fighting in that part
of your country should concern us all. It is claiming yet
more lives, both civilian and military. It is aggravating
the suffering of those living there, forcing more to flee
their homes. There is no end in sight. In cities such as
Avdiivka, people talk of an endless salvo of artillery
and rockets. They talk of failing electricity and falling
temperatures, of burying loved ones in the snow. And
those events have not come out of the blue. They are
not new. The Council knows all too well the root causes
of this violence and instability. This is what happens
when Russia disregards the sovereign right of Ukraine
to choose its own destiny. This is what happens when
Russia undermines the territorial integrity of Ukraine
by illegally annexing Crimea. This is what happens
when Russian military personnel stand side-by-side
with separatists whom they have equipped, armed and
trained. And, this is a reality that the Security Council
cannot, must not, accept. We need urgent action to
bring an end to this upsurge in violence before it spirals
out of control.

Iwant to pay tribute to the efforts ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination to bring
about a truce to allow crucial repairs. Theose efforts
will help to restore vital utilities and to allow for the
evacuation of civilians. I urge all parties to support
those efforts and to facilitate access to the area for
humanitarian actors.

But such actions are just a band-aid on a bullet
wound. For any fragile short-term truce to become a
comprehensive and sustained cease-fire, all parties
most show restraint. That means in particular ending
the extensive use of high-caliber indiscriminate
weapons, such as Grad rocket systems. The use of
those weapons, from and against civilian areas, is not
only in disregard of the Minsk agreement; it is also an
abhorrent rejection of the norms of conflict. They must
be withdrawn from the line of contact, as stipulated in
the Minsk agreements.

We also need to tackle the underlying causes of the
fighting. It is clear that any solution to the Ukraine crisis
must be political, not military, as we all recognized in
resolution 2202 (2015). The Minsk agreements are the
only meaningful path to long-term peace in Ukraine.
Let us therefore urge all sides to recommit to meeting
their full obligations under the Minsk agreements. We
support the continued efforts of France and Germany
within the Normandy format towards securing full
implementation, and we are extremely grateful for
the enormous investment that they have made in the
process to date.

Let me conclude with this final thought. We
frequently hear from the Russian Government - as we
did today - that all the problems in eastern Ukraine
are the consequences of actions by the Ukrainian
Government. That is simply not the case; it is an
inversion of reality. The responsibility for the inception
and continuation of the conflict in eastern Ukraine lies
squarely with Russia and the separatists it supports. As
the British Prime Minister made clear in Washington,
DC, last week, the United Kingdom will continue to
stand by Ukraine in full support of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Most recently, the international
community - through the General Assembly resolution
on the situation in Crimea in December - sent the same
clear message to Russia. And earlier this week, the
entire Security Council, including Russia, expressed
the very same thing in an agreed statement (SC/12700):
that we support the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine

But Russian words are not the same as Russian
deeds. We need to see Russia comply with its Minsk
commitments. We need to see Russia stop equipping
and arming the separatists and, instead, use its
influence to make sure the separatists meet their Minsk
obligations. And we need to see Russia withdrawing its
force from all of Ukraine. That includes Crimea, the
illegal annexation of which we do not, and will not,
recognize. Sanctions against Russia cannot be lifted
until that happens. It is for the people for Ukraine to
decide their country's future. Ukraine must be allowed
to make its own sovereign decisions.

