Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank the Secretary-
General not only for his briefing but especially for his
unflinching and abiding efforts to achieve peace and
security in the Middle East.

My comments will focus on three issues, namely,
the Palestinian question, Syria and Lebanon.

On the question of Palestine, we note that both sides
are abiding by the terms of the ceasefire agreement of
26 August. That has provided ample opportunity for
the international community to focus attention on the
much-needed reconstruction of Gaza. We welcome
the convening of the donors conference in Cairo on
12 October, co-chaired by Norway and Egypt, to fund
the reconstruction. We commend the leadership of the
United Nations for its role in brokering an agreement
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority providing
a framework for the reconstruction effort.

While we pay close attention to the reconstruction
of Gaza, we must never lose sight of the need to move
forward the peace process in a very determined manner.
We must seize every moment, and I believe that the
current ceasefire should be viewed as representing
an opportunity for both sides to restart the stalled
negotiations. We are convinced that dialogue remains
the only viable means of resolving the question of
Palestine. The two parties should heed the well-meaning
appeals from various stakeholders to resume direct
negotiations without further delay. That dialogue must
be complemented by concrete action to demonstrate the
sincerity of both parties. It should also be consistent
with relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Quartet road map and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative. We restate our support for a two-State
solution with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security.

Concerning Syria, we welcome the successful
completion of the work of the Joint Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the United Nations for the Elimination of the
Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Syria's declared chemical weapons materials
have now been destroyed in designated facilities outside
the country. The progress achieved in the completion of
that delicate process is a significant milestone in the
implementation of Council resolution 2118 (2013). We
acknowledge the cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the Joint Mission, as well as the efforts of Member
States who contributed financial and material resources
in aid of the Mission.

With the steady progress on the chemical weapons
track in Syria, the Council must now focus its attention
on seeking ways to achieve a cessation of violence
and, indeed, a political settlement. In that regard, we
look forward to the Council's engagement with Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura in order to assess the way
forward in reviving the stalled peace talks. We urge
the parties to the conflict in Syria to lay down their
arms and embrace dialogue and negotiation within the
framework of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) ofJune 2012. There cannot be a military solution
to the conflict in Syria.

With regard to Lebanon, we are deeply concerned
by the challenge posed by the presence of armed
militias to the security and sovereignty of the country.
There seems to be no indication ofprogress towards the
disbanding and disarming of the militias, as called for
in resolution 1559 (2004). By their very nature, armed
militias weaken the legitimate authority of the State
and foster an atmosphere of lawlessness. They have
no place in a system of democratic governance and,
indeed, their presence fuels sectarian tensions. Nigeria
would like to see all militias active in Lebanon disarm
and disband, in line with their commitments under the
Taif Agreement of 1989. As long as militias continue to
operate unimpeded in Lebanon, the peace, stability and
sovereignty of the country will remain under threat.

We urge the political leaders of Lebanon to
demonstrate the political will necessary to break the
impasse caused by the inability to reach a consensus
on a president to fill the vacuum left since President
Suleiman's term ended in May. As one of the three
principle offices in Lebanon's political establishment,
the presidency is a crucial component of the country's
power equation. An early consensus in choosing a
successor to President Suleiman will, in great measure,
help to stabilize Lebanon.

