Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this rather important meeting. I would also
like to congratulate you on mounting the exhibition
on Pakistan's 52 years of service to the international
community through its peacekeeping efforts, which
you undertook yesterday. We are not far behind you.
We have been participating in peacekeeping missions
for 52 years and, as long as circumstances permit, we
will continue to do so.

We would like to sincerely commend Mr. Feltman
and to congratulate him on the comprehensive message
that he has sent to the international community today.
We thank him for briefing us on the unhappy situation
in Mali. We also thank him for mentioning the loss
of lives of our soldiers, who are brutally attacked by
terrorists on account of a decision to deploy to Mali.
That is a price that we are willing to pay and we will not
run away from our responsibility to Mali or any other
country in the region.

I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Cote d'Ivoire for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Mali in his country's capacity as Chairperson
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We also wish to congratulate and thank the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations for providing the African Union (AU) overview
of the situation in Mali.

This is a very timely meeting as it comes only days
after the convening of the Extraordinary Session of the
Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government
in Abidjan on 19 January. We would particularly like
to draw attention to the Final Communique of that
meeting as it is rather central to the resolution of the
Malian crisis.

Let me seize this opportunity to express our deep
and heartfelt condolences to the Government and people
ofAlgeria for the loss oflives ofboth innocent hostages
and members of the security forces in the recent heinous
terrorist attack at the gas plant in Amenas. In strongly
condemning those senseless and inhumane acts of
violence, Nigeria stands together with other members of
the international community, especially those countries
that lost some of their nationals in the horrific incident.
Such acts regretfully remind us that the scourge of
terrorism remains a continuing challenge and that no
country is immune from its malignant tentacles.

While we convey our deepest sympathies and
condolences to the traumatized and bereaved families,
my delegation wishes to reiterate that the Security
Council has a critical role to play as a forum for
advancing collective action against global terrorism.

The fight against terrorism remains a very high
priority for Nigeria both domestically and across our
subregion. We also recognize the terrible threat that Mali
is now facing from terrorist groups and armed militants.
As part of the unfolding international effort to free
Mali of this threat and danger, Nigeria has commenced
the accelerated deployment of 1,200 troops as part of its
contribution to the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). We note with satisfaction
that other ECOWAS and AU member States and other
countries have also decided to contribute troops in

support of the Malian army's efforts to free its country
from the terrorist and extremist menace.
As has already been mentioned, Major-General
Shehu Usman Abdulkadir of the Nigerian Army was
endorsed as Force Commander ofAFISMA by ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government at their recent meeting
in Abidjan. It is important to underline the fact that
the availability of a Nigerian military officer to head
AFISMA and Nigeria's financial assistance to Mali, as
well as the role of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan
as associate mediator in Mali, together with President
Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, are all reflections of
our deep concern at and interest in the security situation
in Mali and the subregion as a whole.

Nigeria's actions are in line with the Security
Council's decision of 10 January and resolution 2085
(2012), which calls for the rapid deployment ofAFISMA
and the strengthening of international support for Mali.
Nigeria desires a peaceful resolution of all disputes.
Indeed, in October 2012, President Goodluck Jonathan
undertook a mission to Bamako to meet with all parties
and foster dialogue. However, in a situation where
room for such reconciliation is not allowed or given,
regrettably the use of force becomes inevitable and
indeed necessary.

Our action in Mali is in line with the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law, and therefore needs no justification or defence.
We are also adhering to the norms and. principles
that underpin the protocols of our regional grouping,
ECOWAS, on collective security and the protection of
member States' territorial integrity. We went into Mali
to assist its army to free its territory and defend its
integrity, independence and unity.

Beyond all of these considerations, we would
like to underscore the fact that the Sahel region and
countries like Mali have been ignored or neglected
by the international community for too long. The
sufferings of their people and the deteriorating security
situation were not deemed worthy of the attention of
the world until matters became compounded and it was
too late to deal with them peacefully. The debate of the
Security Council on 10 December 2012 (see S/PV.6882)
and the high-level meeting on the Sahel convened by
the Secretary-General on 26 September 2012 were, in
our view, actually more about the neglect of the Sahel
region than anything else. The Secretary-General had
consistently drawn attention to the situation in the
region, and had the foresight to draw up an integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel. His appointment of
Mr. Romano Prodi as his Special Envoy for the Sahel
also reflected his concern.
Sufficient, accelerated and timely delivery
of humanitarian assistance is desperately needed
for the entire Sahel region. In the medium and
longer terms, structured peacebuilding initiatives,
the strengthening of security sector reform and
institution-building - including good governance, the
entrenchment of democratic institutions, human rights
and youth empowerment - are direly need across
the region. Nigeria therefore recognizes that the use
of force, while necessary to tackling the immediate
terrorist threat and instability in Mali and the entire
region, cannot be an effective long-term strategy or
solution.

The international community must do more.
Promoting uniform economic development and
increasing development assistance would enable the
Governments of the region to address the root causes
of instability and conflicts. They would, for instance,
be able to address concerns such as extreme poverty,
the impacts of climate change, pervasive illiteracy,
unemployment, general discontent and even secessionist
tendencies, if they were properly assisted by the rest
of the world financially and materially. This would no
doubt help to engender cohesion, counter extremism
and reduce the appeal of violence.

It is in that connection that Nigeria would urge the
active participation of all Member States in the donors
conference, scheduled for 29 January in Addis Ababa, for
the trust fund established in paragraph 22 of resolution
2085 (2012). We hope that the donors conference
will galvanize all Member States, international
organizations, civil society organizations and other
stakeholders to work in concert for the attainment
of the common objective of tackling terrorism and

addressing human rights and humanitarian concerns in
the subregion.

My delegation wishes to commend the unique and
invaluable contributions of France and other countries,
including Niger, our sister country Chad, Togo and the
many others that have pledged troops to this onerous
effort of the global community to restore the sovereignty
of Mali. The pivotal and timely action of France, in the
light of the deteriorating security situation in Mali and
in the context of the resolution 2085 (2012), was a key
lesson of the significant value that a single country can
add to global counter-terrorism efforts. There is no doubt
that the impact of the French efforts and the significant
contributions of many countries towards assisting Mali
in the resolution of its security and institutional crisis
confirm that close and systematic cooperation among
Member States is an essential prerequisite and effective
strategy for tackling terrorism.

It is our hope that similar commitment and forward-
looking action will be taken by the world in addressing
other concerns of the countries in the Sahel and in
supporting the United Nations to achieve the objectives
of the Secretary-General's integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel.

