Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Let me at the outset commend Ambassador
Arias for his leadership and thank him for his report. I
welcome this opportunity for my delegation to address
this body of the United Nations, and I appreciate it
even more because it is rare for non-members of the
Security Council to be able to address this body to
express their concerns or views on the most important
problems facing the international community as a
whole.

Accordingly, my delegation deems it appropriate
that its voice be heard concerning one of the most
serious and acute problems facing us today - a
problem that is disrupting the equilibrium, peace,
concord and security of the planet, rending the socio-
political fabric and undermining financial architecture
and State security - that is to say, the problem of
terrorism in all its manifestations and ramifications,
with all its linkages to a broad range of illicit activities.

My delegation endorses the statement made by
the representative of Peru in his capacity as coordinator
of the Rio Group in New York. I wish, however, to
make our voice heard, because Ecuador is an ally of
those peace-loving nations that aspire to the peaceful
solution of disputes. Ecuador believes in respect for the
rule of law, international solidarity, tolerance and full
respect for human rights, as well as in the immutable
ethical and moral principles by which we should abide
in the context of relations among human beings and
States. On the basis of the principles and values to
which the Ecuadorian nation firmly adheres, we are a
strong champion of the Charter of the United Nations.

Ecuador wishes to reiterate to the Security
Council and to the international community its
strongest support for the any initiative or action
undertaken to fight international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. However, such action should
always be undertaken in the framework of the United
Nations, which has a central role to play as the premier
multilateral body ensuring respect for international law
and human rights. We are therefore firmly convinced
that this global threat must be dealt with firmly, in a
concerted manner and with all the ways and means that
international and national law make available to States.

My delegation would like once again to reiterate
its categorical condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and calls on the international
community to redouble its efforts to seek the necessary
consensus, with a view to giving the international
community a sufficiently broad multilateral legal
framework for the global fight against terrorism, while
at the same time preserving the fundamental rights and
dignity of human beings. We must adopt legislation
against those acts and penalize them more severely to
prevent them from taking innocent life, causing
enormous material damage and affecting sociopolitical
and economic structures of the international
community to satisfy the perverse and execrable
purposes of their masterminds.

My delegation wished to say this because, while
we frequently bury ourselves in long and unfruitful
etymological or conceptual discussions, men, women
and children in every corner of the world -
defenceless, innocent people - continue to be the
victims of these unacceptable, indiscriminate and, from
any point of view, unjustified terrorist acts. The
perpetrators, accomplices and dissimulators, in making
violence and terror their way of life, claim to justify
their acts by wrongly attaching to them some kind of
foundation or principle, some ideological, religious or
other singularity.

However, my delegation also wishes to point out
to this body that hunger, unhealthy conditions, poverty,
great economic disparities, failure to respect human
rights, corruption, the handling of divergencies and
conflicts in non-peaceful ways and the overwhelming
external debt burden are all sources of international
instability and insecurity. They undermine
governability and destabilize democratic institutions. It
is therefore of paramount importance that the
international community be fully aware that these harsh
daily realities of developing countries are also a threat
to world security, since they cause the loss of
thousands of human lives around the world every day.

Thus, the international community must,
concurrent with its frontal attack on terrorism,
undertake a broad and concerted global strategy to
promote development and improve the standards of
living of the great majority of the world's population
and develop dialogue and tolerance among human
beings as well as among States.

As I said yesterday to the Sixth Committee,
several years have elapsed and lengthy discussions
have taken place on measures to eliminate international
terrorism and on the drafts of the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and the
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism. They have been analysed yet again
in recent days, but, for various reasons, it is not yet
possible to guarantee their viability. We reiterate in this
forum our appeal to all peoples who hold dear peace
and the peaceful solution of conflicts to overcome their
differences and to join efforts in the interest of the
common good and of international peace, security and
concord, with a view to securing a present imbued with
progress, development and peaceful co-existence and
guaranteeing for coming generations a future in which
respect, tolerance, dignity of the human being reign
supreme.

Faithful to these beliefs and principles, as well as
to its international commitments, the Government of
Ecuador has in the past year complied with article 18,
paragraph 13, of the United Nations Convention on
Transnational Organized Crime relating to the
appointment of a central authority and has promulgated
the text of the Convention so that it will be a part of
our national legal code. Similarly, on 25 February
2003, the Ecuadorian Government ratified the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

Ecuador has done its utmost for the effective
application of existing international norms relating to
the prevention and suppression of terrorism, especially
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), for which it
has developed a wide-ranging strategy that includes
legislative, administrative, policing and other
measures. At the same time, we are taking steps and
exercising the necessary control with regard to the
consolidated list prepared by the Security Council
Committee established under resolution 1267 (1999).
In this connection and on the occasion of the
seventeenth Presidential Summit of the Rio Group in
May, Ecuador committed itself to strengthening
cooperation in the struggle against terrorism and has
been participating in efforts within the Organization of
American States and in the Andean Community to this
end.

The evil activities of terrorist networks have a
profound and indiscriminate effect on the entire
international community. We cannot remain passive
before such a serious global threat. We must ensure
peace and the peaceful co-existence that all peoples of
the world desire.

