Mr. Koenders: Mr. President, let me start by
stating that it is a great honour and pleasure to address
you in person in my capacity as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in cote
d'Ivoire since October last year. The first three months
of my mission have, of course, focused on the
legislative elections, but I would like to start by putting
the situation in C6te d'Ivoire into a slightly broader
perspective.

Remarkable progress has been registered in cote
d'Ivoire towards restoring normalcy since the end of
the violent post-election crisis last year. The security
situation is stabilizing, those displaced have started to
return, the economy is starting to show resilience, and
the legislative elections were held successfully and, I
think, most importantly, after last year's crisis, in
relative peace, although the final results have yet to be
proclaimed and certified. President Ouattara has
undertaken important steps to strengthen subregional
cooperation, and I think that cote d'Ivoire is taking
2
steps towards reclaiming its historical role as a pillar of
stability and prosperity in the subregion.

That important progress notwithstanding,
significant challenges remain. Cote d'Ivoire is still
struggling to recover from the devastating crisis, which
took a heavy toll on the country and its people, while
many national capacities have been destroyed. The root
causes of instability and potential triggers of violence
have remained. Important challenges and issues
relating to security and national reconciliation should
not be underestimated and require, in my View, the
political attention of the Council.

The priorities identified by the President and his
Government in areas where the United Nations is
mandated to provide support remain valid and relevant.
The support of United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) is essential to help the Government
stabilize the security situation, which includes the
reconstitution and reform of security and rule-of-law
institutions; the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; the protection of
civilians; facilitating the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons; and fostering the crucial
process of national reconciliation, early recovery and
the promotion and protection of human rights.

The holding of the legislative elections without
delay and in a relatively peaceful atmosphere is, in our
View, a significant achievement that marked a major
step forward in the restoration of constitutional order,
more inclusive governance, and the completion of a
key unfinished aspect of the peace process. UNOCI
worked actively with the Government and all political
stakeholders, including the Facilitator, to help ensure
that the legislative elections proceeded in a manner that
contributes to securing lasting stability in C6te
d'Ivoire.

Although voter participation was lower than
during the 2010 presidential elections, the turnout,
approximately 36 percent, was similar during previous
legislative polls in the country, in 1990 and 1995.
UNOCI played an important role across the country in
support of the authorities which were responsible for
the organization and conduct of the polls, while
providing the same level of technical and logistical
support to the Independent Electoral Commission as
was the case during the presidential elections. I would
also highlight the fact that the Ivorian security agencies
provided effective security, in concert with UNOCI.
12-21574
The mission and the United Nations country team
provided the same level of technical and logistical
support to the Independent Electoral Commission as
was the case during the presidential elections.

In keeping with the mandate given to me by the
Council to certify that all stages of the electoral
process were held in accordance with international
standards, I will yet have to certify these important
elections, and I will do so after the national institutions
have evaluated the process. The Constitutional
Council, which is currently examining llO electoral
complaints filed by candidates, has announced its
decisions on the appeals filed by a number of
candidates; their proclamation is expected in early
February.

Now that the legislative elections have taken
place, it is important to focus attention on some other
priority areas, including national reconciliation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and consolidation of the security
situation, particularly in Abidjan, the west and the
border areas. It is, in my view, equally important to
focus on addressing the root causes of the Ivorian
crisis, including issues such as access to land and
imbalanced development. The question of impunity
also remains an important concern; it is essential that
all those who are responsible for gross Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law be
held accountable, regardless of their political affiliation
or camp.

The overall security situation in C6te d'Ivoire has
remained relatively calm. However, insecurity in the
west, including criminal activities, and the threat of
cross-border movements of armed groups and weapons
has continued to pose a major challenge. A large
number of weapons remain in circulation in Abidjan
and throughout the country, a situation which has
contributed to the high levels of crime and security
incidents involving armed elements. The Government
has begun to take measures to address security-related
challenges, and we are currently discussing with the
Ivorian authorities a concrete set of support measures
that the international community could provide in this
regard.

Let me conclude by saying that Cote d'Ivoire has
made significant progress towards restoring normalcy.
Legislative elections mark the completion of a key
aspect of the peace process and the implementation of
12-21574

the Ouagadougou Political Agreement.
Notwithstanding the progress made in the past months,
Cote d'Ivoire is still struggling to recover from the
post-electoral crisis and will continue to need the
Council's support in addition to that provided by other
international and regional partners. I can assure the
Council that the United Nations, through UNOCI,
continues to make every effort to support the
Government in addressing key challenges and to help
the Government to materialize its vision towards
reclaiming its historical role as a pillar of stability and
prosperity in the subregion.

