Mr. Rosenblatt (United States of America): We
would like to welcome our Somali friends, Prime
Minister Ali Khalif Galaydh and other members of the
transitional Government back to the Security Council,
and express to them our desire to work with all Somalis
of goodwill on the difficult but necessary task of
rebuilding their country. We thank them for the update
on developments in their country and note in particular
Prime Minister Galaydh's words with regard to the
implementation of our common struggle against
terrorism.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report on Somalia and share his concern about
the suffering of the Somali people. We should also like
to note our appreciation for Mr. Stephen's introduction
of that report.

We have heard reference to the suggestion of
establishing a friends of Somalia group here this
morning and in our informal consultations. We
welcome further discussion of the feasibility and utility
of such a grouping and look forward to our own active
engagement in this regard.

We also note the Secretary-General's conclusion
that the current security situation in Somalia precludes
the establishment of a peace-building office at this
time. The key phrase is "at this time". We have
complete confidence that the Secretariat will balance
its deep concern for the welfare of the Somali people
with its equally deep concern for the safety of United
Nations personnel in gauging the feasibility of such an
office. The message to those who wish to see an
expanded United Nations presence is that that their
advocacy efforts need to be focused on Somalia, not on
New York.

Even as we have this discussion, we will continue
to work with the Secretariat and with our partners to
identify programmes that can be undertaken for the
benefit of the Somali people, within acceptable risks.
We should not set the bar so high that nothing can be
done inside Somalia; rather, we must do what we can in
current conditions. At the same time, we must all do
what we can to improve the situation.

We believe that the people of Somalia control
their own political destiny. A future expansion of the
United Nations presence in Somalia, however
important, cannot substitute for the will of the Somali
people to reclaim their country from chaos. The search
for political legitimacy must proceed inside Somalia,
and it must go Somali by Somali.

In our view, no single group has yet succeeded in
achieving that legitimacy. It is not for the United States
Government, the Security Council or any other outside
power to determine who is the legitimate representative
of the Somali people. The United States will support
Somali leaders, organizations and individuals who are
committed to peaceful political reconciliation and the
rule of law.

A critical mass of Somalis determined to work
together in peace and democracy to rebuild their
shattered country is the only legitimizing force that
means anything. Our responsibility as the Security
Council and as individual member States is to figure
out how we can support the coming together of that
critical mass.

The tragic conditions that originally spurred us to
action in Somalia still exist. When the United Nations
peacekeeping mission went into Somalia, it did not
seek to conquer or occupy. It went to save lives -
African lives, Muslim lives, human lives - an
imperative that remains central to all our efforts. The
sabotage of the peacekeeping mission was not done by
the people of Somalia, nor was it done for the people of
Somalia.

I want to assure the Council that my Government
remains deeply committed to and concerned about the
plight of our friends, the people of Somalia. We look
forward to additional discussions on this issue.

