Mr. Kasoulides (Cyprus): We welcome the timely
initiative of the Russian Federation to convene this open
debate. I would like briefly to provide our perspective
on the issues before us.

The United Nations is, and should remain, at the
apex of international order and justice. It should adapt to
the broad spectrum of security challenges, and Security
Council resolutions need again to become credible and
actionable. No crisis can be resolved by a single Power
or stakeholder. The complexity of the crises we are
facing necessitates effective and mutually reinforcing
multilateralism. I underline that the European Union
must play its role in the settlement of the conflicts in
our neighbourhood through its wide array of capacities
and policies. While we formulate policies to counter
terrorist threats, we need to bear in mind that an ounce
of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Socioeconomic
and political exclusion, youth unemployment and
limited access to education play well into the hands of
those who seek to propagate extremism.
Each country that faces such challenges is a unique
case. With regard to Libya, the formation of a national
unity Government is well overdue. It is imperative that,
once it is in place, the United Nations, the European
Union and other key stakeholders provide support in the
domain of security-sector reform, institution-building
and financial support. With regard to Syria, it is evident
that our approach has thus far not alleviated the plight
of the Syrian people, nor has it facilitated a political
solution. The Geneva communique (S/2102/522, annex)
remains key, and so is the need for a realistic political
transition process.

Finally, a remark on Daesh. It is a threat that
affects us all. There is much more to be done on the
issue of tracking and interrupting financial flows to
the terrorists. Aspects of that issue have been discussed
elsewhere during the current session of the General
Assembly, and it is evident that we need more robust
Security Council action in that respect.

