Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first thank
our briefers for their informative presentations. We
especially appreciate the personal participation in the
meeting of His Excellency Minister Alpha Barry.

Our briefers today have confirmed the alarming
tone ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2019/868),
which points to a rapid increase in the number of
terrorist attacks and the number of victims, especially
in Mali and Burkina Faso. We strongly condemn those
attacks. Terrorist groups have strengthened their
position across the Sahel region, making many parts of
it unstable. As we are well aware, the lack of stability,
poverty, impunity and limited State presence are the
main causes of the growing scale of terrorism. It is
crucial to focus on those cha1lenges in parallel with an
effective security strategy.

We believe that the new international initiatives
focused on the Sahel region that have been undertaken
in recent months, such as the partnership for security
and stability in the Sahel, announced by France and
Germany in August, and the Economic Community
of West African States Summit on Terrorism, held in
Burkina Faso in September, will further strengthen
international support to the region, with the United
Nations playing a leading role.

Poland appreciates the cooperation with partners
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Thanks to the
involvement of those important actors, the justice
system has been strengthened, contributing to the
advancement of the implementation of the human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee law
compliance framework.

The report of the Secretary-General has proven that
comprehensive cooperation and joining forces offer an
effective way to address the root causes of conflict,
violent extremism and terrorism. We are glad to see a
positive example of such collaboration in Mauritania,
which hosts the permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel

and the G-5 Sahel Defence College. The efforts made to
increase the capacity of Mauritanian soldiers operating
under joint forces are admirable. We also welcome the
information on progress in training specialized police
units to fight terrorism and international organized
crime, including 22 newly deployed officers in Burkina
Faso and 15 in the Niger.

We are deeply concerned by the information coming
from the Mopti region about members of the Malian
armed forces, operating under the Joint Force, who
may have committed serious human rights violations.
It is very important that a timely investigation into
the allegations against Joint Force units be conducted,
as that will strengthen transparency regarding the
human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework.

Let me conclude by confirming our strong support
for the mandate ofthe G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We hope that
all necessary steps will be taken to further operationalize
its police component, which will be a critical part of the
Force. Let me also express our deep gratitude to the
personnel of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for their brave
service under very challenging circumstances.

