Mr. Power (United Kingdom): Can I start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
I also congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to join colleagues in welcoming Ambassador
De Riviere to the Security Council and bidding a fond
farewell to Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu. Like others, we
had not realized that today was to be his last appearance
at the Council. I know my Ambassador would want me
to express, on behalf of Her Majesty's Government, our
appreciation for his partnership and his contribution to
the work of the Council.

The United Kingdom believes that the most
important element of the link between organized crime
and terrorism lies not in the groups themselves, but in
the response from Governments. We see that the links
between terrorist groups and criminal activity vary by
region and cover a broad range of relationships, from
the tactical to the strategic, thereby requiring individual
responses in each situation.

The United Kingdom views terrorism primarily as
a criminal enterprise, thereby necessitating a civilian
policing response. It therefore follows that the response
must closely resemble the same means we use to
tackle organized crime. That is why this debate is so
important and the further research that we are calling
for is very much needed. States and the international
community must tackle terrorism and organized crime
by focusing on strengthening policing and investigative
responses, upholding the rule of law and international
human rights law and tackling the conditions that allow
terrorism and organized crime to flourish.

We agree with the representative of South Africa
on the link between organized crime and terrorism
being context-specific. But we know that criminality
can create an enabling environment for terrorist groups
to secure the recruits and resources they need for their
operations, as many speakers have mentioned today,
including the very worrying example of terrorist
recruitment in our prisons. Moreover, when criminal
organizations seek to undermine Governments and
governance, they can affect the resources available to
address terrorism and violent extremism. At the same
time, criminal groups can profit from the instability and
insecurity generated by terrorism and conflict, creating
strong vested interests in fuelling those dynamics and
perpetuating the suffering in such contexts.

With regard to prevention, we believe that we must
adopt a broad approach that can stop the problem at
its source by identifying and supporting those at risk
of engaging in criminality, building the highest levels
of defence and resilience among vulnerable people,
communities, businesses and systems. Addressing
the socioeconomic and governance-related drivers of
criminality are just as vital as relentlessly tackling the
organized criminal networks.

In relation to terrorism, we have also stressed
many times in the Council the importance of a broad
preventive approach that strengthens the capacities to
ensure that legal and criminal justice responses are in
full compliance with international law and human rights
obligations. One way to do that has been to support the
preventing and countering violent extremism national
action plans, which foster a coordinated response to
terrorist crimes and in whose development the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and many others have been closely
involved in supporting Member States.

In the United Kingdom our approach is guided by
annual strategic assessments of the threat that serious
organized crime poses to our security and prosperity.
Last year, the United Kingdom also published a
serious organized crime strategy that emphasized the
importance of enhancing our approach across a number
of pillars - not only law enforcement but also in the
upstream prevention space that many representatives
have talked about today. Governments alone cannot
tackle such challenges. Public-private partnerships,
bringing together the private sector, civil society and
Government actors, are critical to ensuring that all
relevant parties are aware of the threats and can access
the necessary resources in order to counter them.

As the Russian and Chinese Ambassadors both said
very strongly, the international community must pool
efforts at an international level in order to maximize
its advantage. Just as criminals can learn from each
other, so too we must learn from the criminal networks
and share our understanding. The United Nations can
play a vital role in that endeavour, bringing together the
expertise and those of us in the international community
who are like-minded in order to adopt such an approach.
We must do so in full respect for all the international
agreements and Security Council resolutions that have
been adopted by this body, including those that fully
implement the relevant human rights standards.

However, we encourage greater coordination in
responding to transnational threats. We recall that this
is a central mandate of the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and the United Kingdom was very pleased to play a
strong role in supporting its creation. We continue to
wish that Office well as it strengthens its ability to
provide concrete and meaningful capacity-building
initiatives and further research and support to the
Council in tackling this problem.

