Mr. Cabral (Portugal): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report to the
Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to that resolution. The report
covers the period from 27 September to 22 December
2011.

Many developments have taken place in relation
to Libya since the Chair last briefed the Council,
almost three months ago. Foremost among them, in
terms of the work of the Committee, is the delisting of
the Central Bank of Libya and the Libyan Foreign
Bank on 16 December, upon the request of the relevant
Libyan authorities. The asset freeze therefore no longer
applies to those two entities. The Committee will
continue to work towards the goal of ensuring that all
assets frozen pursuant to resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) are made available as soon as possible to,
and for the benefit of, the people of Libya.

I would also like to highlight that, on 31 October,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2017 (2011),
by which it requested the Committee to assess the
threats and challenges, particularly in relation to
terrorism, posed by the proliferation in the region of all
arms and related materiel of all types, in particular
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS), from
Libya, and to submit a report to the Council on

proposals to counter the threat and to prevent such
proliferation. The Committee is to be assisted by the
Panel of Experts, to cooperate with the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and to work
together with other relevant United Nations bodies,
including the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), in that endeavour. Consultation with
international and regional organizations is also
suggested. Subsequently, on 2 December, the Council
adopted resolution 2022 (2011), by which it expanded
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to include, in coordination and
consultation with the transitional Government of
Libya, assisting and supporting Libyan national efforts
to address the threats of the proliferation of all arms
and related materiel of all types, in particular
MANPADS, taking into account, among other things,
the aforementioned report.

It was in the context of the implementation of
that resolution, among other purposes, that the
members of the Committee met in informal
consultations on 12 December. At that meeting,
following briefings by the Panel of Experts, CTED,
ICAO and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya on the implementation of resolution 2017
(2011), the Committee agreed that the working
document would be consolidated by the Panel in
February 2012, on the basis of which a Committee
report would be submitted to the Council shortly
thereafter.

The other main purpose for convening the
informal consultations was to hear a presentation by
the Panel of Experts of its progress report. The Panel
reported on the missions it had undertaken to various
countries in the region, including Libya, and sought the
Committee's assistance with respect to other missions
that it hoped to undertake. The Panel conveyed some
preliminary findings on its monitoring of the
implementation of the arms embargo, travel ban and
asset freeze. In the discussion that ensued, the
members of the Committee addressed questions or
comments to the Panel and agreed to consider
dispatching letters to certain countries that had yet to
respond to the Panel's request for a visit. Continued
cooperation between the Panel of Experts and
UNSMIL was emphasized.

During the reporting period, in connection with
the arms embargo, the Committee approved four
requests for an exception to that measure under

paragraphs 9 (a) and 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee also had no objection to a fifth request
for an exception that invoked paragraph 9 (c) of the
resolution. Furthermore, no negative decision was
taken by the Committee in relation to six notifications
under paragraph 13 (a) of resolution 2009 (2011),
which allows the supply of arms and related materiel of
all types intended solely for security or disarmament
assistance to the Libyan authorities.

With respect to the asset freeze, I have already
noted the delisting of the Central Bank of Libya and
the Libyan Foreign Bank. Prior to that delisting, the
Committee approved six requests for an exception to
the asset freeze under the extraordinary expenses
provision set out in paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970
(2011). It also acknowledged the receipt of six
notifications under the prior contracts provision set out
in paragraph 21 of that resolution. Furthermore, no
negative decision was taken by the Committee in
relation to 11 notifications under the basic expenses
provision set out in paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) and 12 notifications under paragraph 16 (a) of
11-64750

resolution 2009 (2011). Members of the Council will
recall that the latter paragraph provides for the
unfreezing of funds for additional purposes. All in all,
those requests and notifications amount to at least
$18 billion.

Finally, during the period under review, in its
replies to written communications submitted by two
Member States, the Committee confirmed that, with the
adoption of resolution 2009 (2011), the asset freeze no
longer applied to the subsidiaries of United Nations-
listed entities. The Committee will continue to provide
guidance on the scope and application of the relevant
measures to any Member State that so requests it, in
order to ensure a clear and consistent understanding by
all.

