Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on the Peacebuilding Commission's (PBC) annual
report (S/2011/41), which constitutes an opportunity
for the Council to reflect on the important role that the
Commission plays in the United Nations system. I also
thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for his excellent
leadership during his chairmanship of the PBC. My
delegation pledges its full support to Ambassador
Eugene-Richard Gasana and wishes him every success
as the Commission's Chair for 2011.

The past year was marked by the five-year review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
which offered an opportunity for the Council to
consider ways to perfect its work. The Commission is a
relatively new body in the United Nations system, and
the review allowed Council members to reflect both on
the progress achieved so far and the challenges ahead.
We once again thank the facilitators for their work and
for the useful recommendations they presented.

In our View, there are three areas where the
Council must continue to strengthen its work, namely,
the integrated and multidimensional nature of
peacebuilding, national ownership and partnerships
with other relevant actors. As Brazil has already
underscored on different occasions, it is of the utmost
importance that the PBC enhance its integrated
approach. During the open debate held in February by
the Brazilian presidency (see S/PV.6479), the Council
emphasized that security and development were closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing.

In addition to pursuing security and stabilization
tasks, we believe that it is essential that peacebuilding
strategies also focus increasingly on economic and
social policies aimed at improving the living standards
of affected populations. Assisting national
Governments to restore their capacity to fight poverty
and strengthen institutions is another responsibility that
the Council cannot avoid. To name but a few, greater
attention must be given to the provision of basic
services, such as health and education; youth
employment, including through vocational training;
economic revitalization; and the fight against poverty.
It is also essential to strengthen the voice of women.
As we know, women are key actors in the economy,
especially in agriculture, and can play a leading role in
the prevention of conflicts.

Those dimensions are clearly interrelated.
Tangible progress in economic and social issues will
have a positive impact on the security situation. In
Guinea-Bissau, for example, the improved economic
situation in the country and the debt relief provided
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative opened the way to mobilizing more resources
for institution-building, social services and security
sector reform.

As for national ownership, there is no doubt that
the actions that we undertake must be steered by the
interests and needs of the affected country. A fluid
dialogue with national Governments and support for
political processes that can help local actors to forge a
vision of their priorities should therefore be guiding
principles of our activities.

The assistance provided must be tailored to what
national stakeholders consider as their fundamental
interests, and should focus on the consolidation of
national institutions. Institutions are indispensable to
enhancing national ownership and allowing for
stronger public administration. As Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste Jose Luis Guterres highlighted
before the Council in January (see S/PV.6472),
international partners must help to build national
institutions by working within them, since "one cannot
build a nation upon the principles of another"
(S/PV.6472, p. 6).

Partnerships with different actors - and this
brings me to my third point - is also instrumental to
the success of any peacebuilding initiative. Reaching
out to the international financial institutions and to
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, should be continuously pursued. One of
the areas in which partnerships can produce tangible
results is the deployment of civilian capacities. As the
recent report of the Secretary-General on this issue
underscores, it is essential to protect and nurture local
capacities, including through flexible arrangements and
South-South cooperation.

My delegation echoes the call by Ambassador
Peter Wittig for enhanced interaction between the
Commission and the Council. We believe that the
Security Council should resort more often to the advice
of the PBC when discussing the mandates of missions
in countries on the Commission's agenda. In February,
during the Brazilian presidency, an interactive dialogue
on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi was
held, with the presence of the Chair of the country-
specific configuration, Ambassador Paul Seger. We
hope that such initiatives will continue.

As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration, Brazil has endeavoured to help that
country to reach long-lasting peace and development.
The activities described in the annual report are just a
snapshot of what the country-specific configuration has
done in critical areas such as security sector reform,
advocacy before international financial institutions,
resource mobilization and economic revitalization.

We are committed to continue to work in all of
those areas in order to make the PBC increasingly
meaningful and effective on the ground.

