Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency. I would also like to extend my
congratulations in connection with the national day of
the Russian Federation, a country for which I have
particular affection, nourished during the years when I
had the honour of representing my country there.

The Argentine delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and
would like to associate itself with the statement made
by Peru on behalf of the Rio Group. As we said last
year, the issue that we are debating today is of great
importance because it affects two essential elements of
international relations, peace and justice, which cannot
be, nor should be, considered to be contradictory or
discordant. Rather, on the contrary, they should be
viewed as essential for one other.

The International Criminal Court is an institution
that is already functioning. Its judges have been
elected. The Prosecutor will assume his duties next
Monday. And the remaining steps necessary for its
establishment are being finalized. The international
community has taken forward the establishment of the
Court and its functioning with speed, effectiveness and
determination. The Criminal Court was not established
to administer justice in a vacuum. On the contrary, the
history of the negotiating process and the balanced
nature of its provisions clearly reflect its objective of
reconciling the interests of the international community
as a whole with national objectives of State sovereignty
and security. Its rules also reflect the determination to
establish a framework that makes the Court's role
compatible with the needs of the collective security
system.

Resolution 1422 (2002) was adopted last year
following a situation created by the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the exception adopted by
the Security Council in that resolution, and once again
submitted for the Council's consideration, will not
become a permanent exception, which would neutralize
the status of the Court.

The Statute offers the necessary guarantees to
ensure that the Court will exercise its jurisdiction only
in cases within its competence. Even in such cases, the
Court first must exhaust the principle of
complementarity, allowing the competent national
jurisdiction to consider and decide on the issue. This is
why we cannot explain fears or doubts about the Court
by a country that has trust in its own legal system and
the effectiveness of that system. If, however, a case
finally comes before the Court for decision, we are sure
that the Judges and the Prosecutor, whose
qualifications and background speak for themselves,
will carefully consider it and will prevent the slightest
suspicion of political motivation or partiality.

For decades, the international community has
pursued the establishment of a court that would be able
to judge the most serious international crimes. The end
of the cold war broke the stalemate that prevented
States, in a joint undertaking with civil society, from
laying the foundations of the Court. The painstaking
negotiations that led to the Rome Statute achieved a
delicate balance that, without distorting the purposes of
the Court, took into consideration States' legitimate
concerns. It is important to maintain that balance,
ensuring the integrity of the Rome Statute.

The Court is a necessary tool to ensure the
effective universal application of basic human rights.
The process of ratification of the Statute is progressing
steadily. Thus, the international community is
demonstrating that this institution warrants credibility
and support. We hope that this debate will help to
overcome fears or doubts - which in our opinion are
not valid - vis-a-vis the Court. The Rome Statute is
not in conflict with the system established in the
United Nations Charter. On the contrary, the Court will
help to strengthen the maintenance of international
peace and security through its sheer existence; and this
will be a deterrent to the potential authors of monstrous
crimes that fall within its competence. That is why we
think that there is no contradiction; nor is there a need
to choose between them.

