Mr. Mahmasani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Mr. President, and in thanking your
predecessor, the Ambassador of France, and also
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei.

The Arab Summit convened in Beirut last March
adopted a resolution in which it categorically rejected
any attack against Iraq or any threat against the peace
and security of any Arab State. Such an attack was
considered a threat to collective Arab national security.
The resolution also welcomed Iraq's commitment to
respecting the independence, sovereignty and security
of the State of Kuwait, and it called upon Iraq to
cooperate in order to find a rapid solution to the issue
of prisoners of war and detainees, in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.

The reports of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) presented by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on
14 February confirmed some progress in the
inspections process. They also confirmed Iraq's
cooperation, which leads us to stress the need for those
operations to continue until such time as the Iraqi file
can be closed and the sanctions can be lifted, in
accordance with paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
Mr. Blix reported that:

(spoke in English)
"The situation has improved. ...(S/PV.4707, p. 2)

"All inspections were performed without notice
and access was almost always provided promptly.
(ibid.)

4c

"So far, UNMOVIC has found no such weapons
[of mass destruction]". (ibid., p. 3)

(spoke in Arabic)

The conclusions reached by Mr. ElBaradei in his
report include the following:

(spoke in English)

"We have to date found no evidence of
ongoing prohibited nuclear or nuclear-related
activities in Iraq." (S/PV.4707, p. 9)

(spoke in Arabic)

In the light of the conclusions reached by the
inspectors, who are the only legitimate authority
entrusted with the verification and submission of
evidence to the Security Council, there is no
justification for waging war against Iraq. Therefore we
ask: why a war? What are the imminent danger and
sudden threats that would justify it?

The inspectors are pursuing their inspections
throughout Iraq. The eyes of the Security Council are
on Iraq. Satellites and reconnaissance aircraft fly
through the skies of Iraq. Where, therefore, is the
danger posed so starkly by Iraq as to warrant a war
within weeks? The insistence on waging war against
Iraq at a time when the inspectors are striving to verify
that country's disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction raises the question as to whether the war is
actually intended to disarm Iraq of such weapons or to
achieve other objectives.

The countries of the Middle East - with the
exception of Israel of course - call for a halt in the
preparations for war against Iraq. International polls
indicate a worldwide rejection of war. Seventy-seven
per cent of the British reject war and 59 per cent of
Americans call for the inspectors to be given more
time. From Sydney to New York, millions have
demonstrated against the impending war in Iraq.

The imminent threat to the peace and stability of
the Arab nation is Israel's arsenal of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons and their delivery systems.
Israel continues to occupy Arab territories and pursues
a policy of destruction of the Palestinian people. For
the past 22 years, it has rejected the implementation of
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), which calls on
Israel to submit its nuclear programmes and facilities
to the IAEA safeguards regime. For the past 12 years,
it has rejected the implementation of paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991), which calls for the creation of a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. Why do we condone Israel's behaviour
and why do the inspection teams not head there to
eliminate its weapons of mass destruction? Why, I ask,
are there such double standards?

Amidst the cloud of war hanging over the region,

the Council of Foreign Ministers of the League of Arab
States met in Cairo on 16 February and confirmed the
Arab countries' rejection of any act of aggression
against or threat to the peace and security of any Arab
State. They considered any such threat to be a threat to
collective Arab security. The Council of Foreign
Ministers also rejected any political plan or policy to
impose changes on the region, to interfere in its
internal affairs or to ignore the legitimate interests of
the peoples of the region.

We hope that the end of the cold war late in the
last century will not signal a prelude to the onset of hot
wars in the new century, beginning with a war on Iraq.
The option of war represents a failure of the Security
Council and a collapse of the present international
system, as well as a challenge to the United Nations
Charter, which is the sole safety valve for protecting
countries, particularly the weaker ones, and for
preserving international peace and security.

To preserve the peace in the Arab region and
throughout the world, we call on everyone to reject the
option of war and to give the inspectors sufficient time
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Iraqi question.
The statement adopted by the European Union summit
in Brussels said, in part:

(spoke in English)

"The Union's objective for Iraq remains full and
effective disarmament We want to achieve this
peacefully. It is clear that this is what the people
of Europe want."

It is clear by now that this is what the peoples of
the world want. Let us not fail them.

