Mr. Ben Yahia (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation wishes to express its sincere thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
include the question of counter-terrorism on the
Security Council's agenda for this month - at the
request of the delegation of Ukraine - given the
extreme importance of this issue.
I also wish to take this opportunity to reiterate to
the American delegation, and to my friend Mr. Colin
Powell, Tunisia's compassion and support to the
friendly Government and people of the United States
following the events of 11 September 2001. I also
extend my sympathy and condolences to the bereaved
families of the victims of the accident that occurred in
New York today.

The phenomenon of terrorism is not a temporary
or new one. Tunisia has drawn attention to the dangers
of terrorism since the early 1990s, and in various
forums has called for the need to establish an
international framework for combating this
phenomenon.

On the national level, Tunisia has found efficient
solutions through the implementation of a
comprehensive strategy - political, economic, social,
cultural and educational - as well as strengthening the
rule of law and government institutions, thereby
distancing ourselves from threats of terrorism and
violence.

On the international level, we believe that it is
time for the international community, first, to unite its
efforts in order to eradicate the phenomenon of
terrorism, its structural and financial bases and its
means of disseminating information. In this regard,
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) constitutes a
solid basis that enables the international community to
move from rhetoric to effective action in order to
contain the dangers of this phenomenon. This
resolution also constitutes an appropriate international
framework within which to elaborate an international,
integrated preventive and coercive strategy that tackles
terrorism.

Secondly, it is also time that the international
community cooperate and coordinate efforts in order to
elaborate a rigorous plan of action to combat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations: religious, ethnic or
political. In this regard, Tunisia is determined to
continue cooperating and contributing at all levels with
the international community in order to establish a
comprehensive and consensual code of conduct to
combat terrorism and to set up an adequate mechanism
to achieve that goal. In this regard, the Organization of
African Unity and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference have adopted a proposal, to which Tunisia
contributed and which led to the adoption of a number
of important decisions. I wish to draw the attention of
Council members to the document that has been
circulated today, which includes reference to the
African mechanism for crisis management and the
Organization's position on terrorism.

Thirdly, all States should explicitly and genuinely
commit themselves to deny any direct or indirect
assistance, including granting political asylum, to
persons whose actual or tacit participation in terrorist
acts has been proved. All States should also, in
cooperation with each other, prevent terrorist networks
from moving about freely under the cover of civil
society organizations, and should deprive these
networks of any means of carrying out their activities.
In this respect, we should be very vigilant and alert vis-
a-vis their exploitation of modern information
technology to spread the culture of extremism, violence
and provocation.

The debate that took place in the General
Assembly after the events of 11 September 2001 has
enabled the international community to take a unified
stance on and condemn terrorism. We welcome, in this
regard, the conclusions of that debate, particularly the
following: the call to avoid confusing Islam with the
acts of certain extremist terrorist groups that have no
relationship whatsoever with the religion, which is one
of tolerance, mediation and moderation; the affirmation
of the rights of people to self-determination in
accordance with the Charter and within the framework
of international legality; and the call for strengthening
international cooperation and solidarity with a View to
eliminating the factors of frustration and deprivation in
the world and to finding solutions to pending
international issues, particularly the question of
Palestine. By doing so, we ensure that those problems
are not used by terrorist and extremist movements to
destabilize the world.

We also support the conclusion calling for
combating the manifestations of poverty and
underdevelopment. In fact, the future of world security,
stability, and development depends upon the degree to
which we consecrate the principles of equality, justice
and solidarity between peoples. In this regard, Tunisia
has proposed the creation of a world solidarity fund
with the aim of taking rapid action in the poor regions
of the world.

Consistent with our support of resolution 1373
(2001) and its requisites, we also support the resolution
that will be adopted by the Council today. Finally, I
would like to mention a call addressed last Wednesday
by President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia, on
the occasion of the fourteenth anniversary of the
Change of 7 November 1987, to world leaders, to the
forces of good and men of wisdom to intensify their
efforts in order to prevent relations between peoples,
particularly in these delicate times, from veering
towards the resurgence of confrontation between
religions, which are in their essence noble objectives,
sources of tolerance, dialogue, and solidarity.

