Mr. Otunnu: I thank the Security Council very
much for asking me to join in this briefing.

 

All civilians deserve and need the protection of the
international community, but children deserve particular
attention because they are the most innocent and powerless
sector of vulnerable populations and because destroying
children in this context is destroying the future of our
society; but also simply because children suffer
disproportionately in these situations.

Just witness these figures. In the course of the last
decade, as the Council knows, more than 2 million children
have been killed in situations of conflict, more than 1
million have been orphaned, more than 6 million have been
permanently or seriously injured, 12 million have been
made homeless and more than 10 million are estimated to
be suffering from grave psychological and emotional
trauma. But even as we speak now, more than 300,000
children in over 30 conflict situations in the world are
serving as child soldiers. More than half the total
population of displaced persons - both those displaced
within their national borders and those who have crossed
their national borders - are children. More than 800
children are estimated to be killed or maimed every month
by landmines; and, indeed, the worst forms of trauma and
violation - rape and other forms of sexual violence - are
routinely committed against women, especially young
women, in situations of conflict. These are the reasons why
we must especially focus on the particularly vulnerable
situations of children.
I wish to devote the rest of my remarks to what can
be done, what measures the international community might
explore to reverse this trend of abomination.

The first measure, on which my colleague Sergio
Vieira de Mello briefed the Council only a few weeks ago,
is the absolute imperative of having access to populations
in distress. When communities are cut off from the outside
world and are isolated, that is when they are most
vulnerable and when abuses take place and multiply. So the
international community must insist on access by
humanitarian agencies to bear witness, quite simply, to
provide succour to those who are in need and to monitor
the real application of both the international and local
standards that apply to the conduct of war.

Second, we have to promote the concept of children
as a zone of peace. In practical terms this implies two kinds
of measures. The first is that the locales where children
predominate, such as schools, hospitals and playgrounds,
should be regarded as battle-free zones. In this context, I
am very pleased that the Statute of the International
Criminal Court now makes it a war crime to target or
violate those locales. But, secondly, it also means that
even if we may not in particular situations be able to
bring war to an end, we should at least promote the idea
of humanitarian ceasefires and of a break in hostilities to
allow for inoculations and evacuations and to allow for
children to be given special protection. The ideas that are
now being explored in this context with colleagues in the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World
Health Organization in the context of the Congo are
something that I hope the Council will strongly support.

Third, there are situations where - in the midst of
ongoing conflict - parties in conflict, including non-State
actors, have made commitments to take certain measures
that can increase the space of protection for children.
They have made commitments not to recruit and use
children, not to interfere with access to relief supplies by
populations within their zones of control and not to target
civilian populations. The challenge now is how to ensure
that these parties in conflict are encouraged and given
incentives to honour these commitments. There is a
collective role for the Security Council in that context,
and there are individual roles for Governments
represented within the Security Council and within the
United Nations in this regard.

What can Governments do? Governments have very
important lines of communication to parties in conflict,
including non-State actors. Governments have influence
that really matters on the ground. In an interdependent
world, I believe that no party in conflict can remain
indifferent if concerned Governments and the Security
Council make a concerted effort for them to know that it
matters whether or not they honour the commitments that
they have made.

Fourth, we must explore how the initiatives that are
now taken within countries can be translated into
neighbourhood initiatives. What do I mean by this? I have
been to a number of countries in the course of the past
year and I have tried to undertake some commitments and
initiatives on the ground. But I have also been
increasingly struck by certain cross-border activities: the
recruitment, abduction and transfer of children across
borders; the illegal flow of arms, especially light
weapons; the flow of landmines; and also the flow of
displaced persons to and fro. It is impossible to protect
civilian populations, especially children, exclusively
within national boundaries. We must therefore identify
certain neighbourhoods - neighbouring countries - and
take initiatives that will bring about commitments on the
part of neighbouring countries, as well as insurgency

 

groups active within those zones, to forgo some of their
activities and to take certain measures that provide for the
protection of children.

With my colleagues within the United Nations,
including UNICEF, we are already exploring how we might
initiate such initiatives in the neighbourhood of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in
eastern Africa, Sierra Leone, Liberia and, certainly, in the
neighbourhood of the war theatre in Kosovo.

Fifth, I could not agree more with the observation that
has been made by my colleagues that one of the striking
features of peace agreements up to now is the conspicuous
absence of any mention of the needs and protection of
children. And yet we know, as I have indicated, that
children suffer disproportionately in the midst of conflict.
In the aftermath of conflict it is they who are the most
dominant presence within a society, children who need to
be taken care of. I therefore hope that every effort will be
made, in a more systematic way, to encourage parties in
conflict and to promote the incorporation of the issue of the
protection and the needs of children in peace agendas,
meaning, at the stage when negotiations are taking place.

My office has begun some preliminary discussions in
the context of both Burundi and Colombia, and we hope
that with the Council's support and the support of other
friends of Burundi and Colombia it might be possible to
incorporate the issue of the protection and the needs of
children in these two situations where children have
suffered especially badly.

Sixth, we have the recruitment and use of children,
and there are three elements involved in this. The overall
strategy must be to eradicate the use of children in conflict
situations. But there are three elements that are important
in achieving that strategy. One is obviously the raising of
the age limit for recruitment and participation from 15 to
18, and I remain most active in promoting a consensus on
this issue. But that is not sufficient. Secondly, it is
important for the international community to mobilize a
movement, a movement of pressure, that can lean on parties
in conflict and that can help protect children in present
theatres of conflict where children are being abused. That
is essentially a political project, as distinct from the
juridical project of raising the age limit. Thirdly, and this is
equally important, we know that there are social, economic
and political factors that create the conditions that facilitate
the exploitation of children in this fashion. We must
address those economic and social factors as well. These
three elements together will help us in moving to
eradicate the use and abuse of children in this way.

Seventh, I have been quite struck in my Visits to
many countries by the fact that the single most vulnerable
group consists of those who are displaced within the
borders of their country, and by the fact that there is, as
of now, no agreed framework for providing protection for
these people. Yes, there are arrangements for providing
relief, and that is most welcome, but there is no
framework for providing protection to these populations.
I have been discussing this with both the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
with my very good friend Mr. Francis Deng, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Internally
Displaced Persons. The international community has a
challenge, an urgent challenge: as we speak, there are
more people displaced internally, within their countries,
than those who have crossed borders and have become
refugees. A framework must emerge for the protection of
this most vulnerable of groups.

Eighth, there is the issue of the importance of local
value systems. There are two pillars on which we must
fasten our claim for the protection of civilian populations.
One pillar has been referred to already by my colleagues:
international humanitarian and human rights instruments,
such as the Geneva Convention, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the recently adopted Statute of the
International Criminal Court, and so on. That is an
important, probably the primary pillar. But there is a
second pillar, about which we hear less, though I hope we
might hear more. In many societies facing the challenge
we are describing, there are values, there are norms that
have germinated in the local soil, that speak to the
protection of civilian populations, and especially of
women, children and the elderly. I am reminded of the
words of a Kenyan elder who, observing the atrocities
committed in situations such as those we are describing,
said, "In our tradition, men fight men. But now they are
targeting women, children, and the elderly." This was the
lament of a Kenyan elder. So we must work to promote
this other pillar and, where that pillar has been
undermined, and in some cases collapsed, work to help
local communities and elders resuscitate that pillar. On
these two pillars we must build our claim for the
protection of women and children.

Ninth, it is very clear that the ground is often
prepared for the massive violation of civilians through the
demonization of the other community, through hate
campaigns, political rallies and political tracts, on radio,

 

and on television. These signs are visible and audible. The
international community must make a more concerted,
systematic effort to repudiate these signs when they begin
to appear.

Finally, tenth, there is dialogue with the business
community, because we have seen that in some of the worst
theatres of conflict where children and women are being
targeted there are active business dealings going on, in
timber, in gold, in diamonds, in the sale of light weapons.
I am not talking of all theatres of conflict. I am talking of
Sierra Leone, I am talking of Angola, I am talking of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the Sudan -
theatres where we especially see the worst manifestation of
victimization of civilian populations. Is it possible to
encourage the business community to have a serious
dialogue around this issue, to perhaps develop voluntary
codes of conduct within their own industry that can address
their contribution, however indirect, to fuelling the machine
that victimizes and violates women and children?

Let me say, in conclusion, that I believe two things are
very important for the Council as it looks at this issue. One,
the era now ending has been an era of the elaboration of
international instruments. A very impressive body is in
place, and many of those instruments have been referred to.
The era we are entering must be one of application. A child
in Sierra Leone is not impressed by all the instruments we
cite here, unless the application of those instruments and
values makes a difference to his or her life on the ground.
I hope the Security Council collectively and Members
represented within the United Nations will invest their
influence in that direction.

Finally, I very much hope that the Security Council
will undertake to follow up systematically on the
commitments made in the discussion of a few weeks ago,
the discussion today, and the most important initiative taken
by the Council last June and the presidential statement on
the impact of war on children. I hope that the commitment
represented in those initiatives will inform the ongoing
business of the Council, and will especially inform the
work of the Council when it decides on specific crisis
situations and elaborates specific mandates.

I am at the Council's disposal to help it move forward
with this project.

