Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian ):
I would like to welcome Mr. Abdullah, Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, who is
participating in today's meeting.

The Russian Federation actively supported the idea of
organizing today's open debate in the Security Council, the
purpose of which is to make public the views of the
Council members and of a broad range of Member States
of the United Nations on the present stage of the conflict in
Afghanistan. We hope that this will help the Council to
determine more clearly what more can be done to assist
in the settlement of this conflict, which is one of the
longest-standing ones.

We are obliged to note, with profound regret and
sympathy to the Afghan people, that the worst fears of
many members of the international community came true
when, nearly three years ago, the Taliban seized the
capital of the Islamic State of Afghanistan. Having started
with a brazen pretension to power and domination in that
country that was accompanied by brutal reprisals against
opponents, the Taliban movement showed in its
subsequent policy and practice that it intended to continue
to act in precisely that spirit, ignoring the frequently
expressed will of the international community and
aggravating the critical situation into which the internal
armed conflict has driven Afghanistan and cast it into a
political, economic and humanitarian catastrophe.

Russia strongly opposes the Taliban's continuing
escalation of the fighting in Afghanistan and condemns
the Taliban leadership's policy of using force to solve the
Afghan problem. We note the particular cynicism
displayed by the Taliban in carrying out a major offensive
literally two days after the conclusion of the Tashkent
meeting of the "Group of friends and neighbours of
Afghanistan".

We are seriously concerned by the increasing
external interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.
This can be seen in particular in the many reports of
direct participation in the fighting, on the Taliban side, of
thousands of Pakistanis and hundreds of fighters from
other countries. We call on Pakistan to take immediate
measures to prevent its territory from being used to
provide military support to the Taliban. This would be in
line with the commitments made by Pakistan, along with
the other members of the "six plus two" group, in
accordance with the Tashkent declaration.

We note with particular concern that yet another
spiral of brutal armed resistance by the Taliban has led to
increased suffering for the Afghan population. We cannot
but sound the alarm regarding information on new gross
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law, including reports of mass shootings,
arrests and forcible relocations of hundreds of thousands
of peaceful inhabitants of Afghanistan. As a result of such
actions by the Taliban in several regions of the country,
including around Kabul and the Panjshir valley, where
vast numbers of displaced persons have been

 

concentrated, there is a real threat of a humanitarian
disaster.

We demand that the Taliban movement immediately
put an end to this practice, and that it also ensure proper
conditions for the provision of emergency humanitarian
assistance by the international community to all who may
need it.

We cannot accept the continuation of a situation in
which the territory of Afghanistan that is controlled by the
Taliban is used to support international terrorism and
extremism of all stripes and also to encourage the illegal
production of and trafficking in narcotics. It is no secret
that over the last few years, as a result of these Taliban
actions, Afghanistan has acquired a firm reputation as an
international exporter of terrorism and narcotics. The
negative consequences of this are already being felt far
beyond the borders of that country, including in some
regions of Russia and in the States of Central Asia.

In connection with such developments in the Afghan
situation - developments that directly affect Russian
security - we, jointly with our partners in the
Commonwealth of Independent States, will continue to take
all necessary measures.
The resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly contain a condemnation of the actions of
the Taliban and clear demands regarding the general
principles and outline of an Afghan settlement. We fully
share and support these positions. The cornerstone of these
demands is the holding, under the aegis of the United
Nations, of inter-Afghan talks aimed at creating a broadly
representative government that would respect international
law, including human rights and international humanitarian
law, and would ensure respect for the rights of all Afghans.

We believe it is timely to recall that all of the
resolutions of the Security Council on Afghanistan have
been adopted unanimously, and the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly have gained increasing support from
Member States with each passing year. At the fifty-third
session of the General Assembly nearly one third of the
delegations sponsored the resolution on Afghanistan. These
votes argue with great seriousness that those who ignore the
decisions of the United Nations - and thus, in essence,
openly defy the international community - should reflect
on the possible consequences of their short-sighted policy.

We are convinced that the United Nations, which
plays a central role in coordinating international efforts in
the Afghan area, must take effective action to halt the
bloodshed and lead the parties to a peaceful settlement.

We support the efforts of Ambassador Brahimi,
undertaken on the basis of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, and also the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.

Russia is on the whole satisfied with the results of
the meeting of the "six plus two" group, held in July in
Tashkent, with the participation of high-level
representatives of both Afghan sides. That meeting
represented a very important step towards ensuring
favourable conditions for unblocking the Afghan crisis.
The meeting also bore witness to the viability of that
group as a truly effective international mechanism for
finding a way out of the conflict in Afghanistan. We feel
that that group must increase its efforts aimed at
achieving a political settlement to the conflict, and that
the Security Council must support the group in every way
possible.

In our view, one of the effective means for
influencing the situation in this country, so as to shift the
focus to negotiation, could be the consideration by the
Council of the question of introducing effective measures
aimed at achieving the full implementation of the
resolutions it has adopted.
Russia confirms its readiness to continue
constructive interaction and cooperation with all interested
parties in order to resolve the conflict in Afghanistan on
the basis of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council.

