Let me begin by thanking Ambassador Dang Dinh Quy for his update, as well as Special Representative Shearer and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock. Their briefings today provided a stark illustration of the dire and deteriorating humanitarian situation faced by millions of people in South Sudan, as well as the urgent need for the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. I note what David Shearer said about the fact that the violence is by no means as bad as it was previously - which is a mercy - but it is a sad and profound reality that more than two years after the conclusion of the Agreement and one year after the Council's visit to Juba, millions of people in South Sudan have yet to see real peace dividends. This year we have seen the declining food security picture affecting millions and catalysed by subnational violence, slow implementation of the Agreement and record flooding. As Mark Lowcock made clear, the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis, released on Friday, shows that there is likely to be a famine in western Pibor, and thousands more people living in famine-like conditions in five other counties. Resolution 2417 (2018) puts the onus on the Council to take action when we see a clear link between conflict and food insecurity, and that is unmistakably the case in South Sudan. The situation will only worsen if we do not act. Now is the time for us to step up and show leadership. The United Kingdom is one of the major humanitarian donors in South Sudan. In October, we committed a further $10 million in assistance in addition to our humanitarian aid outlay, which has totalled $218 million in the past financial year. But international support and humanitarian aid alone cannot solve the situation. The ultimate responsibility lies with South Sudan's Government. It is a great shame that the representative of South Sudan has once again not made a request under rule 37 to be with us in the Council today as we discuss the plight facing millions of his compatriots. We call on the Government of South Sudan to accept the gravity of the situation, to support the release of the full IPC analysis and to cooperate with and provide unfettered access to humanitarian partners. Efforts to impede the IPC process help no one, and although humanitarian aid is crucial, the bottom line is that the crisis can be resolved only if South Sudan's leaders show the required political will. We must also recognize the human-made nature of this crisis. Successive cycles of violence have resulted in forced civilian displacement, abductions and notable increases in sexual and gender-based violence. We welcome the positive steps taken to build state-level institutions and we commend the commitment made last week to finalize state- and county-level appointments, which is significant. However, we need to ensure that those structures deliver tangible, positive impacts on people's lives and that governors and state officials guarantee unfettered humanitarian access as an immediate priority. Stability is vital and can be achieved only through a fully inclusive process. We welcome the recent recommitment by non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement to the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army (in Opposition), and we call on all parties to continue to engage constructively in the Rome process. Let me also reiterate our call to South Sudan's leaders to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in that process. The fact that famine is likely to occur should be a wake-up call for us all. At this moment of renewed crisis, we call on all parties to redouble their efforts to realize lasting peace and stability. It is therefore vital to ensure that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is able to carry out its mandate unhindered. Bureaucratic and physical impediments are a direct contravention of the Revitalized Agreement, the status of forces agreement and international peacekeeping norms. In conclusion, as we look to the end of South Sudan's first decade as an independent nation, our hope remains that a partnership can be forged between the donor community, the United Nations and South Sudan's Government and that 2021 will see a renewed effort to help end the humanitarian catastrophe in the country. The Government of South Sudan needs to see the donor community and the United Nations as partners helping them to resolve the crisis, and South Sudan's leaders need to put their people first.
