Ms. Wronecka (Poland): 1 thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Soliz for his briefing. I would also
like to express my delegation's support for his further
efforts in steering the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Poland attaches great importance to its
commitments on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. With full conviction, we support
the implementation of legally binding instruments,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention.

Resolution 1540 (2004) constitutes an important
complementary tool in this area, since it addresses
weapons of mass destruction-related threats caused by
non-State actors, which are increasing. Resolution 2325
(2016) calls upon States to take into account the evolving
nature of the risk of proliferation and rapid advances
in science and technology in their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Rapid technological advances
in the dual-use domain continue to outpace national
and international regulations. Non-State actors have
become more creative in weaponizing new technologies.
The use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists is
a dreadful reality.

Let me just mention that the Joint Investigative
Mechanism attributed the use of chemical weapons
also, but not only, to Da'esh. All these developments
prove that resolution 1540 (2004) is not only still
relevant, but the importance of its full implementation
is perhaps greater than ever before.

We also believe it is possible to build synergies
between the 1540 (2004) Committee and other relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as functional groupings, such as the Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction, the European Union
Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear Risk
Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Proliferation Security Initiative. They all have
tools to assist nations in better implementing their
non-proliferation commitments.

We are pleased that the programme of work of
the Committee, adopted earlier today, recognizes the
need for a structured and more regular discussion
based on monthly expert meetings of the Committee.
We hope that such regular meetings will contribute to
the revitalization of the Committee's work, as well as
to further implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also hope that the process of selecting a new
coordinator of the Group of Experts will be finalized
soon, according to the established precedent.

