Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I am very pleased,
as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), to give
an overview of the main developments in the work of
the Committee since the most recent joint briefing, on
14 November 2011 (see S/PV.6658), in addition to the
information just delivered by Ambassador Wittig in the
joint statement.

I will update the Council on the first annual
review of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
conducted by the Committee and on recent activities.
Before I do so, I want to express my gratitude to
Lebanon for having served as acting Chair of the
Committee at the end of 2011.

In accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 1977
(2011), the Committee conducted, with the assistance of
its experts, its first annual review on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The review showed the
progress made by States and other activities relevant to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
period from 1 January to 31 December 2011. The report
on the review was transmitted to the Security Council on
1 February 2012 (S/2012/79, annex) and is structured in
two parts. The first part provides a factual summary of
the year under consideration, based on the structure of
resolution 1977 (2011) in the areas of implementation,
assistance, cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, and transparency and
outreach. The second part is analytical, with a forward-
looking perspective, identifying nine steps that the
Committee may consider, taking into account
recommendations contained in the report submitted to
the Security Council on 12 September 2011
(S/2011/579). The annual review is also available on the
website of the 1540 Committee.

Since the most recent joint briefing, the 1540
Committee has conducted activities focused on
implementation, assistance, cooperation with
international organizations, and outreach and
transparency, in accordance with resolution 1977
(2011) and with the tenth programme of work of the
Committee for the period from 1 June 2011 to 31 May
2012.

With regard to implementation, monitoring and
facilitating, the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by States is a key function of the Committee,
bearing in mind that the full implementation of the
resolution by States is a long-term task. As no initial
report on the implementation of the resolution has been
received since the most recent joint briefing, the
number of States that have not yet submitted a report
remains at 25. However, the Committee has received
additional information from several States. Belarus
informed the Committee of its intention to prepare a
national framework document on the implementation
of the resolution. Serbia informed the Committee of the
adoption of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for the
period 2012-2016. Montenegro provided the
Committee with point of contact information.

In addition, experts supporting the Committee
have conducted country-specific dialogues with several
States, with a view to facilitating the implementation of
the resolution. Experts conducted a site visit to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as part of
the United States of America country visit. This was
done at the invitation of the United States Government,
which wished to discuss the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Let me also note that a visit
was planned to the Republic of the Congo, at its
invitation, to discuss several aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
the submission of an initial report. The visit was
eventually postponed owing to the accidental fire in the
central arms and ammunition depot in Brazzaville. I
ensure the Republic of the Congo of our sympathy for
their situation and of our willingness to reschedule the
visit at a more convenient time.

On assistance, the 1540 Committee continues to
actively play its clearinghouse role to facilitate match-
making between requests and offers of assistance in
relation with the implementation by States of
resolution 1540 (2004). In that regard, the Committee
continues to implement its revised guidelines on
processing assistance requests. Since the most recent
joint briefing, the Committee has received additional
information regarding assistance from Serbia and point
of contact information for assistance from Madagascar.
As Chairman of the 1540 Committee, I have sent
letters to States and regional organizations that have
requested assistance to inform them of the responses
received and to enquire whether their requests were
met.

In anticipation of the Group of Eight Global
Partnership Working Group meeting in Washington, DC,
on 24 and 25 January 2012, the Committee approved an
updated consolidated list of assistance requests prepared
by its experts and shared it with the presidency of the
Group of Eight (G-8) for distribution to the G-8
partners, calling for a substantive and proactive dialogue
on that issue. Since the most recent joint briefing, the
1540 Committee and its experts have participated in
three meetings of the Global Partnership Working
Group, where assistance and capacity-building matters
were discussed.

The Committee continues to cooperate with
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, participating in outreach events organized
or co-organized, for instance, by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA), the League
of Arab States, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the World Customs
Organization and the secretariat of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States.

The Committee received a briefing from the
Chair of The Hague Code of Conduct, who noted that,
although the Code had not been negotiated within the
framework of the United Nations, it had a valuable role
to play in furthering the aims of resolution 1540 (2004).

The Committee received points of contact
information from the African Union and the OSCE.
The Committee has also received a communication
from the OSCE submitting point of contact information
for 44 of its participating States, in accordance with
OSCE Decision 19/11, entitled "Points of Contact on
UN Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)", adopted
on 14 December 2011.

The Committee may consider a strategy for
engaging with international, regional and subregional
organizations and other entities, as appropriate, in
particular with respect to information-sharing, the
exchange of experiences and lessons learned and
cooperation in assisting Member States.

Since our most recent joint briefing, the
Committee and its experts have participated in 31
outreach events, listed on the website of the Committee.
These include participation in the first Conference of
International, Regional and Subregional Industry
Associations on Resolution 1540 (2004) held in
Germany, from 23 to 25 April 2012, which was
attended by Committee members from both Germany
and Pakistan.

The Committee, with the assistance of its experts,
has also participated in various country-specific
activities, including Albania, Belarus, Colombia,
Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, Myanmar and
Turkmenistan.

Transparency is a key principle guiding the work
of the Committee. With the support of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
Committee undertook a major redesign of its website,
which has been launched and can now be accessed in
its new configuration.

Before I conclude, let me highlight two matters
on which, I hope, it will be possible for the Committee
to make progress. The first is the establishment of a
group of experts in support of the Committee, in
accordance with paragraph 5 (a) of resolution 1977
(2011). The Committee has approved and transmitted
to the Council recommendations for the structure,
methods, modalities, expertise and geographical
representation of the Committee and the group of
experts. A call for nominations was subsequently
launched, and Committee members are now actively
consulting on finalizing the process of establishing the
group. As Chair of the Committee, I call for a speedy
conclusion to that process and establishment of the
new group of experts without delay, as it is already
becoming clear that the work of the Committee and the
progress it has made so far will be adversely affected if
we do not have a group of experts in place as soon as
possible.

The second matter before the Committee is that
of strengthening the existing administrative and
logistics support for the Committee by the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, as requested by the Council in
paragraph 22 (a) of resolution 1977 (2011), including
through strengthening the regional capacity of UNODA
to support implementation of the resolution at the
regional, subregional and national levels. Completing
those two tasks will be a major focus of the
Committee's work in the upcoming period.

I would now like, if I may, to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

South Africa believes that the United Nations
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
combat terrorism. Those efforts should comply with
legal norms and standards and with human rights and
humanitarian law. The Security Council and the three
terrorism-related Committees play an important role in
that regard. We therefore support strengthened
coordination and cooperation among the Committees,
and believe that their efforts should complement the
work of the General Assembly on counter-terrorism,
particularly the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

South Africa believes that in implementing our
various obligations under resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), we should
take into account the need for a Member State-driven
agenda. Accordingly, we recognize that it is up to each
State to contextualize the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy within its own national framework. This will
make it relevant to the overall objective of combating
the threats of terrorism and of the possibility that
non-State actors, including terrorists, may acquire
weapons of mass destruction.

In that regard, we welcome the continuing work
of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) in promoting cooperation in implementing the
Strategy, and their close cooperation with the
terrorism-related Committees. As we have heard from
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
three expert groups have been able to work
cooperatively and share information on specific themes
and activities. We welcome these and other ongoing
efforts to improve the Committee's procedures and
working methods, particularly in order to streamline
processes, avoid duplication and create transparency.

We also value the work being done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED to provide
technical assistance to those States that request it, to
facilitate Member States' compliance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, and to assist in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Security Council sanctions have to be capable of
withstanding legal scrutiny, including on the question
of due process. There are a number of
well-documented legal challenges in various parts of
the world to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime.
We therefore welcome the efforts to create fair and
transparent procedures for the listing and delisting
processes. Similarly, the Office of the Ombudsperson,
with the support of Council members, is playing a
significant role in strengthening the legitimacy and
credibility of the work of the sanctions committees.

South Africa emphasizes that we should look
carefully at the proposed appointment of a counter-
terrorism coordinator. Such a position should have an
appropriate mandate and scope, and take into account
the specific mandates of the various United Nations
structures dealing with terrorism. My delegation is of
the view that the creation of any new office should be
measured against its potential contribution to
facilitating international efforts to combat terrorism,
rather than duplicating existing structures or placing an
additional burden on Member States, especially those
of the developing world.

The existence of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to the very existence of humankind.
South Africa's concern about the use or threat of use of
such weapons also extends to the potential threat that
non-State actors may acquire materials that could be
used for the development of those weapons and their
delivery systems. However, we are heartened by the
commitment expressed by many developing countries
to implementing their commitments to preventing
non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring
such materials.

It is important that those concerns be addressed
with the proper understanding that, as States implement
their Chapter VII obligations as contained in resolution
1540 (2004), their national ownership of that process is
to be respected. South Africa has tried to reach out in a
more even-handed manner to developing countries. We
have noticed that one of the key recent trends emerging
in the Committee from the developing world's
perspective is the increasing number of States that have
requested some form of assistance in implementing
their legally binding obligations under the resolution,
while we are also pleased that resolution 1977 (2011)
provides us with a mechanism by which to do so.

In conclusion, the Council has an important role
to play in ensuring that the counter-terrorism strategy
of the United Nations shall become more transparent
and accountable to the wider membership that it
represents. South Africa is pleased to note that some
progress has been made in that regard, and we hope
that our efforts to find a sustainable strategy to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and to
eradicate the dangers posed by non-State actors,
including the possibility of terrorists' acquiring
sensitive materials, remain at the centre of our
discussions.

