Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. It is an issue of
great importance to regional and international peace
and security, especially in the circumstances currently
prevailing in the Middle East.

At the outset, I would like to confirm our
endorsement of the statements that have been and
will be made on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Non-Aligned Movement. I also salute the presence
among us of the Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine and his participation in this meeting, and I
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing.

The Palestinian cause has witnessed important
developments since the last Council debate on the issue
(see S/PV.6847). Through its resolution 67/19, adopted
on 29 November 2012, the General Assembly granted
Palestine the status of a non-member observer State of
the United Nations. After the adoption of that resolution,
Israel started expanding settlements and increasing
the number of residential units in existing ones. In his
briefing to the Council last month (see S/PV.6894), the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs noted
Israel's announcement in the wakes of that adoption
that it would continue planning for the construction
of thousands of residential units in the area between
Jerusalem and the Ma'ale Adumim settlement. He went
on to say that the Israeli Government had decided to
speed up the construction of approximately 6,500
residential units in East Jerusalem. That was the Israeli
Government's response to resolution 67/19.

As another means of punishing the Palestinian
people, Israel refused to pay the tax and customs
revenues due to the Palestinian Authority. That is a
violation of the Paris Protocol, which stipulates that tax
revenues must be transferred. To alleviate the suffering
of the Palestinian people, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
gave budgetary support to the Palestinian Authority
in the amount of $100 million. The Israeli occupation
of Palestinian land has become one of the longest-
standing occupation issues that this Organization
has dealt with. We hear statements in this and other
bodies expressing the strong belief on the part of the
international community and the United Nations in the
justice of the Palestinian cause and the inevitability
of putting an end to their plight. However, practically
speaking, the Council is paralysed and helpless because
the occupying Power continues to disregard the
international community and carry on with its brutal
and unjust policies.

In his most recent report on the situation in the
Middle East (S/2012/701), the Secretary-General
states that settlement expansion undermines the
territorial basis for a future Palestinian State. The
settlements incontrovertibly violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which forbids occupying Powers to change
the demographics of the land or to confiscate territory.
The settlements deal a death blow to the possibility of a
peaceful settlement to the Palestinian question based on
the principle ofland for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the two-State solution.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as the guardian
of Islamic holy sites, is deeply concerned about the
Israeli practices in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The Security
Council and the General Assembly have adopted over
10 resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem and the need to
avoid any negative impact on its religious and spiritual
significance. Nevertheless, over half of Israeli settlers
live in the area of Jerusalem and its environs, and
increasingly in the area between southern Jerusalem
and Bethlehem. The most recent resolution on Jerusalem
was Assembly resolution 67/24, adopted on 30 October
2012 and entitled "Jerusalem". Its first paragraph states
that any measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
to impose its laws and sovereignty are illegal and null
and void and lack all legitimacy.

Israel continues its campaign of demolition in the
area surrounding the holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
both above ground and especially under and around
the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, in an effort to weaken its
foundation, which would lead to its eventual collapse.
The excavations around Al-Aqsa Mosque have increased
to almost 30 locations. Meanwhile, Israel continues to
demolish the homes of Palestinian Jerusalemites and
to cancel their residency rights, continuing to evict
many Palestinian families from their homes in East
Jerusalem, leaving them homeless.

That is without even mentioning the behaviour of
Israeli settlers in the city who commit provocations,
including damaging and desecrating mosques and
churches. The Council is obligated to compel Israel
to cease its current policies and abide by Council and
Assembly resolutions. The time has come to do away
with the permanent immunity that Israel has enjoyed,
to take the measures necessary to guarantee the
independence of the State of Palestine, and to put an
end to the occupation of its territories. The occupation
of the Syrian Arab Golan and the Shab'a farms and
other Lebanese territories, must also come to and end.
Failure to act will deeply hurt the credibility and stature
of the United Nations and the Security Council.

The tragic situation in Syria has recently taken a
serious turn for the worse, with increased killings from
air raids conducted by the Syrian Government against
its own citizens. It has come to the point of treating its
citizens as enemies, killing them and destroying their
homes. The number ofvictims is now more than 60,000,
while the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is in the millions.

Everyone can see that the Syrian regime has lost
its legitimacy and can no longer remain in power. It
fights to the very end in order to cling to its vanishing
authority. It seeks to portray the situation as a dispute
between that country and its neighbours, while in
fact its people have risen in revolt and have clearly
expressed their will, which must be respected. Its
clinging to power over the corpses of martyrs cannot
continue. Threatening to destroy Damascus so that it
collapses around its people is only a sign of despair and
bankruptcy.

The Syrian people feel bitter about the international
community's lack of action and at the fact that the
Security Council has abandoned them. The Council
has to date been unable to stop the Government
killing machine. Instead, the killing machine has
grown stronger and broadened its scope, committing
crimes against humanity and horrendous massacres.
My country therefore demands that all perpetrators of
those crimes be held accountable before international
justice. It calls on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in that regard.

As it notes with distress the events in Syria, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has not hesitated to shoulder
its responsibility by coming to the help of the Syrian
people and providing humanitarian assistance and
relief aid to the tune of several hundreds of millions
of dollars. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will actively
participate in the donor conference called for by the
Secretary-General, to be held at the end of this month
in the State of Kuwait, in order to meet the needs of the
Syrian people.
Moreover, the Kingdom was among the first
countries to recognize the Syrian National Coalition,
recognized to date by more than one hundred States. The
Coalition must therefore now be given the opportunity
to represent the Syrian people in all organizations,
bodies and forums. That position of Saudi Arabia
stems from its great grief and sadness at the events we
witness daily - the killing, destruction and genocide
committed by the regime against unarmed civilians.

Our country notes that the Security Council has
been very slow to take action in response to the tragic
situation in Syria and to assume its humanitarian,
moral and regional responsibilities. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia urges the Council to respond to the
appeals of the Syrian people and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We call on the
Council to promptly act with resolve under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in order to put
an end to the killing being perpetrated by the Syrian
regime. We urge it to work towards achieving a real and
peaceful transfer of power that meets the aspirations
and expectations of the Syrian people for freedom,
dignity and prosperity and that preserves the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, while respecting the
diversity of its people.

