Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank the Chef de Cabinet to the
Secretary-General for her input.

The main and longest-running conflict in the
Middle East is the question of Palestine. As long as it
remains unsolved, peace and security in the Middle
East cannot be restored. The unlawful occupation of
Palestine is the main cause; it can therefore end only by
an end to the occupation. There is no magic solution.
All initiatives so far have disregarded that principle and
failed. The so-called deal of the century is bound to
fail for the same reason. The land of Palestine is not
up for sale, and the aspirations, honour, dignity and
inalienable rights of an entire nation cannot be bought.

The United States, by supporting the occupation,
has been responsible for the prolongation of the
conflict. That is the case with respect to almost all
other conflicts in the region. One can easily track the
United States involvement in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria
and Yemen, supporting some terrorist groups and many
other unlawful acts, including cyberattacks in the
Middle East.

Yesterday marked the sixty-sixth anniversary of
a United States-United Kingdom-orchestrated coup
against the democratically elected Government of
Iran. After the Islamic revolution, instances of United
States interference in Iran include supporting Saddam
Hussein in his aggression against Iran; downing an
Iranian passenger flight, which killed all 290 on-board,
including 66 children; supporting several coup attempts;
and perpetrating economic terrorism that targets
ordinary and vulnerable Iranians, such as patients by
using food and medicine as a weapon against them.

One of the main causes of the instability and
insecurity in our sensitive region is the military presence
of the United States, which has deployed over 70,000
troops across the Middle East and maintains an active
military presence in all littoral States of the Persian
Gulf, except Iran. The number of foreign military
installations in the Middle East has increased from four
in 1990 to 41 in 2018, almost all of which are United
States installations, which is the highest concentration
of foreign military installations in the world.

In addition to the illegal withdrawal of the United
States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
another destabilizing factor is the unbridled flow of
American weaponry into the region, which has turned
it into a powder keg. Unfortunately, some countries in
our region, such as Saudi Arabia, are recipients of that
deadly weaponry, with the illusion that they can buy
security by relying on the United States. In fact, the only
beneficiary of that accumulation of weaponry in the
region is the defence industry of exporting countries.

Likewise, we should not lose sight of the
destabilizing nature and impact of the divide-and-rule
strategy of the United States, through which it has
persistently sowed division among the countries of the
region. The Iranophobic statements of United States
officials also serve the same purpose. They disseminate
fabrications against Iran to justify their policy in the
region, with the aim of excluding Iran from playing
its role in the region. Iran has been in this region for
millenniums and will remain there for millenniums to
come. Any attempt to exclude or by-pass Iran from the
region is therefore an illusion and doomed to fail.

While we are not seeking confrontation, we cannot
and will not remain indifferent to the violation of our
sovereignty. In order to secure our borders and interests,
we will therefore vigorously exercise our inherent
right to self-defence. As a country with the longest
coastlines in the Persian Gulf and the Oman Sea, Iran
is determined to continue ensuring the safety and
security of maritime navigation in the area, particularly
the Strait of Hormuz. The interference of foreign forces
in that strategic waterway, under whatever pre-text, is
destabilizing and therefore unacceptable. Any attempt
at artificial coalition-building for securing navigation
in the area will fail.

We believe that the littoral States are responsible
for the security of the Persian Gulf. That is the basis of
our initiative to create a regional dialogue forum, which
is in line with paragraph 8 of resolution 598 (1987). We
will continue consultations with our brothers in the
region to realize such a lofty goal.

