The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

First, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
the candid presentation he has given us. He depicted
the tragedy, the fear, the insecurity that so many
millions of human beings are suffering, victims of the
crisis in Sudan. I wish to express to him the promise of
Peru's unvarying support to him and to his office for
their work in attending to crises of this type throughout
the world.

I will start by discussing the situation in the
Sudan, and more specifically in Darfur. We share
Mr. Egeland's concern that the situation of insecurity
in that area has worsened and that access to
humanitarian assistance grows increasing difficult and
risky. Confronted with this scenario, it is urgent for the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to take an effective decision that will protect
civilians by intensifying dialogue in order to achieve
an end to hostilities and the longed-for resolution of
the crisis in Darfur.

We believe that in order to decisively change the
direction of events in Darfur, the Government of
National Unity in Sudan must accept the initiatives
being discussed in order to arrive at a viable political
process based on consultation and dialogue.

The Government must also accept the deployment
of a credible and sufficiently large peacekeeping force
with a robust and wide-ranging mandate with a view to
consolidating the agreements reached at the political
level, thus protecting the civilian population, which is
victim of the rebels, the Janjaweed and the security
forces.
As regards the Juba peace process, it is important
to highlight the achievements made - in particular, the
ceasefire agreement and the protocol. We hope that the
parties will honour their commitments and that the
calm that has returned to northern Uganda after so
many years continues. In this regard, we join with
those who have thanked the Government of Southern
Sudan for acting as mediator in the peace talks. We
believe that this process should contribute to putting an
end to impunity for the serious crimes that have been
committed. It must also lead to a situation in which the
Ugandan Government, with the help of the
international community, sets in motion an all-
inclusive process to address the root causes of the
conflict, in particular the extreme poverty and social
marginalization of communities in northern Uganda.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Mr. Jan Egeland has asked to make some final
comments. I give him the floor.

