Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for allowing my delegation to speak in this
debate. Belgium fully supports the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict, and should like make
the following observations in its to national capacities.

We welcome the publication of the new report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children and
armed conflict (S/2016/360). Among the developments
noted, Belgium regrets the worsening impact of violent
extremism on children. We share the view of the
Secretary-General that this phenomenon is the result of
a context in which it is essential to understand the root
causes in order to combat it effectively. Our struggle
against violent extremism will be successful only if
we address its root causes, always in strict compliance
with human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Gravely concerned by the phenomenon of child
abductions in situations of armed conflict, my country
welcomes the addition of this phenomenon to the list
of violations involving inclusion in the lists annexed to
the annual reports. Belgium believes that these lists are
a valuable tool in the identification and prosecution of
perpetrators, and contribute thereby to efforts to stop
such violations.

Belgium also remains concerned about the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas and calls on all
parties involved in a conflict to renounce that practice,
of which children are the primary victims. My country
also urges States that have not yet ratified the relevant
international instruments, especially the conventions
banning landmines and cluster munitions, to do so as
soon as possible. My country encourages all Member
States to strengthen their efforts to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law.
Belgium also wishes to emphasize the importance
of the establishment of adequate reintegration and
rehabilitation mechanisms for children affected by
conflict. The extreme experiences of these children
often have a negative influence on their ability to
reintegrate, which can also harm term efforts to sustain
peace. It is therefore important to work together to
ensure that children affected by conflict can benefit
from appropriate long-term support. It is in that spirit
that Belgium organized last month in New York,
in the presence of Her Majesty Queen Mathilde, an
event promoting the sharing of best practices for the
psychosocial rehabilitation and social integration of
children in conflict.

Belgium reiterates its firm support for the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and notes with
appreciation the results of her Children, Not Soldiers
campaign, which has led all the Governments concerned
to sign action plans aimed at ending the recruitment and
use of children in national security forces. We strongly
support the efforts made to that end in the context of
peacekeeping operations, including the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in support of the capacities and
initiatives of the Governments concerned to prosecute
alleged recruiters of child soldiers.

In conclusion, we support the meticulous and
courageous work of the personnel of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict, as reflected by
the fact that Belgium is one of the main donors to that
UNICEF programme. We call on States Members to do
the same.

