Mr. Reuben (Israel) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Colombian delegation for your efforts in carrying out
the work of the Security Council during this month.

(spoke in English)

Today's debate occurs in the midst of historic
changes in the Middle East. With these changes, which
hold the promise of spreading new freedom and
prosperity in our region, we also see many challenges.
Extremists and terrorists continue to pursue the same
destructive agendas, seeking to take advantage of the
turbulence created by the transformations that are now
occurring.

Recent events in the Gaza Strip provide another
clear example of the destabilizing threat posed by these
terrorists and their patrons, bringing to light once
again, the depth of their callousness in carrying out
violent attacks that deliberately target innocent
civilians - men, women and children.

Since the beginning of March, Hamas and other
terrorist groups have launched some 92 rockets and
141 mortars at civilians throughout southern Israel, as
part of what is the most serious escalation of projectile
fire emanating from Gaza in more than two years.
There is no question about the intended targets of these
attacks. They have launched rocket after rocket at
major Israeli population centres that are home to
hundreds of thousands of people. They have struck
houses and buses, factories and farms, synagogues and
schools.

Just two weeks ago, on 7 April, Hamas members
used an anti-tank missile that they had smuggled into
the Gaza Strip to strike and completely destroy a
school bus travelling in southern Israel. This act of
terrorism injured the bus driver and fatally wounded
16-year-old Daniel Aryeh Wildfich, who passed away
this week from injuries he sustained in that attack.

As residents of New York, we all see the yellow
school buses that bring local children to school. Some
in the Hall entrust those buses to safely transport their
own children. I ask my colleagues sitting around the
table, Can you imagine how you would feel if an
anti-tank missile was deliberately fired at such a bus in
Manhattan or Brooklyn? This is the reality facing many
Israelis today. This is also the reality facing the Israeli
Government as it seeks to pursue the terrorists that
carry out these horrific attacks - terrorists who
consistently demonstrate their disregard for any
considerations of human life and basic precepts of
international law.

I am continually astonished that some in the
international community express the belief that the de
facto terrorist organization now in control of Gaza can
conduct an independent, credible and impartial
investigation into the crimes that it commits on a daily
basis. It is naive, at best, to put such faith in that
terrorist group, which time and again shows only
disdain for the universal human values on which such
an investigation would be based.

The use of an anti-tank missile to attack an Israeli
school bus reminds us of the dangerous consequences
of the continued smuggling of arms into the Gaza Strip.
Iran and Syria remain the primary sponsors of this
illegal activity, which is carried out by both land and
sea.

On March 15, Israel made the international
community aware of one recent attempt by Iran and
Syria to smuggle weapons into Gaza when three
containers carrying some 40 tons of weaponry -
including C-704 advanced anti-ship missiles - were
captured on-board the MV Victoria cargo vessel. These
containers of weapons were concealed among a cargo
of lentils and cotton, providing yet another example of
Iran and Syria's cynical and dangerous practice of
using civilian ships and airplanes to transfer weapons
to their proxies in our region. This incident reveals
only the tip of the iceberg of Iran and Syria's illegal
smuggling activities.

Unfortunately, the Security Council and the
international community do not pay appropriate
attention to the illegal smuggling of arms into Gaza -
a critical aspect of resolution 1860 (2009). In spite of
the frequent discussions held in the Security Council
about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
there has never been a serious debate in this forum

about the clear threat that arms smuggling into Gaza
poses to the security of Israel and to the stability of our
region. Every day, more Israelis are placed within the
range of terrorist rockets as a result of illegal arms
smuggling into Gaza. The alarming potential for using
these smuggled weapons to attack civilian targets in
our country continues to be demonstrated over and
over again. This month, terrorists in Gaza struck a
school bus. Next month, it may be a ship or a civilian
airliner. Israel calls on the Security Council and the
international community to devote much more
attention to the issue of arms smuggling to the Gaza
Strip and to take tangible measures to halt this illegal
activity.

On the subject of the Gaza Strip, allow me also to
draw the Council's attention to plans for a provocative
action that holds the potential to escalate conflict and
create instability in our already very fragile region. A
number of non-governmental organizations and other
groups have made public their intention to direct a
large flotilla of some 15 ships and more than 1,000
individuals to challenge Israel's naval blockade of the
Gaza Strip. This action, which seems to be planned for
the second half of May, has been organized by groups
and individuals that hold many ties to Hamas and other
terrorist organizations. Numerous participants engaged
in the planning of this flotilla have made very troubling
statements expressing their willingness to become
martyrs in this effort.

As is widely known, there are established
mechanisms through which humanitarian assistance
can be delivered to the Gaza Strip through Israel. These
channels are being used daily by United Nations
agencies and other international actors. My country
remains ready to receive such goods in the Port of
Ashdod and to transfer them to the Gaza Strip after
security inspection.

Many international leaders, including
representatives of the United Nations, have spoken out
clearly against such flotillas and about the need for
humanitarian supplies to be transferred to the Gaza
Strip only through established channels. For example,
in his briefing before the Council today and last July
(see S/PV.6363), Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Lynn Pascoe said that such convoys were not
helpful in resolving the basic economic problems in
Gaza and needlessly carried the potential for
escalation.

Many statements issued at the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting in Brussels last week offered the
same perspective, including the Chair's summary,
which called on all international supporters to make
use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza, and abstain from provocations.

The flotilla anticipated for May is clearly
designed to serve purely as a political provocation, and
not to advance any humanitarian goal. Let me stress
that Israel is not interested in confrontation. However,
we are firmly determined to enforce our naval blockade
on Gaza, which is solely intended to prevent the illicit
trafficking of arms and ammunition to the Gaza Strip
and to stop additional terrorists from infiltrating the
area.

Israel calls on the United Nations and all
members of the international community to speak with
a clear and resolute voice against this new provocation
and to take all necessary measures to prevent it from
occurring.

Israel continues to implement significant measures
to improve life for Palestinians on the ground. In the
West Bank, my Government is working closely with the
Palestinian Authority to promote economic growth and
institution-building. Since the beginning of 2010, Israel
has removed more than two thirds of the roadblocks in
the West Bank and expanded its professional dialogue
with the Palestinian Authority in a variety of areas.
These and other measures helped to grow the West Bank
economy by approximately 8 per cent over the course of
2010, prompting a consistent rise in the area's standard
of living.

In spite of the fact that Palestinian terrorists
continue to launch attacks against Israeli towns from
the Gaza Strip, Israel has taken significant steps to
improve life for the area's residents. For instance,
Israel has put in place new arrangements and
mechanisms to usher in a substantial increase in the
quantities and variety of products available for import
and export, which have helped grow the Gaza Strip
economy by approximately 15 per cent over the course
of 2010.

An average of 159 truckloads of supplies were
delivered to Gaza daily during the second half of 2010,
which was nearly double the number of truckloads that
were delivered during the first half of the year. Israel
has also established a new joint coordination and
supervision mechanism to move forward international
humanitarian projects in the Gaza Strip overseen by
third parties, such as the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the United Nations Development Programme. As
of the beginning of March, Israel had approved 121
such projects in Gaza, in a wide range of fields, such as
education and water and sewage infrastructure. We
have facilitated the transfer of more than 55,000 tons
of building materials for use in those projects since the
beginning of 2010.

As I have done in the Council before, I reiterate
Israel's call to the Palestinians to rejoin us in direct
negotiations without delay; for it is clear that peace can
only be achieved through direct negotiations. It cannot
be imposed from the outside. Any lasting peace
agreement must be built on the core principles of
mutual recognition and security. As Israel's President
Shimon Peres made clear to United Nations
Ambassadors during his visit to New York this month,
we need solutions, not resolutions.

I urge all members of the Council to consider that
in just the past two months Israelis have witnessed
hundreds of projectiles fired at our communities from
Gaza, the brutal murder of five members of the Fogel
family in Itamar and the explosion of a bomb at a bus
stop in the centre of Jerusalem, which killed a woman
from the United Kingdom and injured some 50 other
people. Those are just a few examples of the complex
security challenges that Israel continues to face on a
daily basis, which must be addressed in any future
peace agreement.

Security, however, is not the only obstacle to
peace. Enjoying lasting peace will also require that we
build a culture of mutual understanding and tolerance,
based on clear recognition of both peoples' right to
exist. Israel's commitment to recognizing a future
Palestinian State must be met with an equal
acknowledgement that Israel is the Jewish State for the
Jewish people. The Palestinian leadership must be
unambiguous in its recognition of my nation's right to
exist and take real steps to prepare its population to
live side by side with Israelis. They must also show
their commitment to peace by accepting
responsibilities and not just demanding rights, meeting
directly with Israeli leaders, who are just minutes
away, to get down to the real work of negotiating two
States for two peoples.
This week the Jewish people are observing the
holiday of Passover, during which we remember our
deliverance from slavery thousands of years ago and
reaffirm our commitment to the importance of freedom
for all people. However, this year, as we cherish our
own freedom, Israelis continue to hope and pray for the
freedom of our kidnapped soldier, Gilad Shalit. Israel
remains deeply concerned about Gilad's continued
captivity and the fact that he has been deprived of his
most basic human rights, including any visit from the
Red Cross, for nearly five years. The international
community must do all in its power - and more than
has been done thus far - to bring about his swift

release.

