Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we congratulate you on the coming
40 years and on your effective and lucid diplomacy.
Argentina would also particularly like to commend
the Russian Federation because tomorrow, 12 June, is
Russia Day. We very much hope that your delegation
will enjoy an excellent day for the country's celebration.

In Argentina, the saying "Will the last one to leave
please turn off the light" may perhaps be conveyed by
the Secretariat to the Secretary-General. We very much
appreciate his briefing and wish him a happy birthday
on 13 June. May he have a pleasant trip inaugurating
the World Cup in the sisterly Federative Republic of
Brazil.

I would also request the Jordanian delegation to
transmit to our dear colleague, Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein, that the opening ideas of his statement were,
as usual, very good but that, when rituals are repeated,
they frequently become myths. And myths, at a certain
point, wind up more real than reality. Although we have
myths about peacekeeping operations, 1 will address
some of the realities mentioned by my colleague.

I would first like to acknowledge the stimulating
concept note submitted by the Russian Presidency on
new trends in peacekeeping operations (S/2014/384, annex), which runs along the same lines as what we
have been discussing, both with respect to the various
draft resolutions on peacekeeping operations and to the
Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
as well as in the broader realm of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly
(C-34).

With respect to the recent shift in the mandates of
several African missions, in particular the creation of
an intervention brigade within the framework of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which was authorized in order to implement
certain peacekeeping tasks, while the principles of
peacekeeping are clearly defined and well known, my
country is concerned, as are other Member States, that
recent practice seems to contradict those principles.

To put it in more colloquial terms, we cannot use
the United Nations to wage war through other means.
Our responsibility is to maintain international peace
and security. Let us recall the recent recognition of
the growing need for peacekeeping missions to be
endowed with effective mandates that enable them
to act in operations involving increased risk and
unconventional threats. Nonetheless, we understand
that the peacekeeping system was not conceived to
impose peace, nor is it prepared to do so. We therefore
encourage this Organization and all its bodies to debate
and clearly define what we mean by "robust mandates".

In that regard, while we view as positive the trend
for the Organization to oversee the command, control
and financing of missions that require, in exceptional
cases, that peace be imposed, we believe that the
characteristics of an appropriate and effective tool
for such exceptional tasks should be derived from a
broad, overdue debate involving all Member States on
peacekeeping and the use of force by this Organization
and should not be the result of a fait accompli.

We believe that we should not disregard the
principles of the peacekeeping system that we have
worked so hard to build and that we should not put at
risk the safety of United Nations personnel deployed in
our missions on the ground, to whom, as have others,
I offer the homage and recognition of my country,
Argentina.

In that regard, after listening to other statements, the
point is that those of us from countries that contribute
troops and police should not be afraid that our citizens
from the military and police, whether male or female,
might suffer harm. No. They have been trained as

effective and solid professionals to act in exceptional
situations in which violence is very much part of the
environment. So let us be clear. These are not physical
education or kindergarten teachers. They are military
and police professionals. But our Organization cannot
deal with and increasing number of situations of risk
and violence without taking care to be effective in
designing its mandates, its rules of engagement and the
security contexts in which the men and women of the
countries that provide troops and police are being asked
to exercise their profession as soldiers and police. In
other words, let us not add further risks to the inherent
risk. That, I believe, is the message that the countries
that contribute troops and police have been saying all
along.

With respect to unmanned drones and the use of
new technologies in peacekeeping missions, we believe
that these new technologies can bring important
capabilities to peacekeeping operations, so long as they
are evaluated, on a case by case basis, with a view to their
use in observation under the control of the Organization
with strict respect for the norms that guide us. In that
context, I would like to reiterate the demand that was
made in the framework of the C-34. We want and hope
to receive further information from the Secretariat
with regard to the use of such technologies, including
lessons learned in the confidential treatment of the
information obtained, as well as on improvements in
the safety of deployed personnel, the understanding of
the operational situation and the protection of civilians.

New technologies cannot be developed out of thin
air. They cannot be allowed to proliferate without
regulation. Ifin this Organization we managed to adopt
a non-proliferation treaty as an international legal
framework -- still not quite universal -- how could we
not work out a regulatory agreement that obligates all
States to agree on the ethical and legal bases that will
enable the reliable, efficient use of new technologies?

We believe that inter-mission cooperation, to which
the Presidency's brilliant concept note also refers, should
not be a substitute for the appropriate implementation
and planning of a peacekeeping mission. We should
ensure that such cooperation does not affect the
fulfilment of the sending mission's mandate, and that
it should be appropriately integrated by the receiving
mission. That includes the challenge of maintaining
sufficient budgetary discipline, which is necessary in
such cases, with particular regard for the principle that
no loans between active missions are allowed, as well
as the rule that stipulates that the costs of inter-mission
cooperation should be borne by the receiving mission.

Such considerations lead us, in conclusion, to
the issue of financing for peacekeeping missions. We
have observed a negative tendency to broaden the
complexity of mandates without providing them with
the financial resources necessary for their appropriate
implementation. We insist that the matter of financial
allocations to peacekeeping missions constitutes a
political issue and not a simple budgetary question,
since it affects the effectiveness and the credibility of
the whole Organization.
Argentina believes that the future of peacekeeping
operations depends on their having clear and
adequately financed mandates. For that to be the case,
we need to continue to be able to count on the necessary
consensus in the General Assembly, so that the efforts
of the troop-contributing countries are met by an
analogous commitment on the part of those countries
with greater financial responsibilities. The successful
implementation of the various tasks specified in the
peacekeeping mandates shines a spotlight on the
effectiveness of those expenditures, in particular if we
compare the lean budget of around $8 thousand million
available for all peacekeeping operations with the
enormous cost of global military expenditures.

Finally, the growing tendency to include aspects
of peacebuilding in the mandates of our peacekeeping
missions has transformed our peacekeepers into early
peace builders. We consider that to be one of the most
significant developments in peacekeeping operations
in recent years. It is in fact essential in order to
prevent countries from falling back into conflict and
to enable peacekeeping operations to function with a
platform that allows for the protection of human rights,
development, gender equality, and the consolidation of
democracy and the rule of law.

I cannot conclude my remarks without making
an observation about the fact that we put ever more
responsibility on specific sectors within the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Argentina agrees that
they should cover the areas of human rights, the
humanitarian efforts, the equality of women and the
protection of children. But What often happens when
we are on the ground is that we come to see that we
should look strategically at how to conduct operations.
Instead of piling more responsibilities onto a particular
area, we should think about how we can coordinate and
articulate them so that they dovetail with the various
agencies in the United Nations system and with the
capacities we have in regional, subregional and national
organizations. Because what happens? Superimposition
and disconnectedness do not help promote peace, and
what helps even less is competition between entities
and organizations - competition for resources and
a feudalization of their agendas. We should all work
together cooperatively, not with the logic of the market
but with a culture of peacekeeping.

