Mr. Bonser (Canada): Canada is proud to have
co-sponsored resolution 2341 (2017) today.

Terrorist groups are evolving, and we need to
continue to work to understand their strategies in order
to protect our populations. For example, as Da'esh
faces losses in Iraq and Syria, it is transforming from
a territory-based entity into a global virtual network.
Foreign terrorist fighters still loyal to D'aesh and with
training and battlefield experience pose a renewed
threat as they move to new locations. The threat of lone
actors inspired by violent extremist ideologies persists.
As terrorists seek to impose maximum damage in
new areas of operation, critical infrastructure is a
vulnerable target.

Attacks on physical assets, information-technology
systems, networks and services essential to health,
safety and security can be devastating in terms of loss
of life and the harm they can cause to the collective
economic well-being and the erosion of the public's
sense of safety. Attacks that succeed in inflicting great
harm and damage also bolster the propaganda efforts
of terrorist groups. Member States must work together
in a coordinated effort to respond to that aspect of
the global terrorist threat as an integrated part of
our collective efforts. We therefore welcome today's
resolution, presented by Ukraine, which encourages
Member States to develop or further improve their
strategies for reducing risks to critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks.

In our national context, Canada is working to
leverage our critical infrastructure networks to share
information and strengthen our resilience against
terrorist attacks. Canada's national strategy and
action plan for critical infrastructure establishes
a collaborative federal, provincial and territorial
approach to the security of the critical infrastructure
sector so as to mitigate the full range ofrisks and threats
facing Canada's vital assets and systems. The national
strategy aims to build partnerships, implement an all-
hazards risk-management approach and to advance the
timely sharing and protection of information among
partners. Ultimately, protecting our vital assets and
systems from threats demands a cooperative approach
across a broad range of stakeholders at every level.

(spoke in French)

We underscore the need for legal and regulatory
frameworks to address this threat and encourage
United Nations agencies to incorporate that into
their needs assessments aimed at supporting Member
States' capacity-building efforts. We appreciate the
resolution's language reinforcing the protection of
critical infrastructure as part of a holistic national/
global counter-terrorism strategy that balances vital
security concerns with rights and freedoms. Canada
wholeheartedly endorses cooperation in that area
within and among Member States at all levels. We
firmly support the resolution.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to underscore
Canada's strengthened commitment to inclusion and
diversity, following the massacre targeting a mosque in
Quebec City that killed six Canadians this past January.
As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said at the 2 February
funeral service for three of the Victims,

"We will combat all extremism in any form and
we will be there for all citizens and protect their
fundamental freedoms - the freedoms of religion
and of conscience - so that anyone can fulfil
their destiny"

in complete security.

