Mr. Otto (Palau): Palau would like to congratulate
New Zealand on its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and to thank it for convening
this important open debate on the peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States (SIDS).

We would like to acknowledge the presence
of the leaders who have come from all the capitals
of the SIDS countries for this important event. We
associate ourselves with the statements delivered by the
representative of Tonga, on behalf of the Pacific SIDS,
and by the Foreign Secretary of the Maldives, on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States, to which I would
like to add this statement in my national capacity.

Palau shares all the issues discussed by the
leaders who have spoken today, ranging from issues
of governance such as money-laundering and illicit
financial flows to syndicate criminal activities.
We have our share of trafficking and drug use, of
non-communicable diseases and HIV/AIDS. Illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing continues unabated,
bringing the risk of food insecurity.

All of those problems have the potential to
destabilize and bring unrest to our communities, but
the one we wish to see on the Security Council's agenda
is the impact of climate change, because it deserves to
be addressed here and now. When whole nations are
swallowed by the sea, there is potential for unrest.
When an entire population is forced to migrate or
become refugees, either as one group in one place or
several groups in several places, peace becomes elusive
and the potential for unrest and conflict becomes real.
Palau has low-lying atoll islands that are at risk of being
swallowed by rising sea levels and are in that category,
with the potential for the absence of peace and the
presence of conflict.

We therefore join our leaders in urging the Security
Council to consider the impact of climate change as a
real threat to peace and security that it should address
by adding it to its agenda now, as we heard the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and the Minister of
International Development Cooperation of Sweden
advocate earlier. Additionally, the Council can continue
to encourage all Member States to arrive at a strong,
legally binding agreement on climate change in Paris,
as we have heard many members say today, including
the representative of the Netherlands just a few minutes
ago.

To summarize, as the concept note (S/2015/543, annex) says, understanding the role that the Council
and the United Nations system can play in working
with small island developing States to address these
challenges will be important to preventing future
conflicts and maintaining international peace and
security. Palau urges the Security Council to put the
threat that climate change poses to small island States'
peace and security on its agenda.

Before I leave, I would like to emphasize that peace
and security are important to Palau and, small as we
are, we do participate in international peacekeeping
activities in the Sudan and Darfur. As Members of
the United Nations community, we will continue to do
our part to ensure that peace and good mental health
and well-being will continue for all people all over the
world. Finally, we would like to thank the Security
Council, as well as all of our partners, for their work
and assistance, as well as for the further assistance
commitments that were made today.

