Allow me first of all to thank Judge Carmel Agius and Mr. Serge Brammertz, the President and Prosecutor of the international mechanism to carry out the residual functions of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. My delegation commends the Mechanism for the swift precautionary measures taken to protect its staff and all detainees and to ensure the continuity of its activities in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that regard, I would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Mechanism for the loss of life among its security personnel in Arusha due to the virus. It goes without saying that the Residual Mechanism has contributed not only to fighting against impunity, but also to preventing and deterring the commission of new crimes, promoting reconciliation and responding to the aspiration to justice of victims and their families. However, the objectives set for the Mechanism can be achieved only if it has adequate financial means, as well as assistance from the Member States of the United Nations in effectively implementing its mandate. My delegation therefore calls on Member States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism, as required under resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December. In that regard, I would like to commend the French authorities, the other law enforcement agencies and the Mechanism for the actions that led to the recent arrest of Mr. Felicien Kabuga, indicted by the ICTR in 2011 for genocide and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in Rwanda in 1994. The report (S/2020/309, annex) shows that the Mechanism has implemented most of the recommendations made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in 2018 and 2019 and has achieved the goal of gender parity in the functions of the Mechanism at several levels. It also shows that the methods of the Office of the Prosecutor are in line with the expectations of the Security Council as outlined in resolution 2422 (2018) of 27 June 2018. Therefore, the Mechanism deserves praise and encouragement for all the progress made in the implementation of its mandate. My delegation appreciates the efforts of the Mechanism to guarantee the fundamental rights of convicted persons and takes note of the significant progress made in the areas of administration, the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses and the management of archives. In closing, my delegation would like to reiterate its encouragement to all the staff of the Mechanism and, with regard to the completion of the remaining proceedings, to urge the Mechanism to ensure that fair trials are held with respect for due process and the human rights of the accused. I would also like to commend Viet Nam, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, and the Office of Legal Affairs for the coordination between the Council and the Mechanism. We look forward to the adoption of the draft resolution renewing the mandate of the mechanism and reappointing the judges in the days to come in order for this important work to continue and for justice to prevail.
