Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): Let me start by extending
my appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, in the
discussions in the Council on the serious and growing
problem of civilians in armed conflict.

 

I should also like to join the others who this morning
welcomed Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). I wish
to take this opportunity to express Japan's continuing
support for the worthy work that the ICRC is carrying out
around the globe under his able leadership.

Today, I shall not dwell upon our basic recognition
that the majority of victims in an armed conflict are
civilians - mainly women and children - as this has been
articulated by many others in the previous debates in the
Council; nor shall I comment here on all the interrelated
and valuable recommendations that are about to be adopted
by the Council. Rather, I should like to try to shed some
light on today's theme by discussing how to respond to the
plight of internally displaced persons.

The displacement of civilians is a matter of
international peace and security, since peace, reconciliation
and reconstruction in war-torn communities depend, at least
in part, on their effective reintegration. Moreover, if
unaddressed, internal displacement not only causes internal
instability but may also spill across borders and upset
external and regional stability.

I should like now to express Japan's views on how to
address the issue of internally displaced persons by
stressing the following two basic points.

First, Japan supports the approach taken by Mr.
Francis Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons, which is based on the belief
that sovereignty is responsibility. Under that approach,
through analysis and dialogue with Government and
agencies in the field, the international community would
jointly try to solve the problem. When a given Government
is not in a position to completely fulfil its responsibility -
for political, economic, or other reasons - then the
international community can come in to help, with the
consent and understanding of that Government. Japan
believes that such an approach should be strongly enhanced,
and in this context Japan is considering extending some
financial support to facilitate Mr. Deng's worthy efforts.

My second point pertains to how better to respond to
the issue of persons displaced by armed conflicts. If you
recall, in the Council last January Ambassador Holbrooke,
of the United States, made an eloquent case for the need to
address a displaced population that remains within the
borders of a State wrecked by conflicts. His suggestion that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) might play a wider role in the response
to the issue of internally displaced persons triggered an
intense debate in the international community on how to
address this pressing subject. The realities in the growing
number of cases of displacement and the activities of
humanitarian agencies both suggest that the protection
aspect of the response towards internally displaced
persons has clearly been weak.

Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, has responded to Ambassador Holbrooke's
suggestion with a qualified "yes". According to her, in
such cases where refugees and internally displaced
persons are generated by the same causes, or where
refugees have sought asylum across borders in areas
where there are also internally displaced persons, UNHCR
would be able to utilize its expertise and skills to protect
the displaced persons. This, in our eyes, and in the eyes
of the international community, I believe, would be a very
encouraging sign that the need to protect civilians affected
by armed conflict is meeting with a better response. This
is so because it would mean efficient use of limited
resources, as well as avoiding layers of bureaucracy.

It is also encouraging to know that efforts towards
greater coordination on the humanitarian front are being
made by the United Nations and relevant organizations.
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee, chaired by the
International Red Cross, is pursuing more accountability
in the international response to internally displaced
persons. I shall not go into detail here on the desirable
institutional arrangements that have been under
deliberation, and recently with greater intensity. What
should be kept in mind, however, when undertaking this
exercise is that there is no model method for protecting
civilians caught in an armed conflict. Each conflict has a
different historical and geographical background, and the
pattern of activities by United Nations agencies and other
international bodies differs in each conflict and each post-
conflict situation. Whichever body has the most
value-added expertise, and whichever is well placed in the
field, should be designated as being accountable. A
coherent and comprehensive response by all actors -
including better protection, assistance and economic
recovery for internally displaced persons - needs to be
pursued effectively.
I should like to conclude by expressing the readiness
of my Government to actively take part in the effort by
the international community to seek ways to address the
issue of displacement. When effective methods are
agreed, you can be assured, Mr. President, of J apan's full
support and cooperation.

 

