Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I will deliver a short
version of my statement. However, a copy of the longer
version will be circulated to members of the Security
Council.

We congratulate Uruguay on its membership of
the Security Council and presidency this month, and
on having convened today's important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

We meet at a critical moment witnessing the
immense suffering of millions of civilians in conflicts
around the world, particularly in the Middle East, where
civilians are bearing the highest toll of armed conflict
in all forms, including foreign occupation. That toll has
compelled the largest movement of refugees since the
Second World War, with grave humanitarian, social,
economic, psychological and security consequences for
the children, women and men whose fate it is to become
refugees, as well as for the countries in conflict,
receiving countries and the international community as
awhole.

The Palestinian people - including the 5.5 million
Palestine refugees who constitute the most protracted
refugee crisis in the world - know all too well the pain
and tragedy of such turmoil and dislocation as they
continue to suffer the injustices of the 1948 Nakba and
to endure the brutality of Israel's illegal, belligerent
occupation for nearly a half century. Their suffering
persists due not only to the failure to achieve a just
solution to the conflict, despite countless United Nations
resolutions, but also to the international community's
failure to uphold international humanitarian law in the
face of grave breaches and to ensure the protection of
civilians until such a solution has been realized.

The intent of those who drafted the Geneva
Conventions and Additional Protocols was clear. It was
to ensure protection to civilians in situations of armed
conflict and minimize their vulnerability and suffering.
Yet, the tragedy of civilians in armed conflict persists
due to lack of respect for international humanitarian
law in too many circumstances and the failure to hold
accountable the perpetrators of violations and grave
breaches, including Israel, the occupying Power, which
continues to cause harm and suffering to the Palestinian
people with absolute impunity.

We have repeatedly appealed for protection for the
Palestinian people, notjust in the recent period but over
the decades as our people have endured immeasurable
oppression and cruelty under Israeli occupation,
including the killing and injury of civilians in military
raids, air strikes, bombardments and terror attacks
across the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, detention, imprisonment, abuse and torture,
forced displacement and transfer, an illegal blockade
and other severe measures of collective punishment.
The deplorable situation is corroborated by numerous
United Nations reports, including the Secretary-
General's recent annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), which documents the devastating
impact of the Israeli occupation on Palestinian children
and their extreme vulnerability. Yet, over the decades
and despite the Security Council's own calls for
protection, Palestinian civilians have been deprived
of effective protection from such systematic violations
and crimes.

As far back as 1987, the Security Council, in
resolution 605 (1987), took into account "the need
to consider measures for the impartial protection
of the Palestinian civilian population under Israeli
occupation" and requested the Secretary-General to
examine the situation and report "on ways and means
for ensuring the safety and protection of the Palestinian
civilians under Israeli occupation". Regrettably, the
recommendations contained in the report of 21 January
1988 (S/ 19443) were never implemented due to Israel's
rejection of resolution 605 (1987) and the lack of
political will to hold it to account and insist on its
respect for international humanitarian law, to ensure
protection of the civilians under its occupation.

Resolution 605 (1987) was followed by other
relevant resolutions calling for respect for international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
in particular resolution 904 (1994), in which the Council,
expressing grave concern at the Palestinian casualties
and underlining "the need to provide protection and
security for the Palestinian people", called for

"measures to be taken to guarantee the safety and
protection of the Palestinian civilians throughout
the occupied territory, including, inter alia, a
temporary international or foreign presence"
(resolution 904 (1994), para. 3).

Reaffirmations of the obligations of the occupying
Power under international humanitarian law, including
the obligation to ensure the safety and well-being of
the Palestinian civilian population, were repeatedly
made thereafter by the Council, the General Assembly,
conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and successive United
Nations High Commissioners for Human Rights,
including Ms. Mary Robinson, who in 2001 stressed
that,

"[t]he protection of the victim should be the
overriding concern of the United Nations and its
agencies and programmes Protection needs to be
accorded to the people of the occupied territories
in strict compliance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention".

All of that has been to no avail. Although the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, a small,
unarmed international civilian contingent, was deployed
in 1997 and continues to provide a limited protective
presence in the city, the violations faced by Palestinian
civilians have never ceased and continue to the present
day, only with greater intensity and impunity. The
impact of the violations on civilians has been immense,
with countless lives ruined and generations lost,
underscoring the need for the enhanced and effective
protection of the Palestinian people. The international
community has clear responsibilities, particularly the
Council and the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which must be upheld. Protection
should not be viewed as unreasonable or unimaginable
by any party that respects the law and human rights
and seeks peace. Civilians - children, women and
men - must not be used as cannon fodder, and all
efforts must be made to spare them the atrocities of war
and protect their lives.

The United Nations special responsibilities were
underscored, inter alia, in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which stresses
that

"[t]he protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a core principle of international humanitarian law
and a moral responsibility for the United Nations"
(S/2015/446, para. 82),

and decries the systemic constraints, including the
lack of consensus among Security Council members,
that have prevented United Nations action in efforts
to address the protection needs of civilians in many
conflicts.

In that connection, we also highlight the essential
role that can be played by humanitarian organizations,
as well as civil society, in providing a protective
civilian presence. In Palestine, we recognize the
important contributions, in that regard, made by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies providing assistance and protection to the
most vulnerable, including children, and the work
of civil society. The latter includes, for example, a
programme run by the World Council of Churches that
provides protective escorts for our civilians, and we
urgently call for the enhancement of such efforts. We
call on the Secretary-General, in particular, to urgently
explore and mobilize United Nations capabilities in that
regard, in line with international humanitarian law.

Moreover, the United Nations study reviewing
protection regimes (S/2015/809, annex), which was
requested of the Secretary-General by President
Mahmoud Abbas and which was presented by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council in October,
provides important precedents that should be fully
considered, along with other relevant reports aimed at
strengthening the Council's ability to address protection
needs in conflicts throughout the world. That study,
containing several dozen pages, was not circulated
to the members of the Security Council for them to
shelve away. It was circulated rather for them to study,
consider and draw conclusions with regard to practical
steps to provide protection for the Palestinian people.
For the Palestinian people, that call is more urgent than
ever in an unsustainable and dangerous situation that
continues to require sustained international attention
and action. We implore the international community,
and foremost the Security Council, to rise to the
challenge and act to protect civilians and uphold human
rights in Palestine and everywhere else in the world,
where innocent civilians are suffering in conflicts, and
to restore credibility to international humanitarian law
and to the Council itself.

