Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Sir, my delegation
wishes to extend its congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. We have full confidence that under your wise
guidance, progress will be made in dealing with the issues
on its agenda. Let me also extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Arnoldo Listre of Argentina, for
his skilful stewardship of the Council's activities last
month.

Indonesia wishes to commend the delegation of
Bangladesh for its initiative to have the Council consider
the agenda item before us. We believe that it is both
timely and appropriate and that it will be beneficial not
only to the international community but also to the
countries directly concerned.

The report of the Secretary-General has rightly
focused our attention on the complexities of the
interrelated issues involved and on the role of
peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. The report also makes clear the crucial role
of international assistance in ensuring the effective
implementation of the agreements reached and the
marshalling of resources needed to advance the peace
process.

 

The international dimension of these activities should
focus on the role of the United Nations and of regional
organizations in their respective spheres of competence.
Their involvement within a framework for cooperation will
have a salutary impact by bringing a measure of stability,
which, as experience has shown, has led in some instances
to the restoration of normalcy in troubled areas. But first
and foremost, the success of these endeavours depends
ultimately on the willingness of the parties involved to
abide by the terms of the peace agreements and to give up
the use of force, which is a sine qua non for launching the
three-pronged approach of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

Moreover, the handing over of weapons to competent
authorities and the ensuing demobilization have positive
implications for security in post-conflict situations,
especially in ensuring and promoting the peace process. We
recognize the importance of creating an atmosphere
conducive to security by disarming the combatants and
collecting armaments from civilians within the framework
of an overall weapon-collection programme, so as to
promote an environment in which weapons are no longer
perceived to be necessary.

It is poignant to note that 300,000 children under the
age of 18 have been used as soldiers in conflicts around the
world. It is alarming to note that such activities are on the
increase, which calls attention to the need for their
demobilization and reintegration into society. Their future
is in jeopardy due to limited educational opportunities,
which alone can prepare them for productive careers. It is
self-evident that more needs to be done to ensure them a
rightful place in society through adequate support
programmes.

Special attention should be paid to child soldiers in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
Bearing in mind the vulnerability of children, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers should be pursued in a specific manner. As
conflicts are resolved, their rights, as stipulated in the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, should immediately
be restored, protected and promoted. Their reintegration
into their family and society is crucial. First priority should
be given to school education for them.

Another important issue is curbing the flow of arms
across national borders through clandestine means after
disarmament is achieved, as it would have a profoundly
negative impact on security and portend a potentially
explosive situation. Determined and coordinated efforts at
the national, regional and international levels can stem the
cross-border flow of weapons.

Finally, the question of adequate financing needs to
be addressed to ensure the implementation of programmes
for the reintegration and reconstruction of a damaged
economy. This calls for the distribution of financial
assistance on a fair and equitable basis between the ex-
combatants and the civilian population, many of whom
also face extreme economic hardship.

The complexity and multidimensional nature of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants call for political will, which is of the utmost
importance in bolstering the role of the United Nations
through the modality of peacekeeping. We believe that,
based on the Organization's experience in various
conflicts, it is time to approach these issues on the basis
of guidelines to be drawn from the Secretary-General's
report.

