Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Sweden on joining
the Security Council for a two-year mandate. I also
congratulate the Swedish delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I would like to
wish all States Members ofthe United Nations a year of
peace and security, one in which our populations leave
war and terrorism - terrorism that rages around the
world * behind.

I would also like to thank Sweden for convening
today's open debate on an important subject, namely,
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would also
like to congratulate the other new members of the
Council - Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan.
We wish them every success in the Council and in
upholding the values ofpeace and security. I would also
like to thank Spain for the excellent manner in which it
presided over the Council last month.

Terrorism is carried out by international terrorist
organizations such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front. It
leads to instability and an absence ofpeace. It also leads
to armed conflicts around the world. Da'esh and other
terrorist groups having seized large areas of territory in
Iraq, Syria and Libya, and have taken terrorism to a new
level. They, along with other terrorist organizations,
are attaining ever-greater capacity. They have powerful
modern weapons and know the secrets of technology,
which they make use of to gain supporters and recruit
foreign terrorist fighters, as well as to propagate their
extremist and violent ideology.

No country is immune from those dangers. Iraq
remains in a state of war against all of those terrorist
groups, which have gravely threatened peace in our
country. Despite the process of reconstruction in our
country, basic services have been in decline. Economic
and social indicators, in particular on health care, are
in free fall. Poverty is increasing. There are also waves
of internal displacement. The number of casualties
is growing. Terrorism has increased the feeling of
insecurity and has led to upheaval. That, in turn, also
impedes socioeconomic growth in our country. All of
that has led to setbacks in the gains that have been made
by our country in terms of sustainable development.

A functioning society is essential for peace
and security. We must therefore leave behind all
forms of violence and terrorism, as well as conflicts,
traditional warfare and organized crime, in order to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals. Transparent
democracy, the rule of law and good governance are the
preconditions for a peaceful society. The only way to
achieve a peaceful way of living is to create a context
in which the various political currents can discuss how
to change society. We also need the public to be able
to participate in the decision-making process. The
public should have access to the essential information
that it needs. Indeed, the participation of the public
is one of the pillars of a peaceful society. We need to
end exclusion because that will allow us to combat
financial and administrative corruption and strengthen
development.

We can have sustainable peace only if there is
consensus within our societies. With that in mind,
my Government has adopted a range of legislative
enactments to strengthen national unity and reinforce
the trust of all of the Iraqi people. We are determined to
continue our national project and create an environment
that favours dialogue, which will allow us to strengthen
the feeling of national ownership in a political process
involving all of the national stakeholders, be they
religious or ethnic. In that way, we will be able to
maintain the security and stability of the country.

In conclusion, international efforts to help Iraq in
its fight against terrorism can be seen as part of our
collective responsibility to address terrorism at the
international level. Aware of the danger that local
terrorism can cross borders, our activities now reach
beyond the national to the continental level. That is how
we will contribute to maintaining international peace
and security.

More than ever, Iraq requires the support of the
international community to help to rebuild cities
that have been liberated, ensure stability and allow
internally displaced persons to return to their homes.
We also need to mitigate the effects of the war against
terrorism around the world. Furthermore, we encourage
all countries to respect the Security Council resolutions
on the fight against terrorism and to cut off the sources
of terrorist financing.

