Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico welcomes Mr. Valentin Inzko and
thanks him for introducing his report (S/2009/588*).

My delegation also welcomes the participation of
Mr. Nikola Spirie in this meeting. We welcome him
and congratulate him on the election of his country as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council
starting 2010. We believe that the election of his
country to the Security Council is a demonstration of
the confidence vested by the international community
in the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the role
that it can play to foster regional stability.

Mexico believes that if lasting peace and stability
are to prevail in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the various
political forces of the country must give new impetus
to their dialogue and mutual understanding and
demonstrate the political will to achieve true progress
in the remaining aspects of the peace process.

In that regard, we note with concern that the
report of the High Representative continues to portray
a polarized political environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that has hampered the work of State
institutions, reduced the leeway to achieve the
necessary implementation of the Peace Agreement. We
again call on all actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
redouble their efforts to meet the outstanding
commitments and to keep channels open for dialogue
and negotiations in order to resolve their differences
and avoid actions that could jeopardize the stability of
the country.

We therefore welcome the joint initiative of the
European Union and United States Government to
promote domestic political dialogue in order to
facilitate and accelerate institutional reform. We trust
that such initiatives will contribute to the establishment
of the conditions necessary to progress in reaching
agreements on pending issues.

My delegation emphasizes the importance of the
international community's ongoing support for the
endeavours of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to strengthen the rule of law. The United
Nations, like other organizations on the ground, must
continue to play a key role through its firm support in
such areas as the training of police officers, lawyers
and judges, and capacity-building to resolve civil law
disputes, including those on property rights. My
delegation also encourages the State authorities to step
up their action to implement the National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy and the National Justice Sector
Reform Strategy.

We trust that the endeavours to establish a central
database on war crimes cases and greater regional
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
neighbouring countries to determine jurisdictional
responsibilities will contribute to progress in these
Strategies, as will greater cooperation with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
These actions are critical if the region is to turn the
final page on conflict and regional division.

One of the outstanding issues of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which we believe requires priority
attention, pertains to the situation of about 120,000
internally displaced persons who still cannot return to
their homes due to unfavourable conditions on the
ground. It is therefore important to achieve the
necessary political consensus to comply with the
provisions of annex 7 of the Peace Agreement, which
refers to the establishment of a strategy for the return
of displaced persons and refugees, supporting the
rebuilding of houses, the return of property and the
provision of necessary services.
Reintegration is a vital step towards national
reconciliation. The needs of displaced persons must be
explicitly addressed within a legal framework
providing guarantees for the safe return of refugees.

There is no denying that a favourable economic and
political context would contribute to meeting the short-
term humanitarian needs of these vulnerable groups of
people and to ensuring their safe return under optimal
conditions in the medium and long term. This would
contribute to ensuring genuine national reconciliation
and integration and lasting peace.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate my
country's support for the work of the High
Representative and our hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will overcome its differences and
consolidate a democratic and multiethnic State where
its citizens, like those of the entire Balkan region, will
be able to enjoy a more stable and more prosperous
future as an essential part of integrated European
institutions and organizations.

