The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing. China also listened carefully to the
statements by the observer of Palestine and by the
representative of Israel.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue and the main source of problems in
the region. It is also a gauge for international fairness
and justice. The international community should
proceed from the need to maintain peace and stability
in the Middle East and the world, maintain a long-term
vision, promote a political settlement of the question
of Palestine by addressing both the symptoms and the
root causes of the conflict, safeguard the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people, keep the
situation between Palestine and Israel from getting out
of control and prevent the Middle East from sliding into
a broader crisis.

China is a staunch supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people and an active mediator for peace
between Palestine and Israel. Last week, China received
a visit by President Abbas of Palestine. In his talks
with President Abbas, President Xi Jinping made four
proposals related to the promotion of the settlement of
the question of Palestine under the new circumstances.

First, he emphasized the importance of a firmly
advanced political settlement based on the two-State
solution. The two-State solution best fits the reality
on the ground and is the most universally accepted
option. The parties concerned must continue to work
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. They must also persist in negotiations for
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
question of Palestine. China firmly supports the two-
State solution and supports the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine with full sovereignty,
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We will, as always, play a constructive role
for the settlement of the question of Palestine.

Secondly, President Xi Jinping proposed adopting
the concept of common, integrated, cooperative and
sustainable security. Palestine and Israel are neighbours
that cannot be separated. The security of the two
countries requires them to cooperate, work together
and support each other so as to build common security
through joint efforts. China calls for the effective
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). There must
be an immediate cessation of all settlement activities
on the occupied territories and an immediate adoption
of measures to prevent violence against civilians. We
also call for an early resumption of peace talks in
order to expedite a political solution to the question of
Palestine, and thereby fundamentally achieve common
and lasting security.

Thirdly, President Xi Jinping called for further
coordinating the efforts of the international community
and strengthening synergy in the interest of peace.
For some time now, the international community
has increased its attention regarding the question of
Palestine. The parties concerned have conducted active
diplomatic efforts to promote the relaunching of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel. The international
community should further strengthen coordination and
come up with peace-promotion measures that entail
joint participation. China is willing to join and support
all efforts that are favourable to the political settlement
of the question of Palestine. China plans to hold a
workshop for peace activities in 2017 for Palestine
and Israel in order to provide them with ideas for the
settlement of the question of Palestine.

Fourthly, it is necessary to take integrated
measures in order to promote peace via development.
While promoting political talks, attention should be
given to development, especially to the enhancement of
the capacities of Palestine for economic development.
China views both Palestine and Israel as important
partners in the Belt Road initiative. China is willing
to work under the concept of development for peace in
order to promote Palestine and Israel in engaging in
mutually beneficial cooperation, keep open channels
for such cooperation and continue to support Palestine
to expedite is development. That will help strengthen
the basis of peace and harmony and reduce factors that
disrupt the peace talks between the two sides.
China has announced an initiative to launch a
tripartite dialogue mechanism among China, Palestine
and Israel in order to coordinate the implementation
of major projects of assistance for Palestine. The four
proposals made by President Xi Jinping represent
China's new endeavour relating to the settlement of the
question of Palestine. It takes into account the current
situation as well as the international environment. The
proposals also represent the overall direction of China's
efforts moving forward regarding the promotion of a
political settlement. We hope that the proposals will be
met with active responses and support from the parties
concerned so that we can work together to achieve a
breakthrough in the decades-long unresolved problem
at hand.

Recently, the situation in Jerusalem has continued
to worsen to the point of becoming extremely dangerous.
The top priority now is to ease the tension and
confrontations around the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
and achieve a settlement as soon as possible in order
to reduce tension and avoid any escalation of the
conflict. The Security Council and States in the region
need to carry out emergency diplomatic action and do
their utmost to engage with the parties concerned in
order to calm things down and avoid an escalation
of tensions. Any escalation would cause even more
serious consequences. The provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions must be implemented,
including the provision that calls for upholding the
historic status quo of holy sites in Jerusalem. We have
taken note of the initiative taken by Israel today and
we hope that the parties concerned will continue their
dialogue and communication so as to re-establish calm
at an early date.

China is willing to continue to work with all of the
parties concerned to promote an early settlement of the
current problems and the relaunching of peace talks
between Palestine and Israel so as to realize at an early
date a comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question and establish peace and stability in
the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

