Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for having given me the opportunity
to present to the Council the fourth report of the
Independent International Investigation Commission
(5/2006/375, annex). The report details further
progress made in the investigation of the killing of
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others. It
also provides an update on the technical assistance that
the Commission has been affording to the Lebanese
authorities in the investigations of 14 other crimes. In
particular, the Commission has developed its
investigative activities, increased its technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities, strengthened its
organizational structure and capacity and adopted its
internal procedure.

The investigation has further developed over the
past three months. Twenty-four projects are under way
concurrently, including forensic examinations of the
crime scene and the convoy vehicles; a review of the
telecommunications used by the alleged perpetrators;
and the interviewing of key witnesses and sensitive
sources. Most notably, the Commission has invested a
major 23-day effort in the systematic forensic
examination of the immediate circumstances of the
Hariri attack. One of its main objectives was to
establish a unifying theory on whether the explosion
occurred below ground or above ground, whether it
consisted of one or two blasts or a combination thereof,
06-38709
and how it was triggered. That will facilitate an
understanding of the planning and execution of the
crime, the nature and composition of the perpetrating
team and its skills and coordination, the time spent to
plan the attack, the period during which the decision to
assassinate Rafik Hariri was taken, and the extent of
the involvement, potential advance knowledge or
complicity of other individuals.

Based on the results of the investigations and
analysis and the evidence collected so far, the
Commission has reached the following preliminary
conclusions. One above-ground explosion took place
on 14 February 2005 at precisely 12.55 p.m. A large
improvised explosive device (IED), placed in a
Mitsubishi truck, was detonated as the Hariri convoy
passed by. The IED contained a minimum of 1,200
kilogrammes of TNT equivalent. The detonation of the
IED was most likely initiated by an individual within
or immediately in front of the Mitsubishi.

The Commission does not believe that the claim
of responsibility expressed in the video tape delivered
to Reuters and Al Jazeera immediately after the attack
establishes the identity of the individual. In fact, DNA
analysis of human remains recovered from the crime
scene suggests that there is no evidence that the
individual claiming responsibility for the attack,
namely Ahmed Abu Adass, was the individual who
initiated the detonation of the IED.

The crime must be considered a targeted
assassination. The large quantity of explosives used
elevated the attack to an almost "guaranteed" level: the
magnitude of the explosion was designed to ensure the
success of the operation even if the Hariri vehicle was
not directly hit.

The Commission has developed two basic
working hypotheses regarding the perpetrators of the
attack. On the one hand, the Commission is
considering the possibility that the attack was planned
and executed in a compartmentalized manner. In
practice, this would mean that different people were
responsible for or involved in the planning of the
attack, the reconnaissance and surveillance, the
preparation of the IED, the acquisition of the
Mitsubishi truck, the identification of the individual
used as the trigger mechanism and the claim-of-
responsibility video. Each part would have been
carried out by individuals or groups who were not
06-38709
necessarily aware of or involved in other parts of the
operation.

On the other hand, the Commission does not
exclude the possibility of an operation planned and
executed by a relatively small single team.

The Commission is also developing working
hypotheses regarding those who commissioned the crime.
Given the many different positions occupied by Rafik
Hariri and his wide range of public and private sector
activities, the Commission is investigating a number of
different motives, including political motivations,
personal vendettas, financial circumstances and extremist
ideologies, as well as any combination of them.

In this context, the Commission is continuing
with a series of interviews of individuals who it
believes can assist in clarifying the formal and
informal structures prevailing in Lebanon and the
wider region at the time of the assassination. These
include interviews with Syrian and Lebanese officials
from a number of different organizations and agencies.

The level of assistance provided by Syria during
the reporting period has generally been satisfactory.
Syria responded to all of the Commission's requests,
and did so in a timely manner. In some instances
comprehensive responses were provided. Since March,
the Commission has submitted 16 formal requests for
assistance to Syria. Some of those seek, within a set
time frame, detailed information on the Syrian military
and civilian intelligence apparatus in Lebanon. Others
request the facilitation of witness interviews in Syria or
the sharing of information obtained by the Syrian
authorities in the course of their own investigations.

Three of those requests were submitted as a result
of my meetings in Damascus with the President and the
Vice-President on 25 April 2006. At that meeting, the
President reiterated the assurances given by other
senior officials that Syria intends to comply fully with
all Commission requests. The Commission will
continue to request this full cooperation from Syrian
authorities, including in collecting documents, seeking
specific information and facilitating interviews of
Syrian citizens.

There has also been a substantial increase in the
number of requests for assistance submitted to other
Member States. Since 15 March 2006, 32 formal
requests for assistance were sent to 13 Member States.
3
That increase underlines the wide reach of the
Commission's investigative activities and the
international character of its work.

Moreover, interaction with the Lebanese
authorities continues to be excellent at all levels and on
all aspects of the Commission's mandate. The
commitment and support of the Prosecutor General of
Lebanon and his Office, and that of the respective
investigating judges, have been instrumental in much
of the progress made. The Government of Lebanon, the
armed forces and the internal security forces ensure,
with much dedication, that the Commission can carry
out its work in a secure environment, despite persisting
security challenges. The Commission is particularly
grateful for that support.

The Commission has also continued its technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their
investigation of 14 other attacks that occurred in
Lebanon. The Commission's focus during the reporting
period has been twofold: to advance the status of each
case individually and of all cases horizontally so as to
establish potential links between the attacks.

As a result, the cases can be linked analytically in
a number of different ways, and from varying
perspectives, notably in the similarities in their modus
operandi and their intent. However, in terms of
evidence, none of the cases is developed to an extent
that would allow for the identification and linking of
perpetrators. In fact, all 14 cases are at present lacking
significant forward investigative momentum. The
reasons for that include the lack of Lebanese forensic
capacity to collect and analyse evidence and a lack of
horizontal coordination among the cases due to an
apparent fragmentation within the Lebanese judicial
and law enforcement system. The Commission has
little reason to believe that the status of these cases will
change much in the foreseeable future unless external
assistance is provided. Given the significance of the 14
cases and their potential importance to the Hariri
investigation, I believe that a more concerted and
robust effort is needed to advance the investigation of
these cases.

Progress in the Commission's investigative work
when providing technical assistance will not be
possible without the strong backbone of a solid
organization. The consolidation of the Commission's
structure and capacity is therefore an ongoing effort. In
my last briefing I expressed serious concern over the
lack of readily available and qualified personnel for the
Commission. While the Commission is still not at full
capacity, the situation has improved. Most of the
Commission's key functions are now filled or under
recruitment. We have 24 investigators, lawyers and
analysts on board, with 10 additional staff scheduled to
join us soon. As a result, the vacancy rate has dropped
from almost 50 per cent in January to less than 20 per
cent today.

A key aspect of the Commission's institutional
consolidation has been the adoption of its own internal
working procedure, as directed by resolution 1595
(2005). The procedure aims at ensuring uniformity in
the work of the Commission and respect for minimum
professional standards. The internal procedure takes
into account Lebanese law and judicial procedures, as
well as relevant international standards and the
procedures of international criminal jurisdictions. That
will help ensure that any information collected by the
Commission is admissible in future legal proceedings,
possibly before a tribunal of an international character.

Considerable progress has been achieved in the
Hariri investigation. Critical forensics work on the
crime scene and the convoy vehicles has been
completed. The modalities and circumstances of the
attack of 14 February 2005, which killed Rafik Hariri
and 22 others, are now largely understood. While
continuing essential forensic work, the Commission
will, in the months ahead, focus on the identification of
the perpetrators and those who commissioned the
crime.

The Commission welcomes the 4 May 2006 request
of the Government of Lebanon to the Secretary-General
to extend its mandate for a further period of up to one
year. Such an extension would provide a sense of
continuity and stability and guarantee steady operations
and planning. Moreover, in the light of the potential
linkages between the Hariri investigation and the 14 other
cases, the Commission believes that a much more
concerted and robust effort is needed to move these cases
forward. External support in providing technical
assistance and forensics expertise to the Lebanese
investigations will be critical. The Commission could also
conceive of a more proactive role for itself in supporting
Lebanese judicial authorities in strengthening their
investigations.

I am fully aware of the high expectations that the
Commission's mandate and work create among the
families of the victims - and, in fact, among the
Lebanese public at large. I understand the need to
obtain answers to the questions surrounding the
assassination of Rafik Hariri and the 14 other attacks.
It is precisely for those reasons that there is no
alternative to staying focused and continuing to tackle
these questions one by one and in a systematic manner
that will provide the level of evidential certainty
required by any court so that justice will eventually be
done.

I thank the Council very much for its continued
support.

