Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the Secretary-
General for his special report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Special
Representative Eide and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for their briefings today, and Foreign Minister
Spanta for his presentation.

New Zealand is pleased with the outcomes of the
Paris Conference, especially the emphasis on the
expanded role of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and UNAMA in leading the
coordination of international efforts and in
coordinating the policies and activities of the Afghan
Government and the international community. We
welcome pledges made in Paris totalling $20 billion,
including from New Zealand; the launch of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy; and the
Paris Declaration.

New Zealand supports all the Secretary-General's
recommendations outlined in his report to strengthen
UNAMA. It is important that UNAMA be able more
effectively to coordinate international assistance
alongside the Afghan Government. We are particularly
pleased to see that areas identified in the report as
priorities include governance; the protection of human
rights; the improvement of civil-military coordination;
good offices to support, if so requested by the Afghan
Government, the implementation of Afghan-led
reconciliation programmes; and outreach efforts by
expanding the UNAMA presence throughout the
country.

New Zealand joins others in condemning the
suicide bombing that killed 41 people in Kabul earlier
this week in the vicinity of the Ministry of the Interior
and the Indian Embassy. We are concerned about the
evolving security situation across Afghanistan, and we
agree with the Special Representative's
recommendation, endorsed by the Secretary-General,
that much greater resources will need to be devoted to
security if UNAMA is to fulfil its mandate and achieve
the Paris priorities.

We urge the international community to fulfil its
commitments made at the Paris Conference to help
ensure that the important recommendations of the
Secretary-General can be implemented so that we can
all work effectively with the Government of
Afghanistan towards a positive future for Afghanistan.

