Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to thank the
delegation of Croatia for convening this important and
timely thematic debate. My delegation is honoured to
see you, Sir, the President of Croatia, presiding over
our meeting today. We are also very pleased to
welcome the participation of the Secretary-General in
this meeting.

Despite enhanced efforts by Governments the
world over, the threat of terrorism continues. The latest
heinous and cowardly attack in Mumbai, India,
demonstrated that terrorist groups are not in a state of
idleness. On the contrary, they continue to reinvent
themselves with different means of committing
atrocities. They seek to improve their methods of
causing massive casualties with the aim of spreading
terror in order to paralyse societies, destabilize
political systems and make us succumb to the path of
violence.

Our global effort is clearly facing more difficult
and complex challenges. We need to be not only
decisive in our policies, but also innovative and
practical in our approach. The pace of our cooperation
must match the terrorists' capacity to wreak havoc and
destruction.

First and foremost, efforts to overcome terrorism
must continue to be multifaceted in nature. The
terrorist threat is not a war that can be won through the
sheer application of force. Instead, there is a need for a
comprehensive yet integrated approach, encompassing
intelligence and law enforcement; the legislative
framework; foreign policy, including public diplomacy;
and also socio-economic policy. All those elements are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. We should
not favour one tool while neglecting others. It is
important that the implementation of those tools be
well calibrated and fine-tuned.

Secondly, no country can go it alone. Terrorists
are not encumbered by national borders; hence the
critical need for international cooperation. That
includes the sharing of information, intelligence and
best practices. Capacity-building, as a core element of
the global counter-terrorism effort, needs to be
sustained. The Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation, for example, has provided structured
training for law enforcement officers in the Asia-
Pacific region. The Bali Counter-Terrorism Process,
too, has established strong bonds of collaboration
among legal and law enforcement practitioners in the
region.

Moreover, Indonesia has pursued a deliberate
policy of building a multifaceted web of counter-
terrorism cooperation: bilateral, subregional, regional
and inter-regional.

In South-east Asia this common effort reached a
high point with the signing of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on
Counter-Terrorism by the ASEAN leaders at the
twelfth ASEAN Summit in Cebu, the Philippines, in
January 2007. In essence, the Convention's aim is to
deny terrorists space and a foothold to launch their
attacks.

Of course, such building blocks of cooperation
would not be complete without an overarching
multilateral cooperation effort through the United
Nations, including the Security Council and General
Assembly. The need for a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism should be evident. However,
it is important that the global multilateral frameworks
do not reinvent the wheel, but rather that they build on
and promote synergy with existing national, bilateral
and regional efforts.

Not least, Indonesia firmly believes in a
democratic response. Our efforts must be viewed as
legitimate. They must respect the integrity of
international law, human rights and the Charter. In our
View, undermining the principles of international law
and human rights would not only be counterproductive,
but would also erode the political legitimacy necessary
to sustain global efforts to fight terrorism.

Effective efforts also require a perspective that is
alert to the conditions associated with acts of terrorism.
We need to be conscious of the need to address root
causes, including prolonged unresolved conflicts.
Indonesia wishes to reiterate that conflict prevention
and peaceful settlement of disputes are essential
premises in our common effort to eradicate terrorism.
The Security Council, as mandated by the Charter,
should devote its political energy to resolve those
unresolved conflicts.

Effective efforts also require the use of soft-
power. As a global community, we should work
together to delegitimize terrorism by strengthening
democratic values and promoting tolerance and
pluralism. We need to take specific measures to steer
people away from extremism. We need to promote and
facilitate dialogue among community groups. We need
to give voice to moderation.

Against this backdrop, let me end by emphasizing
the imperative to reject the association of terrorism
with particular nations, regions or religions. Dialogue
among civilizations must be sustained to prevent the
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures as provided for in resolution 1624 (2005).

Such dialogue can bridge diverse cultures, and
facilitate understanding and cooperation across
communities and religions. Only through such an
avenue can we truly have a winning chance. The
United Nations machinery, as part of the equation in
the overall global struggle against terrorism, should
play a leading role in this regard.

On a final note, the Victims of terrorism must not
be forgotten. We are grateful that the Secretary-General
has made reference to this point in his earlier
statement.

