Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Amos and Le Roy, to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and to
Mr. Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross, for their briefings.

The Russian Federation favours the peaceful
resolution of disputes. However, despite all the
international community's efforts, armed conflicts
happen and claim the lives of many people, the
majority of whom are civilians. They especially need
our protection. We are speaking, first and foremost, of
children, women and the elderly, and the humanitarian
personnel who help them. We are convinced that
correcting this situation demands strict compliance
with the norms of international humanitarian law and
human rights standards and implementation of relevant
Security Council decisions.

We firmly condemn both premeditated attacks on
civilians and their death as the result of the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a flagrant violation of international human law.
There is no justification for armed groups who attack
peaceful populations, commit terrorist acts and take
hostages. We emphasize the responsibility of all parties
to a conflict to ensure the security of civilians and to
comply strictly with the norms of international
humanitarian law. We advocate the thorough
investigation of such incidents and punishment of the
perpetrators.

That also applies to the activities of private
military and security companies, the victims of whose
actions are often entirely innocent people. In the
context of formulating clear international standards, we
welcome the recent decision to establish, within the
framework of the Human Rights Council, an open-
ended working group to prepare a draft of a legally
binding document on the activities of such companies.
We are pleased that those topics are reflected in the
text of today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/25).

The protection of peaceful populations is a high-
priority task for the Governments of States involved in
conflict. All parties to armed conflicts bear the
responsibility for ensuring the security of civilians. The
actions of the international community should be
aimed at assisting national efforts in that area. Taking
appropriate measures, particularly those involving the
use of force, is possible only with the approval of the
Security Council and in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Moreover, it is important to take
into account the economic, social, historical, religious,
cultural and other specifics of countries and regions, as
well as the nature of each conflict, its underlying
causes and the possibilities for settlement.

There is no doubt of the need for the Security
Council to draw up clear and realistic mandates for the
protection of civilians, taking into account the financial
and logistical resources at the disposal of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as the
leadership in this area, on the basis of consultations
with Member States.

We should not forget, however, that the
protection of civilians is only one element in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. The main task of
United Nations peacekeeping is to facilitate the peace
process. One very important aspect of the protection of
civilians is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. Those programmes
require adequate support from United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

The work of humanitarian agencies is an
important factor. It should be based on the norms of the
United Nations Charter and basic humanitarian
principles, while their effectiveness depends largely on
how they fit into the international community's efforts
for political settlements. In that context, respect for
State sovereignty is a fundamental principle.

