Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): Let me begin by
extending our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his candid and informative statement.

While Croatia aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by France on behalf of the European
Union, allow me to make some further points on behalf
of my delegation.

My country joined the Council as an elected
member in a year marked by renewed hope for
reaching comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Late
last year, the international community gathered at the
Annapolis Peace Conference and pledged its support
for this process.

The parties have since demonstrated admirable
courage and determination in pursuing that track. My
delegation finds encouragement in the fact, that,
despite the challenges, the two parties remain
committed to and engaged in bilateral talks within the
framework of the Annapolis process.

Achieving a two-State solution and a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
should remain the ultimate goal. We believe that the
international community, including this Council, has to
do its utmost to support the parties in this goal.

We remain cognizant of the fact that progress in
the political and diplomatic process remains
inextricably linked with tangible improvements on the
ground, and we share the views expressed in the latest
Quartet statement in Berlin on 24 June that there is
urgent need for more progress on the ground in order to
build confidence and support the progress in the
negotiations.

That is why we fully support the international
effort that began last December with the Paris donors
conference, followed by the Palestinian Investment
Conference in Bethlehem in May and the Berlin
Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security
and the Rule of Law in June. This effort, coupled with
the special envoy's effort to bring the parties together
and stimulate economic renewal, helps to bring about a
climate of confidence, security and physical mobility,
thereby building a platform for peace. That is why it is
critical that donors' commitments are being fulfilled.

In this context, let me also reiterate our support
for the objectives promoted by the Berlin conference
on security and the rule of law. Security is the most
important service that any Government can provide to
its citizens, if I may cite Palestinian Prime Minister
Salam Fayyad. This requirement extends to building up
an effective and accountable security infrastructure,
including a proper criminal justice system, as well as
the police sector. The ability of the Palestinian
Authority to build credible institutions and manage
security is of key importance for both sides. Not only
is it an essential element of Palestinian State-building,
it is also a legitimate expectation on the Israeli side.
Israel must have confidence that a two-State solution
will not compromise the safety and security of its
citizens. That can only be achieved if there is a viable,
responsible and democratic Palestinian State by its
side, a State that is willing and able to combat
terrorism and anarchy.

Over recent weeks, we have seen a number of
positive signals coming from the region. Having said
that, let me also congratulate France, which holds the
presidency of the European Union, on its successful
effort to introduce new dynamism in the region through
the establishment of the Union for the Mediterranean.

Recognizing that peace in the Middle East
requires a comprehensive solution, we welcome
Israel's readiness to take steps to reach out to the other
actors in the region, demonstrating interest in
addressing a number of challenging issues. We remain
hopeful that these steps will be met with a positive and
responsible response so as to reinforce the dynamic of
peace.

The period of calm in Gaza and the
announcement that Israel and Syria have been
conducting indirect peace talks have been encouraging
indeed, as was last week's prisoner exchange between
Israel and Hizbullah, which we hope will be conducive
to further positive moves.

We are gravely concerned by actions that are
putting strains on the Gaza period of calm, including
today's attack, as well as the outrageous attack that
took place in Jerusalem on 2 July, which we condemn
once again in the strongest terms. We appeal for every
effort to sustain the period of calm in Gaza and thus to
enable the restrictions on Gaza to be progressively
eased, the crossings reopened and the United Nations
projects resumed. We also hope to see progress
regarding the case of abducted Israeli corporal Gilad
Shalit.

Turning to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes the
recent formation of a national unity Government in
Beirut as well as the election of Mr. Sleiman as
President of Lebanon in May. We hope that this
momentum, initiated by the Doha agreement, will be
used to consolidate the constitutional institutions of
Lebanon and strengthen the Government's control over
its entire territory.

The acute sectarian violence in May was a stark
reminder of the relevance of the requirement to disarm
all non-government groups, Lebanese and
non-Lebanese alike. It is now essential that the totality
of the commitments accepted by Lebanon's political
leaders in the Doha agreement be fully implemented,
including the ban against using arms to further political
goals.

It is equally important that the obligations arising
out of the Taif Agreement also be implemented, along
with relevant Security Council resolutions. We are
encouraged by the announced intentions to establish
diplomatic relations between Syria and Lebanon and
salute this week's high-level meetings in Beirut. It is
our hope that these recent developments will translate
into effective consolidation of Lebanon's stability and
sovereignty, thus contributing to the peace and stability
of the wider region.

