Mr. Cevik (Turkey):Let me begin by expressing our
gratitude to the Venezuelan presidency for organizing
this debate, as well as to the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

The system created by the Charter of the United
Nations 70 years ago has prevented numerous conflicts
from turning into another world war and paved the
way for today's achievements in social and economic
development as well as human rights. On the other
hand, the history of the United Nations is full of
examples of non-compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the United Nations failure
to ensure such compliance. That not only results in
direct consequences, such as the loss of many lives, but
also undermines the credibility of the Organization.

We need to devise sustainable solutions to make
the Organization fit for its purpose, taking into
account new challenges. On many occasions, the
Security Council has failed to find timely and lasting
solutions to problems, such as the decades-long Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the tragedy in Syria. There
is no accountability mechanism for inaction by the
Council, which mostly results from the threat or the
use of the right to the veto. That inaction is the main
factor that encourages those who do not refrain from
constantly breaching the provisions of the Charter to
wage war against their own people. Therefore, the quest
for a reformed Council is more than rhetoric and is the
key to the paradigm shift that is urgently needed to put
an end to such impunity.

That unfortunate reality brings me to our second
point, that is, the importance of intensifying our efforts
to prevent conflicts before they occur. Societies in
which policies are crafted on the basis of the dignity
of their people, inclusivity and social justice, as well
as on good governance, are less prone to conflicts.
Therefore, only policies that address the root causes
of conflicts will have sustainable results. We hope that
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) will
have direct consequences in that respect. Also, polices
aimed at enhancing fundamental rights and freedoms
and promoting intercultural dialogue will have long-
lasting results. The Alliance of Civilizations is a tool
designed to that effect.

Thirdly, in the face of a potential conflict, priority
should be given to the effective use of the tools
enumerated in Chapter VI. The guiding principles of
mediation, such as the consent of local parties, the
impartiality of the mediators, the inclusivity of the
mediation process and national ownership, are all
consistent with the principles of the Charter.

My fourth point pertains to the protection of
civilians during conflicts. An immediate end to all
attacks against civilians, including indiscriminate aerial
bombardments - as we have observed in Syria - is not
only a moral necessity but also a clear obligation under
international law. We also strongly condemn the use of
starvation as a method of warfare, which constitutes a
war crime. They Syrian regime continues to resort to
all means to prolong its grip on power. It continues to
use all sorts of force and violence - whether chemical
weapons, barrel bombs, ballistic missiles, targeted
killings, arbitrary detention, torture, systematic abuse,
starvation or forced displacement. Those brutal policies
pursued by the regime against its own people represent
gross violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. They also exacerbate terrorism
in Syria. In that regard, the representative of such a
regime, which is also responsible for the emergence
of Da'esh, is not in a position to lecture anybody on
adherence to the principles of the Charter.

As we share a long border with Syria, developments
in that country have affected Turkey signicantly. We
have been facing national security threats and attacks
emanating from Syria since the start of the conflict,
including from terrorist organizations there. Over
the course of the past few days, Turkish armed forces
have taken retaliatory measures, in comformity with
established rules of engagement and international law,
in response to attacks against Turkey from Syrian soil.

On the other hand, the mass human suffering by
the intensified aerial bombardments targeting civilians
in Syria is of the utmost concern. In the past 24 hours
alone, air strikes by the Russian Federation have
targeted education and health facilities, including a
hospital supported by Doctors Without Borders, taking
scores of lives, including children. The same member
of the Council recently caused a new wave of massive
displacement due to its continuing aerial bombardment,
especially in the north and north-west of Syria. Those
responsible for such abhorrent violations of international
law are not in a position to lecture anyone.

The ongoing review processes on peace operations,
peacebuilding and gender come into play as historic
opportunities that might transform the current system
into a more responsive, efficient and transparent one.

Today, the world faces new and unprecedented
challenges that require concerted efforts to find
innovative solutions.

First, terrorism and violent extremism in all forms
remain one of the gravest threats. We welcome the
Secretary-General's plan of action, particularly the
view that the international community needs to adopt
a comprehensive approach that encompasses not only
security-based counter-terrorism measures, but also
systematic measures that address the drivers of violent
extremism.

Secondly, we now face the largest humanitarian
crisis since the Second World War. We must exert
every effort to strengthen our common commitment to
respect for international humanitarian law. The first-
ever World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in May
in Istanbul, will be a timely opportunity to address
those challenges. Inclusive policies for migrants, as
well as combating racism and xenophobia, takes on
more importance than ever, given the unprecedented
mobility.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the concept of
responsibility to protect in relation to our discussion
today. We believe that the responsibility to protect should
not be restricted to those facing trouble in turbulent
countries. The situation of populations escaping from
these crimes to neighbouring countries should also
be taken into consideration. With an understanding of
burden-sharing, its scope should also cover the needs
and the protection of such populations.

As the largest refugee-hosting country in the world
today, Turkey has been a safe refuge for over 2.5 million
Syrians who had to flee Syria for their lives and has
also ensured that cross-border humanitarian assistance
reaches millions of people in dire need on the Syrian
side of the border, in conformity with its international
obligations and in support of the United Nations. We
believe that this major effort is a concrete example
demonstrating that responsibility to protect can also be
served by humanitarian assistance.

The Charter provides the necessary principles and
means to maintain international peace and security.
Our political will to abide by its letter and spirit and
to work collectively on occasions of non-compliance is
the key to success.

