Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his
briefing. We would also like to commend the
significant and ongoing efforts that he and his team
have been making to bring about security, peace and
stability in Somalia.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to
threaten the security and safety of international
navigation off the coast of eastern Africa. Efforts thus
far have not managed to eliminate the threat, although
they have greatly limited piracy. That reaffirms that
piracy is a natural result of the unstable situation in
Somalia in terms of security and the absence of State
authority in general.

This problem will not be eliminated just by
dispatching naval forces. Dealing with it requires a
more comprehensive and integrated approach. We
share the Secretary-General's View that one of the
means to guarantee the security of marine navigation
off the coast of Somalia in the long term will be to
achieve stability on the ground through development,
promotion of economic revival in local communities,
consolidation of the rule of law, development of
security institutions and provision of support to the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Any solution must also include capacity-building,
especially for Somali judicial and maritime institutions
at the local and national levels and in the region in
general, the prosecution of those suspected of piracy
and armed robbery at sea and strict compliance with
the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.

If implemented, those measures will eventually
obviate the need for the international marine presence,
which is currently playing an important role in
securing international marine navigation. We would
like to encourage the States and organizations that
participate in those forces to examine a way to
implement capacity-building measures in Somalia and
find a solution to the root causes of piracy. We urge
those States to protect Somali sea resources, in
particular from illegal fishing operations by foreign
vessels, which we believe are one of the main motives
for piracy.

In addition, we encourage the international
community to continue to deploy such naval forces in
strict compliance with the international law of the sea
in order to offer protection to all shipments contracted
by the United Nations and the World Food Programme,
including along the routes used to deliver logistical
support to AMISOM. and international maritime trade
routes.

We believe that suspected pirates apprehended off
the Somali coast must be handed over to the
Government of Somalia, which is responsible for
prosecuting them. We urge the international community
to help the Government of Somalia by providing
technical assistance to its judicial bodies. In that
connection, we encourage Member States to contribute
to the international trust fund designed to help defray
the expenses associated with the prosecution of
suspected pirates as well as other activities related to

combating piracy. The Government of Somalia can
sign agreements with other countries in the region
providing for the prosecution of suspects apprehended
in those countries and specify where they will serve
their sentences if found guilty.

In closing, we wish to stress that providing
support to the Government of Somalia to help it
establish its authority throughout the country is of the
utmost importance if our efforts to combat piracy and
eliminate its root causes are to be successful. We also
wish to encourage the Contact Group on Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia to coordinate its activities and
initiatives with those of the International Contact
Group on Somalia. In addition, we note the urgent need
to draft an agreement that would protect Somalia's sea
resources from arbitrary use and would prevent pirates
from launching attacks on navigation in international
waters.

