Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Egypt for convening today's timely
debate. Faced with the evolution of armed conflicts
and the changing nature of new challenges to peace
and development, the United Nations has become
increasingly aware of the urgent need to change the
focus on the achievement of its ultimate raison d'etre and
purpose, maintaining international peace and security.

Unfortunately, the United Nations has devoted
much of its human and financial resources to managing
conflicts rather than preventing them. We therefore urge
the Security Council to devote this and other meetings
to the consideration of prevention as central to action
in the United Nations system and to sustainable peace
as a goal and process. There can be no peace without
development or respect for human rights. And it is
difficult to have development without peace.

The Security Council and General Assembly's
adoption of their historic resolutions 2282 (2016)
and 70/262 demonstrate that both the Assembly
and the Council are already committed to guiding
the Organization's responses through the concept
of sustaining peace, which the Secretary-General's
programme of reform also addresses. As Chair of the
Group of Friends for Sustainable Peace, Mexico would
like to continue working with the Secretary-General
and the members of the United Nations towards a
greater understanding of the potential of this systemic
and conceptual challenge to the fragmentation of the
work of the Organization, which calls for the active
and coherent participation of the principal organs
of the United Nations, as well as the Secretariat and
its specialized agencies, funds, programmes and
operations on the ground.

The wide range of tools available to the United
Nations in order to implement this concept includes
efforts that range from preventive diplomacy to
peacebuilding, along with the design of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.However, we
must take greater advantage of the involvement of the
Secretary-General, directly or through the country
teams in the field, the Special Representatives, and
exploit the possibility represented by the Secretary-
General's request for advisory opinions to the
International Court of Justice as valuable instruments
within the framework of the purposes of the Charter.

The Security Council must also continue to ensure
that the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions are sufficiently flexible and
tailored to the reality and the needs on the ground and
that they address all post-conflict phases and contribute
to sustainable peace in a consistent and multisectoral
way. It is essential to strengthen the interrelation and
coordination between the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries, financial contributors, host
States, regional organizations, relevant United Nations
system agencies, national authorities and civil society.

We hope that the Secretary-General's reform
proposal, which he is currently working on, will be
translated into a sustainable peace architecture that
improves its effectiveness in preventing, maintaining
and consolidating international peace and security. To
do this, it must have the logistical, political, financial
and staff resources to fulfil ever more robust and
multidimensional mandates. We advocate a genuine
institutional change that rests on the pillars of
transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and greater
political, financial and logistical support for United
Nations peace operations.

Sustainable peace has provided peacekeeping
operations and special political missions with a new
narrative and clearer legitimacy, since the close
relationship between prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding is intimately linked to development
and compliance with the 2030 Agenda. We therefore
urge the Security Council to continue to ensure that
its actions to achieve peace are anchored in the major
United Nations agreements.

We are facing a paradigm shift in the Organization
more than 70 years after its founding. We must address
the crises at the root and look at their root causes. We
must invest in communities and in prevention and not
simply in managing conflicts.

