Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Foreign
Minister of Mexico for her statement and congratulate
Mexico upon having assumed the chair of the Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
are convinced that Mexico will discharge its duties
with the same conviction and efficiency as was shown
by the French chair.

This debate was introduced today by very useful
statements by United Nations representatives and by
the eloquent and necessary testimony by Ms. Grace
Akallo.

Canada welcomes this open debate and the
Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2009/158). This debate provides us
another opportunity to bring to the attention of the
Council the severity of continued acts of violence
against children. Too often today, we see the
devastating effects that armed conflict has on children,
including the profound repercussions on their living
conditions. Sri Lanka, Somalia, the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate this
tragedy. Children are injured, killed and displaced and
become victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
They are directly or indirectly recruited as soldiers. To
that we add separation from their families and the
impossibility of pursuing their education. Sadly, this
list is not exhaustive.

Canada commends the Security Council for its
innovative initiatives in building a framework for
protecting children in situations of armed conflict. We
applaud the work of the Secretary-General and his
team. In particular, I would like to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her commitment, her vigorous
advocacy and for the wealth of reporting by her office.

(spoke in English)

Canada strongly supports Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) and the implementation of an
effective monitoring and reporting mechanism for
violations against children. We would like to recognize
the tremendous work of UNICEF and the
non-governmental organization and civil society actors
who contribute to the 1612 monitoring and reporting
mechanism. The impact of resolution 1612 (2005) is
real and measurable, as demonstrated by the release of
children from the ranks of armed groups around the
world. The monitoring and reporting mechanism has
now been implemented or put in place in all the
situations listed in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's 2007 report (S/2007/757). This is in itself a
significant achievement. We hope to see further
advancement of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, engaging with youth and strengthening the
mechanism for the security of these children, to
improve the protection provided.

Canada would like to commend the work of the
Security Council Working Group created by resolution
1612 (2005). We would also like to acknowledge the
strong support provided by the Secretariat to the
Working Group. The actionable conclusions and
guidance issued by the Working Group have
demonstrated the Council's commitment to prevent
crimes against children in situations of conflict and to
ensure that those responsible are held accountable
under national and international law. We hope that in
the coming months the Working Group will be able to
travel to the field for concrete exposure that would
better inform its work.

Thanks to the hard work of these individuals and
organizations, there is a much greater awareness of the
terrible plight of these children. There remains,
however, an environment of impunity for those who
persist in committing the most serious crimes against
children in situations of armed conflict, which has been
highlighted by the Special Representative and the
Secretary-General. In this regard, let me take this
opportunity to register once again Canada's strong
view that the existing monitoring and reporting
mechanism should be triggered by all six grave
violations against children outlined in resolution 1612
(2005).

We must continue to uphold the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict and to strengthen and
expand them. Violations of resolution 1612 (2005)
continue, including a disturbing increase in rape and
other sexual violations against both girls and boys. We
have an opportunity before us to fill an important gap
in the child protection framework, including through
negotiation of a new resolution. It should provide for a
monitoring and reporting mechanism triggered by the
recruitment and use of children, rape and other grave
sexual violence, intentional killing and maiming of
children, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict. Canada urges the Council to
take concrete actions to make this happen.

