Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would be
remiss were I not to begin my statement by conveying
the heartfelt thanks and gratitude of the people and
the Government of Haiti for the kind words and
demonstrations of solidarity expressed to my country
following the destructive strike of Hurricane Matthew
last week, with its tragic consequences. To one and all,
I say thank you, thank you, thank you, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Haiti.

I am pleased to have the chance once again to share
the views of the Haitian Government on the important
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2016/753), issued pursuant to resolution 2243 (2015),
of 14 October 2015. Allow me also to express to the
Security Council the deep gratitude of the President
of the Republic and the Government of Haiti for its
steadfast commitment for close to 12 years now in
the process of building the rule of law and democracy
in Haiti.

The Government of Haiti would like also to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the high
quality of his report to the Security Council. This
document yet again bears witness, as if any more
proof were needed, to the Secretary-General's ongoing
leadership in ensuring the success of the mandate
of MINUSTAH.

With the balance and objectivity characteristic of
the Secretary-General, he takes an in-depth look at the
various dimensions ofthe Haitian crisis stemming from
the interruption in January 2016 of the electoral process
and at the institutional difficulties and structural and
context-based obstacles facing the country at this
critical juncture, and voices concerns regarding the
various challenges the country faces in the areas of
security and human rights and on the humanitarian
front. He also takes a close look at the achievements
registered while underscoring the work that remains
to be done so as to conclude the electoral cycle under
way, which, as we all know, is crucial to Haiti's long-
term stability.

The Government has duly taken note of the
observations made by the Secretary-General. The
return to constitutional order on 7 February 2017
is indeed the binding obligation that falls to the
Haitian Government. The President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Jocelerme Privert, has made it the key
feature of his work as Head of State. As he has pointed
out repeatedly, in particular on 23 September from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, (see A/7l/PV.17),
he has no other mandate than that which was invested

in him by the National Assembly in accordance with
the agreement of 5 February, namely, the completion
and of the electoral process. Shouldering this historical
responsibility, he is sparing no effort in achieving the
conditions that will foster the organization of free,
inclusive and fair presidential and legislative elections,
under the aegis of the Provisional Electoral Council
(PEC), allowing for the reset and normalization of our
democratic institutions.

The results achieved to date have been convincing.
The Electoral Council has hit its stride. The electoral
process is going smoothly despite the uncertainties
of some of the most difficult economic and financial
factors, characterized by, inter alia, the freezing and
reduction of development aid. Of the total budget
estimated at $55 million, the Government has already
disbursed a first tranche of $25 million, enabling the
PEC to hold the first round of elections. The campaign
was launched on 23 August. The overhaul of the
electoral mechanism, making it more reliable in line
with the recommendations of independent electoral
evaluation and verification commission, ensures the
holding of fair and transparent elections. The first
round of elections was set for 9 October.

The upcoming elections are a necessary right
of passage. Only they can dispel the "prevailing
political uncertainty" mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/753, para. 10) to overcome
the institutional crisis and finally address structural
deficiencies, which are hampering the economic and
social modernization of the country and are obstacles to
the full development of human rights. The Government
is grateful to the Secretary-General for welcoming in
his report the "promising signs" that are reflected in

[t]he commitment displayed so far by the national
authorities to assume greater ownership of all
facets of the electoral process, including financial
and operational aspects" (ibid., para. 58).

Similarly, we particularly appreciates his call to all
our international partners for constructive cooperation
in considering

"further financial contributions, in particular with
a view to strengthening the electoral council's
capacity to manage the logistical aspects of the
electoral process" (ibid., para. 59).

Finally, the Government fully aligns itself with the
call for the partners to redeploy
"international electoral observation and expert
missions to diversify levels of scrutiny and
promote confidence in the electoral process" (ibid., para. 59).

Turning to security, the Government believes
that, in the current context, MINUSTAH's support
to the Haitian National Police aimed at strengthening
security, which is necessary for the success of the
electoral process, remains crucial. It therefore notes
with the greatest of interest the recommendation made
by the Secretary-General that

"the mandate of MINUSTAH be extended for
a further six months, until 15 April 2017" (ibia'., para. 61).

With regard to the longer-term presence of
MINUSTAH, the Government is in favour, following
the elections, of sending the strategic assessment
mission, the concept of which has already been agreed.
It is well understood that the next Government, once
elected, will have to jointly define with the members
of the Security Council the terms of reference for the
future Mission as well as the dimensions of the new
configuration. Nevertheless, we believe it useful to
recall the principled position of the Government with
regard to the MINUSTAH transition plan under way
and the profile of the future Mission, both of which
must fully take into account the changing situation on
the ground. In that respect, the smooth rolling out of the
forthcoming elections should be a key indicator for the
prospects for stabilization and medium- and long-term
security needs.

The key is to safeguard the achievements of
MINUSTAH's presence over past 12 years and enable
Haitian institutions, in particular the Haitian National
Police, to gradually and effectively take over the roles
previously filled by the Mission. In the immediate
future, and in tandem with the electoral process,
we are supporting the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which is working with
police-contributing countries, to offset the current
shortfall of 250 police officers against the authorized
level of 951 officers.

The Secretary-General's report highlights a number
of other challenges and notes his particular concerns
about the worsening social, economic and humanitarian
situation. It should be stressed that the recent reduction
in official development assistance and the freezing of
various cooperation programmes have significantly
reduced public investment in necessary infrastructure,
while limiting the United Nations response capability
in providing humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable
groups in Haiti.

Moreover, the resurgence of the cholera epidemic
has compounded an already deeply troubling health
situation. In that regard, while we express our hope
that, at the highest level, further talks between Haiti
and the United Nations on the cholera epidemic will be
undertaken as soon as possible, the Government wishes
to commend the concerted action that the Secretary-
General is deploying to implement a more substantial
package that

"would provide material assistance and support
to those Haitians directly affected by cholera,
[including victims ofthe disease and their families]"
(ibid, para 62).

The Government also notes with the greatest of interest
the urgent call of the Secretary-General for

"Member States to demonstrate their solidarity
with the people of Haiti by increasing their
contributions to efforts to eliminate cholera and
provide assistance to those affected" (Ibid, para 62).

In that vein, 1 would be remiss not to highlight the
new approach recently adopted by the United Nations
with regard to the cholera epidemic, which has been
raging in Haiti since 2010. With admirable frankness,
the Secretary-General officially acknowledged, based
on irrefutable evidence, that the United Nations had a
moral responsibility towards the victims of the cholera
epidemic and that therefore, given the role it had played
in the outbreak of the epidemic and the suffering
of victims, it was incumbent upon the Organization
to do more and make every effort to help Haiti in
overcoming it.

We welcome that courageous new attitude, which
echoes the suffering ofthe victims and above all sends a
clear message to the international community about the
importance of switching from words to action in order
to help Haiti deal with a humanitarian situation that has
just deteriorated alarmingly in the wake of Hurricane
Matthew. For the United Nations this is more than a
moral imperative, it is a duty of international solidarity
that will require a far more substantial effort than
previous ones in order to significantly step up the fight
against cholera, slow its progression and ultimately
eliminate it, by helping the Government to develop the
infrastructure needed to address its structural problems
related to the provision of drinking water, sanitation
and health care in Haiti. We hope that the new two-part
approach recommended by the Secretary-General will
result in an ambitious programme of action that will
finally be equal to these challenges and that the Haitian
people have been pleading for for a long time.

In the same spirit, we welcome the enthusiasm of
the international solidarity that has been expressed to
the victims of last week's disastrous hurricane, which,
as the Council is aware, resulted in tremendous damage
in various parts of the country, particularly the south,
and which, as is understandable, has forced the general
elections originally set for 9 October to be postponed
to a later date. The Government of the Republic of
Haiti is deeply grateful to all the friendly countries,
the cooperative partners, the United Nations and
the non-governmental organizations that have stood
spontaneously and generously with the Haitian people
in the face of a situation that has once again bordered on
tragedy in some of the affected areas. The Government
is grateful to the United Nations for the joint appeal
to international solidarity, launched on 10 October,
with the goal of collecting $120 million for aid for the
next three months to the communities that have been
tragically affected by Hurricane Matthew.

In order to avoid the problems resulting from the
fragmentation, misuse and ineffectiveness of aid that
Haiti has unfortunately experienced all too often in the
past, the Government hopes fervently that international
action and donor contributions can be smoothly
synchronized with the efforts of local stakeholders
and appropriately channeled through the existing
coordination mechanisms for external cooperation that
have already been shown to work elsewhere.

My country is at a crossroads. The next elections will
be a test of our consolidation of a culture of democracy
and the country's long-term stability, economic
modernization and development. The Government is
fully aware ofthis and intends to show itself equal to the
challenge and its mission. It is prepared to make every
sacrifice and to take on its obligations in full, despite
the extremely tenuous means at its disposal. It calls for
cooperation on the part of all of Haiti's partners on the
logistical, financial and operational fronts, in order to
enable the Provisional Electoral Council to complete
the election process and to perform its urgent mission
efficiently and effectively at this difficult juncture.

The Government of Haiti would like to once again
assure all of its partners in the international community
that it will spare no effort to ensure the success of the
forthcoming elections, which will be the proof of the
peaceful political transition and return to a functional
constitutional order that are the conditions for lasting
political stability.

