Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation would like to extend to you, Sir,
its warmest congratulations and to wish you every success
in your term as President of the Security Council. We
should also like to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Tono Eitel on his brilliant performance.

Barely 100 days after the elections in Israel, that
country has committed another flagrant violation of its
obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. The climate of
aggression and hostility against the Arab peoples and the
Palestinian people that has marked the last few months has
led to that Government's recent grave actions: opening the
entrance to a tunnel located in the Western Wall of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem and then
launching an Israeli army attack against Palestinian civilians
who were peacefully demonstrating against that act. This
resulted in hundreds of dead and wounded.

Once again the facts have made it clear that Israel is
continuing to follow an aggressive and dangerous policy
against the people of Palestine and the Arab people. This
represents a constant and unacceptable threat to the entire
Middle East peace process and constitutes gross non-
compliance with the agreements concluded between the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Government of
Israel.

The international community has followed these
events with deep concern, and it is regrettable that the
many appeals for the continuation and development of the
peace process continue to be ignored.

The Security Council has repeatedly affirmed the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
all the territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem. It has also repeatedly called upon the
occupying Power to abide by its provisions.

On numerous occasions the Security Council has
also asked Israel to reverse or halt any action aimed at
changing the status of Jerusalem. Once again the Security
Council's decisions have been ignored, and the destiny of
the Palestinian people and of the whole peace process in
the Middle East, including all its consequences for the
Arab peoples, are at stake.

How can this happen? Are the Security Council's
respectability, legal weight and capacity for action not
enough? Is it that its broad competences, including those
that it sometimes assumes excessively, do not apply when
the human rights, well-being and future of the Palestinian
people and the Arab peoples are at stake? Is it that
resolutions on Palestine do not have the same validity or
standing as others adopted by the Council? In the Middle
East we see most clearly the stark contrast between, on
the one hand, the unforgivable omissions, silences and
inexplicable failure to act and, on the other, the arbitrary
excesses of the Security Council.

Today the Security Council is again face to face
with reality because of the inconsistency of its earlier
actions and its wrong messages, the consequences of
which we warned against when dealing with other issues,
including the confiscation of Palestinian lands, aggression
against Lebanon and, more recently, Iraq.

Impunity is the root cause of the current events, and
those that have taken place in the past in that region. The
history of conflicts in the Middle East is the history of
impunity. Let us hope that the Security Council will find

 

a way to shed its impotence and reaffirm some of the
indications of some weeks ago that it can act independently.

Is there any need to state that it is the double standard
of United States policy that protects such acts and prevents
the solution of the problem as a whole? Is it necessary to
show that the veto, or even the threat of a veto, is at the
heart of the Council's impotence? What has become of the
fiery rhetoric against terrorism?

Once more, it is clear that a profound and democratic
reform of the Security Council is necessary. Once again,
the General Assembly must, without delay, use its full
weight as the universal, pre-eminent and sovereign organ of
the United Nations.

Cuba adds its voice to the international community's
denunciation of this new Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and occupied Jerusalem. Cuba joins in
the vigorous condemnation of the Group of Arab States
against the actions of the Israeli occupation forces. Cuba
rejects the opening of the tunnel entrance in occupied East
Jerusalem, or any use of the tunnel that would jeopardize
any sacred temples or archaeological sites that are the
heritage of all mankind.

Cuba reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to
have an independent State with Jerusalem as its capital and
rejects the measures designed to change the legal status and
demographic composition of the Holy City.

Cuba demands the return of all Arab territories
occupied by Israel, including the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip, the Golan Heights and occupied southern Lebanon.
Cuba demands respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and the internationally recognized frontiers of
the States of the region.

Cuba hopes that there will be no delay, that we will
not hide the need for action behind long debates, and that
the Security Council will express itself with the necessary
severity by condemning the Israeli actions and will assume
its responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security.

