Mr. Vote-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the information
provided regarding his recent trip. I should like to
make a few comments on his presentation.

With regard to Somalia, we are concerned at the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
attacks against the civilian population, as well as the
acts of intimidation and the human rights violations
carried out by various parties. It is also alarming that
access to humanitarian aid is at its lowest point ever
and that humanitarian workers are being threatened and
harassed, which is preventing aid from reaching the
people most in need. We believe it is important that the
Transitional Federal Institutions and all parties to the
conflict promise to guarantee access for humanitarian
workers and to provide transport authorizations so that
the aid can reach those for whom it is intended.

That deterioration on the ground further
jeopardizes the possibilities that a solution can be
found to Somalia's long-standing crisis. It is urgent
that the international community and the Security
Council assess how we are dealing with the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. Without security or
access to humanitarian assistance, all the political
efforts being made for reconciliation and stability in
the country could come to naught.

Furthermore, we regret the continued
deterioration of the security conditions and the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We now need to
ensure the protection of the civilian population, and it
is essential that all parties declare a cessation of
hostilities. In addition, all parties must be required to
permit full and unhindered humanitarian access in
order to improve the flow of aid to the displaced
population.

The briefing reminded us of the factors
contributing to the continued worsening of the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur and illustrated the many
threats faced by internally displaced persons, whose
number had increased to 250,000 as of September
2007.

The scope and the characteristics of the
humanitarian tragedy in Darfur are a constant appeal to
the conscience of the international community. The
millions of human beings who are clinging to life
cannot be helped through a gradual approach or
political considerations; what is required is a great
collective resolve to urgently mobilize all the
assistance needed to save lives and to respect the
human dignity of the displaced persons. We appreciate
the 2008 workplan for the Sudan, to be presented on
11 September next year to international donors; it will
be very important for those most in need in Darfur. The
Sudanese authorities must be prepared to cooperate
fully with the United Nations system and the
international community to make progress in
stabilizing Darfur.

We appreciate the fact that Mr. Holmes visited
the Ogaden region of Ethiopia, where the humanitarian
situation has become worrisome. We understand that
his visit has made it possible to identify the most
pressing humanitarian needs and that he was able to
request the Ethiopian authorities to conduct an
investigation into the reports of human rights
violations in that area.

Finally, I wish to thank Mr. Holmes for his frank

and clear presentation, which reflects the tragedy and

the insecurity being suffered by thousands of people

who are the victims of humanitarian crises. I should

like to assure him of Peru's unwavering support for his

work and for the resolute efforts of his Office to assist

the civilians, including displaced persons and refugees,
affected by those crises.

