Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able
stewardship of the Council this month and thank you
for convening this important debate. I also wish to
thank Ms. Coomaraswamy, Mr. Mulet, Ms. Venemen
and Ms. Hunt for their informative statements and,
more importantly, for their commitment and dedication
to working on this issue before today's meeting. As
others have mentioned, we would also like to commend
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
under the able stewardship of the representative of
France, for its important work.

Children are primary Victims in many cases of
armed conflict. They are the targets of conflict and,
increasingly, its instruments. While the United Nations
has focused on the issue of children and armed conflict
since the 1996 Graca Machel report, followed by
Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) and many
others, children are still involved in armed conflict as
soldiers, with an alarming increase in cases of sexual
Violence and the culture of impunity.

In this regard, we welcome the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008) last month,
which recognized the vulnerability of children in
armed conflict to rape and other acts of sexual
Violence. Israel, for its part, assigns great importance to
the protection of children from violence and armed
conflict, as evidenced in its signature of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocol on armed conflict. Indeed, we maintain a
comprehensive system of laws, protecting children's
rights across the board, and pay careful attention to the
issue of children and armed conflict also through our
vast non-governmental organization and advocacy
networks.

Since the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, we has also worked closely with
the United Nations to promote a constructive dialogue
on this issue. My delegation has followed closely the
Special Representative's recent travels around the
world and her work to raise awareness about this issue.

Despite the evident progress, lessons learned
from previous disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes for children are not
being applied to armed conflict as they should. Child
soldiers continue to be overlooked or do not have
formal access to DDR processes, and thousands of
returning soldiers do not receive demobilization
assistance. Long-term reintegration is severely under-
funded, and girls in particular are routinely neglected,
despite their involvement in the conflict as fighters or
subjection to severe sexual violence.

At the same time, there have been noticeable
achievements in protecting children, inter alia, through
Security Council resolutions that I have mentioned and
the work of the International Criminal Court. The latter
has issued arrest warrants for war crimes and crimes
against humanity that include the forced enlistment and
use of children in hostilities. Similarly, the Special
Court for Sierra Leone's decision on Brima, Kamara
and Kanu marked the first time an international
criminal tribunal has invoked the offence of
conscripting child soldiers.

The scourge of global terrorism means that
civilians today are increasingly vulnerable and
threatened, both from indiscriminate and targeted
attacks. Children have also often become the object of
terrorist interest for purposes of recruitment,
incitement to Violence and human shielding.

In our region, despite the "state of calm",
Palestinian terrorists in the Gaza Strip continue to fire
rockets indiscriminately at Israeli cities in the southern
envelope, including Sderot, placing children in
particular peril. In Sderot, up to 94 per cent of children
suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder. The
psychological effects are no less damaging than
physical wounds. Indeed, until last month, the
frequency of rocket attacks since June 2007 reached an
average of one attack every three hours.

Israeli civilians are not only the victims of
indiscriminate attacks; they are likewise targeted by
terrorists. In March 2008, a Palestinian terrorist
stormed a rabbinical seminary in Jerusalem and
murdered eight boys in cold blood. The Security
Council must unequivocally and unconditionally
condemn such terrorist attacks and call for an end to
Violence against Israeli civilians and to impunity for
those who commit acts of terrorism.

These terrorists do not even care or show concern
for their own populations. Last month, on 12 June,
Palestinian media reported that terrorists accidentally
detonated a bomb in a weapons factory housed in a
residential building in Beit Lahiya. Ten Palestinians
were killed in the explosion and several dozens were
wounded, among them many children, including the
apartment building owner's four-month-old baby
daughter. Hamas has long operated in civilian areas,
using civilians as shields, and has commandeered
schools and houses of worship for making weapons and
planning and carrying out attacks. As evidenced,
terrorism is a grave threat to all children - in our area,
both to Palestinian and to Israeli children.

As many child soldiers are found within the ranks
of armed groups, existing initiatives have limited
impact in protecting children from recruitment and use
in conflict. By their nature, armed and terrorist groups
reject pressure and persuasion to end such practices.
Hence, the international community must advocate for
context-specific and more sophisticated strategies to
address the practice of involving children in armed
conflict.

On previous occasions, my delegation has raised
the issue of indoctrination and incitement to Violence,
of youth and children in particular. Indeed, while we
tend to focus our energies primarily on the conscription
and use of children in hostilities, children need
protection from all aspects of armed conflict, including
programmatic attempts to brainwash them. In recent
months and before, Hamas's Al-Aqsa TV has
repeatedly called upon children to form human shields
and carryout attacks and violence against Israel.
Similarly, Hamas's summer camps are notorious for
their indoctrination of children with propaganda, hate
and Violence.

For the international community to truly deliver
on the issue of children and armed conflict, utilizing,
inter alia, the development approach, we must

holistically confront the conditions that condone and
promote violence in society. This must be a shared
commitment on the part of all States, parties and
people. As Nelson Mandela once said,

"No one is born hating another person because of
the color of their skin, religion or background.
Hatred and intolerance have to be learned and, if
they can be learned, so can love and tolerance,
which are more natural to the human heart. Even
in the grimmest times I have seen glimmers of
humanity, which have reassured me that man's
goodness is the flame that can never be
extinguished."

