Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to join those who have preceded me
in congratulating the New Zealand presidency on
convening today's open debate, which is clear evidence,
based on what we have heard, of its timeliness and of the
severity of the problems facing small island developing
States (SIDS).

For my country, this group of 52 States and
territories - 23 of which are in the Caribbean Sea
region, to which Colombia, with a coastline more
than 1,600 kilometres long, also belongs - are very
important and in urgent need of solutions to their
problems. Of the challenges that were discussed so
eloquently by the Minister of Finance of Seychelles and
the Prime Ministers of Jamaica and Samoa, I will focus
on two that are particularly significant for Colombia:
transnational organized crime and climate change.

Colombia, perhaps unlike any other nation in our
region, has been dealing for decades with transnational
organized crime, at an enormous cost in lives and
resources. In that struggle, however, we have learned
lessons that have enabled us to design a comprehensive
international strategy for security cooperation that
we have shared in particular with our Caribbean
neighbours through advice, technical assistance,
education and training on anti-narcotics intelligence in
order to fight transnational organized crime, as well as
in helping to combat the global drug problem, which,
as we have heard today, has had tragic effects on SIDS,
particularly our neighbours in the region. It is in that
spirit of cooperation that we are now able to announce
that, in September in Cartagena de Indias, we will be
hosting a third Caribbean seminar on combating drugs,
with representatives from 16 countries.

We have also signed cooperation agreements with
14 countries in the region aimed at strengthening
national capacities at the operational level that will
enable us to work together, with better tools, in order to
tackle potential threats to our security and that of our
citizens. Perhaps one of the most effective mechanisms
has been the creation and strengthening of strategic
alliances, in partnership with countries such as Canada
and the United States, that have enabled us to develop
triangular and South-South cooperative relationships,
as others have also mentioned, in order to create safer
societies in the countries of the Caribbean.

Secondly, I would like to refer to the threat posed
by climate change. Disasters caused by extreme
natural phenomena linked to climate change have the
potential to devastate Caribbean States and therefore
the economic stability and security of our entire region.
A single tropical storm can destroy the infrastructure
of an entire country and retard gross domestic product
growth for several years, thus significantly disrupting
its development growth and the region's development
path.
Colombia has fallen victim to this phenomenon
and therefore understands the extreme circumstances
facing neighbouring SIDS, as so rightly stated in your
concept note (S/2015/543, annex), Mr. President, in
which you say that:

"Tackling climate change is not, on its own,
sufficient to eliminate all the challenges that small
island developing States are facing, but failure to act
on climate change will undoubtedly make their future
less secure."

This, of course, will threaten the stability of our
region and of the entire planet. That is why the Security
Council must play a role in the cases of conflict that are
already on its agenda, which can only be exacerbated
by the effects of climate change, specifically through
humanitarian protection measures.

I am sure with the definition of a new post-
2015 sustainable development agenda, and with the
opportunity to adopt a legally binding agreement at
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change Paris Conference to be held in December, as
well as the special session of the General Assembly on
the world drug problem, to be held here in New York
in April 2016, as mentioned by the Prime Minister of
Jamaica and the Ambassador of the United Kingdom,
we shall forge ahead in building more prosperous
societies while tackling the drivers of insecurity for all
States of the world, but especially for the small island
developing States.

