Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation for initiating today's open
briefing on the very critical humanitarian situation in
Syria, and we thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his comprehensive and very informative
briefing. Like others, we express our serious concern
about the continuing severe and devastating nature of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

Turning to the main topic of our briefing today, we
welcome the assessment mission to Raqqa that had been
conducted by our humanitarian colleagues from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on

1 April. It is indeed worrisome that despite a high level
of unexploded ordnance on the ground, an estimated
100,000 people have reportedly returned to Raqqa. The
team has reported, through facts obtained by the local
council, on the extremely high level of destruction, with
nearly 70 per cent ofbuildings either having been razed
to the ground or damaged, and many services, such as
water, electricity, and health care, lacking or severely
limited. Some schools have resumed but are without
school materials and other supplies. It is commendable
that the United Nations and local non-governmental
partners are providing assistance to those in need in the
city, and also responding to gaps and priority needs in
the areas of essential aid and basic services.

We are also worried about the fate of the Rukban
and Hadalat refugee camps, located on the way to the
Jordanian border in the 55-kilometre-radius protected
zone. According to our information, in both camps,
about 85,000 refugees are living in tents. Many are
ill and suffering from hunger and a lack of attention,
owing to a shortage of doctors and medical supplies.
We consider the camp to have the dangerous potential
of turning into a place where anything goes - where
foreign mercenaries, instructors and recruiters to
the ranks of radical organizations operate without
constraints. We are also alarmed at reports that armed
groups do not allow humanitarian convoys of the United
Nations and the Syrian Government into the security
zone. We call for the World Health Organization and
other United Nations humanitarian partners to be
permitted entry into the camps.

We support the proposal of the Russian Federation
to establish humanitarian corridors for the withdrawal
of refugees from the area of Al-Tanf and the Rukban
camp, using as an example of corridors created by
Russian and Syrian military during the crisis in
Aleppo, when thousands of civilians left the city. We
also commend the authorities in Jordan who, earlier this
year, have allowed a one-off delivery of United Nations
humanitarian aid by crane-lift to tens of thousands of
displaced persons from Syria.

Kazakhstan calls on all parties for an immediate
suspension of all war activities in Syria, allowing
humanitarian aid to reach all those in need, as well as
evacuation of all patients requiring urgent treatment
that cannot be provided there. Kazakhstan supports all
the relevant Security Council resolutions so as to ensure
principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2018.

In the light of the prevailing circumstances, the
need for all Council members to implement the recently
adopted resolution 2401 (2018) is most critical. We look
forward to ongoing frequent and periodic reporting
to the Council on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) through the regular Syria briefings and
the Secretary-General's reports, as stipulated in the
resolution. In this context, we support the results of
the second trilateral meeting of the Heads of States
guarantors of the Astana process - the Presidents of
Russia, Turkey and Iran - that took place on 4 April in
Ankara. We believe that this summit of the troika is an
important step towards the settlement of the Syrian war.

Lastly, we must focus on Syrian national unity,
which is critical, particularly after the defeat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. After the prolonged
war, the question of boundaries and territories must
be addressed in accordance with the Constitution in
order to prevent a re-emergence of extremist groups.
The issues before us are the legal and political future
of Raqqa and must take into account the interests
and rights of the various ethnic and tribal groups that
compose the local population.

