Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Let me also pay tribute to the
able leadership shown by the President of the Council
last month.

I am grateful for the privilege to address the
Security Council, and I take this opportunity to update
members on the progress made by our new
Government in our first 50 days, as well as some
urgent news regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia and the situation in Somalia more generally.

Our message remains firm and clear. We are
focused on security, reconciliation, transitional tasks
such as making progress on the constitutional process,
humanitarian assistance, and effective, transparent and
accountable governance. Our hope is that we will
quickly fledge into a stable and secure Government
catering to the needs of our people and able to provide
services to them. We want space for our enterprising
population to return home and establish flourishing
businesses as they have done around the world.

As to security matters, our forces, with the
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), are winning the security battle. Gradual
and incremental though it may be, the secure space in
Mogadishu grows daily. That is the nature of urban
conflict, in which the protection of civilians is as
important as expelling insurgents. While about 60 per
cent of the city of Mogadishu is now recognizably
under Government control, 80 per cent of the
population now lives in our area, and that is the true
measure of our success. The people of Mogadishu have
overwhelmingly voted with their feet and moved to the
more secure Government-controlled areas of the city.

Furthermore, we are starting to see a rise in the
number of young Al-Shabaab fighters surrendering to
the Government and AMISOM. forces. Seven young
men handed themselves over to the Government just
last week. Many are evidently weak, starving and
distressed. We hear the most disturbing tales of
oppression, and we know very well that a generation of
young Somalis will endure long-term emotional and
psychological damage if we cannot bring an end to this
Violence soon.

The additional 4,000 troops mandated to join
AMISOM, for which we are most grateful to the
Council, will have a dramatic impact on this process,
and we welcome their arrival as soon as possible.

Within our first 50 days, our Government has
openly and transparently completed our first monthly
payment of stipends to our soldiers. We are ready to
repeat this each month, and systems are being put in
place to establish a full biometric register our forces by
our fourth month. This simple act of transparent
Government is evidence of our intent.

We await the return to Mogadishu in February of
940 soldiers who have completed training with the
European Union in Uganda. The next cadre of recruits
is ready to go.

In the context of the ultimate aspect of the wider
security issue, our cabinet has debated at great length
the issue of indirect fire and civilian casualties. The
incessant allegations and the effect they have on public
perceptions must be addressed. We stand side by side
with AMISOM, which we know conducts its military
operations with integrity and discipline. However, we
must do more together to reduce accidental damage
and loss of life, better control the use of indirect fire,
and reassure our population against enemy propaganda
claiming that they are targeted indiscriminately.

We have recognized the need to establish a joint
committee with AMISOM. at cabinet level to work with
the AMISOM. Force Commander to establish
communication and maintain protocols within which
we must all work. The most effective policy, of course,
would be to create the strength to eject Al-Shabaab
from Mogadishu outright, thereby entirely removing
any need for indirect fire within the city.
11-20690

Undoubtedly, the most important of the
transitional tasks is the completion of the new
constitution for our nation. If such a constitution is to
have absolute legitimacy and binding authority, both
the process and the eventual content must be beyond
reproach and solely in the interests of the Somali
people.

An important step in the constitutional process
has been taken within the past month as Parliament
approved 15 additional members of the independent
constitutional commission. We have asked the
commission to expedite its work and expand its
consultations. We have engaged Somali constitutional
scholars, lawyers, religious scholars and experts in
Somali culture to review the draft constitution, along
with the independent commission. We intend to be
ready to move to the new stage of parliamentary
approval and then to public consultations within the
next few months. The constitution is such an important
document, with profound implications for the future of
our people and country, that it is essential that we take
the time needed to do it right, without having to
respond to artificial external pressure.

On two separate occasions within the past month,
I have dispatched high-level delegations to Galguduud
and Puntland. In both cases, our delegations have
successfully diffused clan disputes that threatened
stability in those regions. We continue to reach out to
all communities in our country and to lead the process
of peacebuilding and reconciliation. Ahlu Sunnah Wal
Jama'a and the Government have a good relationship.
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a is part of the Council of
Ministers, and its members hold other key positions,
such as Deputy Commander of the Somali army.

Our Government acknowledges the pressing need
for immediate progress towards open and transparent
governance. I have taken a number of steps very early
in our administration to set standards and provide clear
statements of intent. The Cabinet has signed a code of
ethics and a full declaration of wealth. An
anti-corruption commission has been instituted, with
the power to investigate and review Government
procedures and decisions. Ministerial travel can be
undertaken only with my consent, and a full registry of
Government property and vehicles is being prepared.
Our Government is committed to Mogadishu and
Somalia, and that is where you will find us.
5

A full budget providing a comprehensive outline

of Government spending in 2011 has been submitted

by our Cabinet and approved by Parliament. Ministers

have been allocated their budgets for the year, with

priority placed on the payment of civil servants. In

November 2010, the port of Mogadishu collected and

deposited into the Central Bank of Somalia record

revenues of over $2 million. This is the highest
monthly revenue in the past 20 years.

Transparency and accountability are the
watchwords of our Government. The technical experts
within the Cabinet have immediately found ways of
demonstrating good processes and sound administration;
registering and paying troops; formulating, processing
and implementing our budget; and instituting new
measures of accountability and transparency within the
Government. There are a lot of simple but demonstrable
processes that we can deliver to inspire confidence. This
is just the beginning, but in 50 days we have done more
than has been done previously. The Transitional Federal
Government requires budgetary support from the
international community if it is to deliver services to its
citizens.

Success has brought and will continue to bring
with it a variety of challenging consequences. As many
Council members may know, Somalia is in the grip of a
potentially devastating drought. Agriculture is in the
early stage of collapse. A crisis looms as over 2 million
people face starvation. The Government has started
delivering aid to internally displaced persons and the
poor as best we can in areas under Government control.
We have also identified ways of reaching out and
delivering aid to areas under rebel control. We have
called on the Somali people to help each other and on
businesses and people in the diaspora to donate and
support their extended families.

We are grateful for the generous donation of
149 tons of food from our friends and brothers in the
United Arab Emirates. We thank them and ask others to
respond similarly. United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations must accelerate their
arrival in Mogadishu and assist in organizing the
provision of services and humanitarian aid. The long-
term questions of disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation must also be addressed. People who have
6
escaped the terror of Al-Shabaab need and deserve all
our help.

Our forces, together with AMISOM, have our
security in hand. The Government is opening up, police
are being trained, the Mayor is cleaning and organizing
the city, and the people are ready to rebuild their lives.
We are all ready to work with the United Nations.
Currently, AMISOM. is the sole agent for international
support operating in Mogadishu. It cannot continue to
carry the weight of military strategy, security, police
mentoring and training, medical aid and humanitarian
aid alone. It needs support, and it needs it now. We
need support and we need it now.

The debate concerning the future of the
Government in Somalia beyond August this year will
undoubtedly have begun within the international
community. We do not intend to be bystanders in this
debate. We will demonstrate repeatedly between now
and August that we are a legitimate and effective
Government. We accept that the international
community needs a partner it can depend upon and
work with. We will be that partner. We will show that
we have a coherent and transparent programme for the
future and that, despite the most difficult of
circumstances, we have laid the foundation for a secure
Government. Our political development will not
always be pretty, but given time within a secure
environment and with the support of the international
community to relieve the humanitarian crisis, Somalia
will lead Somalia out of its darkest days.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
for the extraordinary job that he is currently doing,
working with my Government to create lasting peace
and stability in Somalia.

