Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking
the initiative to discuss the interlinkages between
climate-related disasters and international peace
and security. I would also like to express our deep
appreciation to the briefers for their thought-provoking
presentations.

Disasters induced by global climate change have
the potential to turn into major security concerns. The
findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change's special report on Global Warming of 1.5°C
warn us about the dangerous consequences that will
follow if we fail to limit global warming to 15°C, in
particular in the areas of poverty eradication, food
security and public health.

Bangladesh is one of the worst-affected countries
by the impacts of global climate change, due to its
geographical location. It is highly prone to natural
disasters, such as cyclones, floods, landslides and
earthquakes. Climate change poses a serious threat
to our 160 million people, although we have hardly
contributed to the deterioration of the environment. Just
a 1°C increase in the global temperature and resultant
sea level rise will cause the inundation ofa large area of
Bangladesh and, we fear, the displacement of40 million
people by the end ofthis century. We are also losing 2 per
cent of our annual gross domestic product (GDP) due
to natural calamities and environmental degradation.
Climate change-induced salinity and other disasters
are harming our production of rice and other crops.
In addition to all of that, hosting 1.1 million forcibly
displaced Rohingyas from neighbouring Myanmar is
also impacting our fragile environment.

Tackling climate change is directly linked to
sustainable development and resilience-building. In
line with that perspective, under the leadership of
its climate crusader, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,
Bangladesh is carrying forward its efforts for
sustainable development with specific plans for carbon
budgeting, the de-carbonization of manufacturing
pathways and low-carbon industrialization. In
considering multidimensional vulnerabilities posed by
climate change and disasters, our Government recently
adopted its Delta Plan 2100 to guide our sustainable
development pathway for the next 100 years.

Bangladesh is committed to implementing its
nationally determined contributions within the
framework of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We have mainstreamed climate actions and
disaster management in our national planning and
sustainable development strategy. Over 1 per cent of
our GDP is being used to combat climate change. To
ensure food security for our people, we have been
investing in transforming our agriculture and making
it more resilient to the impacts of climate change and
disasters. We have taken various initiatives to increase
forestation, including a project worth $50 million for
the conservation of the Sundarbans, the world's largest
mangrove forest and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Despite numerous challenges, at the national
level Bangladesh has been able to reduce casualties
in incidents of natural disasters in recent times by
taking various measures, such as improvements
to our early warning system, the dissemination of
information, the establishment of cyclone shelters
and the active engagement of dedicated Cyclone
Preparedness Programme volunteers for preparedness
and response activities.

Halting global climate change and reducing disaster
risks will largely depend upon the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 to
their true letter and spirit. The recently adopted Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
also acknowledges that investing in, and accelerating
global cooperation for, climate change mitigation and
adaptation would contribute to the elimination of the
adverse drivers and structural factors that compel
people to leave their countries of origin.

Therefore, we must redouble our efforts for
sustainable development. Bangladesh is of the firm
View that climate change and related disasters must be
discussed in the mould of international development
cooperation. Big emitters must aim for the rapid
mitigation of greenhouse gases. Also, providing
financial resources and ensuring technology transfer to
vulnerable countries for their adaptation efforts would
be the most effective response to the threats posed by
climate change and related disasters.

While we emphasize that the effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement and other
relevant global documents and mechanisms are a
must to fight the effects of climate change, we are not
ignoring the fact that there could be a nexus between
climate change and international peace and security.
The whole United Nations system should work together
to improve our knowledge and understanding to find
out if climate change poses any direct threat to peace
and security in a specific locality, or if it is one of the
multiplying factors. The whole United Nations system
should also speak with one voice to prevent or resolve
any crisis that is an evident outcome of the adverse
effects of climate change.

