Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Bolivia congratulates you and your entire
team, Mr. President, on the efficient and professional
conduct of the work of the Security Council during
the month of August. We had a very busy month, in
particular this last week, however, it was also a very
productive month in which the Security Council dealt
with very important issues for international peace
and security.

Among the month's topics that we wish to highlight
is the open briefing on sanctions, held on 3 August
(see S/PV.8018), during which members of the Security
Council were able to express their views on that
vitally important issue, which has implications for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The need for sanctions, their implementation, their
effectiveness and even when they should be lifted were
some of the points that Council members discussed
during the meeting. For our part, we reiterate that
sanctions should not be an end in itself, but rather a
means to an end. Sanctions are one of the Council's
tools for the maintenance of peace and security, and
should be among the last to be used. In that connection,
we categorically reject the imposition of unilateral
sanctions. Such actions not only constitute a flagrant
violation of international law, but also undermine the
efforts and work of multilateral bodies such as ours - as
they extend domestic jurisdiction and legislation from
one State to another, thereby violating the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Still on the issue of sanctions, this month the
Council adopted new sanctions against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We believe that they should
serve as an instrument to achieve dialogue among
the parties, with the ultimate goal of denuclearizing
of the Korean peninsula. The Security Council has
demonstrated great unity during this month in adopting
resolution 2371 (2017) and, yesterday, presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/16. That unity must serve to
achieve a peaceful political solution to the conflict.
We must support all efforts that have been presented
by some Council members to that end. A military
conflict cannot be one of the options, as it would have
unimaginable consequences.

We are living through the worst humanitarian
crisis since 1945. This month the Council addressed
the current situation in various countries in crisis, such
as Yemen (see S/PV.8027), where, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme, more than
20 million people require humanitarian assistance,
17 million people are food insecure, more than 2 million
are internally displaced and 280,000 are refugees.
Similarly, South Sudan, a country that the Council
often discusses, also faces a complicated humanitarian
situation, since almost 50 per cent of the population
requires humanitarian assistance.

We would also like to note the initiative of Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and of the
Egyptian delegation in convening the open briefing on
sexual violence on 10 August (see S/PV.8022). The field
visit by the Deputy Secretary-General is very important
for laying the foundation for collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union in order to
promote the participation of women in peace processes.
Gender equality is critical to building sustainable peace
processes. We hope that such visits can be replicated in
other regions in coordination with other regional and
subregional organizations.
We would also like to underline the thematic
continuity of the Council in recent months under various
presidencies. For example, in June, we held an open
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (see S/PV.7971); in July, under
the Chinese presidency, we held an open debate on
improving African capabilities in the area of peace and
security (see S/PV.8006); and just yesterday, we held
an open debate on peacekeeping and peacebuilding (see S/PV.8033). Next month we will hold an open debate
on peacekeeping operations. We hope that this thematic
continuity will enrich the debate between the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union during next week's joint
consultative meeting between the two bodies.

Finally, Bolivia would also like to join others in
commending His Excellency Ambassador Koro Bessho
of Japan for his work in revising note by the President
S/2010/507. We also express our full support to the
Permanent Mission of Ethiopia, which will assume the
presidency of the Council in September. We pledge our
full support to its team and are confident that they will
do excellent work.

