Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
President for convening today's meeting and Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca for his briefing.

This open debate is taking place against a backdrop
of important developments, with the promise of a new
era of Palestinian unity through the formation of a
Palestinian National Unity Government that represents
all Palestinian factions. In that regard, I reiterate
that Qatar welcomes the signing of a reconciliation
agreement between Fatah and Hamas, along with the
formation of a national Government and its assumption
of its duties in the Gaza Strip. We in Qatar are
conscious of the significance of the current phase in
the continuing efforts to achieve peace in the Middle
East and want to emphasize the importance of making
progress in implementing the reconciliation agreement,
with a view to achieving the national unity that the
Palestinian people aspire to. We are hopeful that those
recent positive developments will be an additional
incentive to making progress and moving past the
current stagnation in the peace process, in order to give
the region's nations and people renewed hope. Qatar
has recently been striving to do all it can to help move
the peace process forward, including by supporting
Palestinian reconciliation and providing humanitarian
assistance to our Palestinian brethren, while also
continuing to work with the international community
to achieve peace.

If we are to achieve peace for both Palestine and
Israel, all the parties must comply with international
law while working diligently to create an environment
conducive to peace and security through de-escalation
efforts and by ensuring respect for religious sites,
particularly Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with the aim of
achieving stability in the region and helping to
de-escalate other crises. Qatar supports the concept
of a two-State solution whereby the two countries can
live side by side in peaceful coexistence. That entails
establishing an independent Palestinian State, within
its 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The risks and threats to international peace and
security posed by the continuing crisis in Syria will
require intensified effort if we are to reach a political
solution. We reiterate our position in support of all efforts
in that regard, based on the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), in order
to fulfil the Syrian people's desire to achieve stability
and safeguard their country's territorial integrity. In
that regard, we support all efforts to de-escalate the
situation and prevent tensions, based on the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Astana process. We
will also increase our cooperation with our international
partners in providing assistance to our Syrian brothers
and sisters.

If we are to address the current crisis in the Middle
East and end extremism and terrorism there, we must
tackle its grave and complex challenges through joint
efforts and intensified cooperation. As new conflicts
emerge, they contribute to the complexity of the
existing crises and hinder international efforts at a
time when the overall scenario in the region is already
very complicated. Qatar has been experiencing a
completely unjustifiable blockade since the beginning
of June that is a blatant violation of international law
and the Charter and that undermines friendly relations
among States, creating an atmosphere of instability in
the region. Despite those attacks on Qatar, which is
maintaining its policy of working to resolve conflicts
peacefully, we reiterate our support for the offer by His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
the Amir of Kuwait, to provide genuine mediation and
appreciate the attitude of all the allied nations that have
supported it.

In conclusion, Qatar reiterates its commitment to
participating effectively and positively in support of all
efforts aimed at achieving peace in the Middle East and
the Security Council's objectives in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

