Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): On behalf of the Chairmen
of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), which deal with the issue of
terrorism, I would like to give an update on the
continued cooperation among the Committees and their
expert groups.

During the past six months, the Al-Qaida and
Taliban 1267 Sanctions Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540 Committee
and their respective expert groups have increased
cooperation, as requested by the Security Council in
recent resolutions pertaining to the three Committees,
notably in resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and
1822 (2008).

The three Committees attach great importance to
coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups, namely, the Monitoring Team, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1540 Committee experts. The Committees
welcome the continuing efforts of the expert groups to
develop common strategies on areas of common
concern, to organize joint workshops, to coordinate
their participation in conferences and joint country
visits, and to exchange information on their activities.
The Committees encourage their expert groups to
further enhance their exchange of information and
coordination with regard to capacity-building,
assistance requests and the delivery of technical
assistance activities. In that context, I would also like
to recall that cooperation and coordination would be
facilitated by the co-location of the experts in the
framework of the Capital Master Plan.

The three expert groups have continued to
implement the common strategy on dealing with
non- or late-reporting States through exchanges of
information and joint visits, when appropriate, and in
assisting Member States in submitting their responses
to the three Committees on their implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Under that
strategy, the three expert groups have jointly
participated in two workshops organized by the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. One of those was a
workshop for 11 States from the Middle East region
09-606 1 2
and the other was for 13 States from the Caribbean and
Latin American region. An expert from CTED
participated in the regional workshop for Central
American States organized by the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was held in Costa
Rica from 8 to 10 September. Those workshops
continue to provide an excellent opportunity for the
three expert groups to assist Member States in
understanding the differing but complementary roles
and mandates of the three Committees.

The expert groups have continued to cooperate on
issues regarding the implementation of relevant
resolutions by States of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Experts from CTED and the 1540 experts attended the
subregional workshop on counter-terrorism, legislative
initiatives and international cooperation held in Suva,
Fiji, from 1 to 2 June 2009. They also attended the
annual meeting of the Pacific Working Group on
Counter-Terrorism, which was also held in Suva, on
3 June 2009.

In addition to those workshops, the three expert
groups are exploring the use of common video
conferences. The Committees believe that such
workshops and interactive discussions with officials
from capitals are very important tools for enhancing
dialogue with Member States, to help improve
understanding of the distinct, although connected,
mandates of the three Committees and to assist
Member States in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions.

After presenting the common strategy to engage
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, entities and agencies, which is still
under consideration, the Monitoring Team, CTED and
the 1540 Committee experts have continued to work on
a common approach to relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations. The expert groups also
continue to coordinate their visits to Member States, to
explore whether those visits could be conducted
jointly, and to coordinate their participation at relevant
conferences. When an expert group does not participate
in a visit, they exchange information on the Member
State that is to be visited. In addition, the three expert
groups also share their reports on their visits, whenever
possible. Since the last joint meeting, Monitoring Team
members have participated in one CTC visit, which
was their fifteenth joint trip.
The three expert groups also continue to
contribute to each other's work and coordinate it
within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which was
established to ensure overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and to help implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The expert
groups contribute to the work of several CTITF
working groups, and the Monitoring Team and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) have
assumed leading functions.

In addition to the abovementioned activities,
there are regular meetings of the expert groups in New
York. Moreover, when CTC organizes briefings in the
framework of its official meetings, the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Committee experts are also invited
to participate. The Chairmen of the 1267 and 1540
Committees, the Executive Director of CTED, the
Coordinator of the Monitoring Team and members of
the 1540 Committee Expert Group attended the Eighth
Meeting of the Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law Enforcement Organization to
discuss counter-terrorism matters in Irkutsk, Russian
Federation, from 23 to 25 June 2009. The Chairmen
and expert groups of the CTC and 1267 Committee
participated in the open meeting of the 1540
Committee for comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), organized
by the 1540 Committee together with the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and held at United Nations
headquarters from 30 September to 2 October 2009.
The three Chairmen and respective expert groups also
jointly participated in the International Workshop for
National Counter-Terrorism Focal Points on the theme
"Better linking national and global counter-terrorism
efforts", which took place in Vienna on 12 and
13 October 2009. As more than one hundred
representatives from Member States were present at
that workshop, the participation of the three Chairmen
was a useful opportunity to raise awareness about the
mandates and current activities of the three
Committees.

On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table has been issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees and their expert
groups. That table has served as a useful tool for
Member States, as it has helped them to better
understand the specificities and complementarities of
our work. The updated table has been posted on our
respective websites and will be distributed today.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors continue to be a
threat to international peace and security. Cooperation
is a crucial element in the efforts to counter the threat
of terrorism, including the threat from nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons for terrorist purposes.
The three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
and their respective expert groups are committed to
continuing to cooperate and coordinate their work,
within their respective mandates, in order to contribute
to an effective and efficient approach within the overall
United Nations framework and within the broader
efforts of the international community. In this respect,
the Committees look forward to receiving further
guidance from the Council on areas of common interest
in order to better coordinate counter-terrorism efforts.

