The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

Over the past month, the Security Council held
an open debate at the ministerial level on inclusive
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security (see S/PV.7361). The Council adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3) containing
important guidelines in this area, including on the
participation of women and young people, inclusive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, the effects of the illicit exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources and transnational
organized crime, and the need to adopt a broad and
comprehensive approach supporting the activities of
the whole system in the context of its three pillars,
including during transition periods under missions
mandated by the Council.

We thank all members of the Council who
contributed to that statement and participated in the
debate presided over by President Michelle Bachelet.
We hope that the statement will help ensure that the
Council's future work integrate such a focus on inclusive
development, which would be especially relevant in
solving the situations before us at present.

In the context of the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Chile proposed the
holding of an open debate on the protection of civilians
focused on the protection challenges facing women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We hope
that that open debate, to be held tomorrow, will bring
forward ideas and solutions on a topic that deserves
our full attention, in the light of the global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
numerous review processes under way, including that
on peacebuilding. In that regard, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/2, which supports
the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
suggests ways to guide efforts in this domain.

Security Council missions are a tool for maintaining
international peace and security. Our visit to Haiti
allowed us to obtain first-hand information and to
issue an urgent unified call on all sectors urging them
to make constructive process through dialogue and by
holding fair, credible and transparent elections. Such
visits demonstrate the need for the Council to remain
attentive to solutions on the ground, such follow-
up being all the more important when it comes to
reconfiguring peace missions.

In Haiti, the Council observed the support
for inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security provided by the
United Nations country team, and the rapid-impact
and community violence-reduction programmes being
implemented by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

The Council also, unfortunately, learned of many
deaths and was able to respond in a timely fashion,
through presidential statements, to threats and attacks
from armed and/or terrorist groups, such as the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and Boko
Haram. In that regard, a holistic approach must be
taken to such issues in the light of the underlying causes
that generate them. That will require us to ensure that
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa are
adequately supported.

The informal interactive dialogue on the final report
of the independent investigation commission on the
Central African Republic was an exemplary initiative
that allowed Council members to gather information
about the fight against impunity in the country, which
will be useful when the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic comes up for renewal.

We welcome the joint reviews of country situations,
missions and offices with their respective sanctions
regimes, including the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which were reviewed together with the
respective sanctions regimes, with a view to promoting
coherent evaluation and procedural efficiency. We
note with interest the consultations held on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and
we welcome those on Nepal, which demonstrate the
Council's interest in preemptively focusing on an issue
that could require follow-up.

We are very grateful for the support received from
all members of the Council this month.
Finally, we wish the greatest success and offer our The Security Council has thus concluded the
full support to China during its Council presidency in present stage of its consideration of the item on its
the month of February. agenda.

I new resume my functions as President of the The meeting rose atnoan.
Council.
