Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pefia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Japan for having convened today's
open debate and for the excellent work that it has carried
out as a member of the Security Council over the past
two years. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning and for his commitment to
prevention in the work of the Organization.

The complex current challenges to international
peace and security compelus to adopt amultidimensional
approach to respond effectively and sustainably to the
threats we face, including those of a non-State and
non-military nature, while addressing their various
dimensions and underlying causes that may have a
local, regional or global impact.
In January 2015, Chile organized an open debate
(see S/PV.7361) of the Security Council on inclusive
development, inspired by our belief that peace is
a prerequisite for the promotion and protection of
fundamental rights and that, in turn, inclusiveness,
social harmony and sustainable development are vital
if peace is to be attained and maintained. This is a
refrain that we heard from many speakers today. There
was widespread agreement at that meeting that security
and development are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing, and that they are crucial if we are to
deliver lasting peace. The meeting also underscored the
importance ofinclusion as a vehicle for political stability,
democratic governance, development and preserving
the territorial integrity of States. These in turn are
bulwarks against conflict and important for sustaining
peace. The presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3)
adopted on that occasion answers some of the issues
that we are considering in today's debate, and we would
urge everyone to draw upon it when it comes to forging
responses to conflict multipliers referred to in Japan's
concept note ( S/2017/1016, annex).

The Council has gradually integrated an inclusive
approach to addressing specific groups and issues
that were once considered to be solely the purview
of development. The Council has developed a
multidimensional and systemic regulatory framework
on complex challenges in conflict and post-conflict
solutions, in conformity with resolutions 2242 (2015),
2250 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2282 (2016), which the
representative of Ghana just mentioned, 2286 (2015),
2332 (2016) and 2347 (2017), which, inter alia, address
the concerns of women, youth, human trafficking,
health care, civil aviation and cultural heritage.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, we would
draw attention to the transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the format of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
The design of this transfer included a strong element
of national ownership bringing together the work of
the Security Council and numerous other stakeholders,
including the Group of Friends of Haiti. This served
as an example of how States that are not members of
the Council can contribute to solutions. The United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, intended
to help safeguard the comprehensive peace agreement
in that country, is a model of how positive interaction
with the agencies of the United Nations system and the
support of the Peacebuilding Fund can reap dividends.

With regard to the Council's working methods, we
would recommend that the following measures be taken
to overcome the current fragmentation when it comes
to addressing the complex challenges to peace and
security - as we are urged to do by the concept note.

First, we need to strengthen the role of elected
members when it comes to drafting resolutions, and
preferably to pursue the drafting in interregional groups,
as was the case with resolution 2286 (2016), when we
also engaged in close consultation with civil society.

Second, we need to make better use of open debates
as a format, selecting topics that would encourage
a contributory analysis by the entire membership. In
order to identify areas of convergence, we recommend
that the presidency encourage interventions at open
debates by like-minded and interregional groups, such
as the Human Security Network and the Group of
Friends on Children and Armed Conflict. The Chairs
of those groups or others could also be consulted when
it comes to preparing the concept notes.

Third, we would suggest raising further awareness
of Arria Formula meetings by circulating a summary
to all Member States detailing proposed and
actual outcomes.

Fourth, we should integrate the work of subsidiary
bodies and the reports ofthe group of expert of sanctions
committees in the work of the Security Council when
it is considering the design of its products, in particular
with regard to transitions in missions.

Fifth, we would strengthen the ties between the
Security Council and the Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission configurations, while making greater use
of the Commission's advisory role and inviting it to
participate in consultations and in Council field visits.

Sixth, we would make use ofthe Peacebuilding Fund
to address gaps and to overcome the fragmentation in
sustaining peace. We should deepen the interaction with
the Fund, taking advantage of its advice to missions, its
interaction with local civil society and its collaboration
with regard to the empowerment of women and youth.

Seventh, as already pointed out here, it is important
to improve interaction with regional and subregional
organizations, as is increasing coherence in the work of
peacekeeping operations. By way of example, I would
mention the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire,
which successfully completed its mandate on 30 June,
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia. A similar
example pertains to the setting up of special missions,
such as the United Nations Mission for the Emergency
Response to Ebola, to which the representative of Ghana
referred, to deal with the Ebola virus emergency.

In conclusion, the new threats of intra-State
and trans-national conflict posed by various
phenomena - such as terrorism, organized crime, drug
trafficking, money laundering, weapons trafficking,
human trafficking, natural disasters, the spread of
disease and environmental degradation - require
holistic approaches, which we hope will be front and
centre in any future reconfiguration of the peace and
security architecture. We hope that the reform under
way will contribute to such a response. Only by acting
in that way can we effectively contribute to conflict
prevention and to peacebuilding in the world, which are
the founding objectives of this United Nations organ.

We would like to warmly thank the delegation of
Japan for its excellent work. Since our statement was
about working methods, we would also like to take
this opportunity to highlight the Working Methods
Handbook, prepared by Japan and known as the Green
Book, and commend the delegation on that initiative.

