Mr. Labbe Villa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Chile, I join Minister Garcia-Margallo y
Marfil in warmly welcoming those who have come to the
Security Council today speak for the victims - those
massacred simply because they were different, because
they were practicing their faith and because they did
not fit into an insane paradigm that defies all the values
that underpin the Organization.

We are grateful to France for convening this
open debate, which Chile believes addresses central
components of a holistic understanding of peace
and international security. Such an understanding
is people-centred and therefore must always uphold
human dignity. It is in that context that we approach
the issue of the rights of minorities. This is also an
opportunity to reflect on the extensive and systematic
persecution perpetrated by the Islamic State, or
Daesh, of communities and individuals belonging to
certain ethnic, religious or sectarian minorities. Their
actions are exacerbating the climate of insecurity that
unfortunately prevails in the region and its resulting
global humanitarian impact, which the United Nations
system is politically, legally and ethically bound to
address through the Council.

Chile, which strongly supports the doctrine of
interdependence among the three pillars of the United
Nations - peace and security, human rights and
development - is also committed to respect for human
dignity and unity in diversity. In that framework,
the multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious
character of many States - not only those in the
Middle East - is a global public good to be preserved
rather than just being a descriptive footnote. The
preservation of ethnic, religious and cultural diversity
is an imperative of civilization.

Therefore, at the present stage of the development
of human civilization, active religious tolerance, which
stems from the inherent right of people to espouse a
religious belief, not to espouse one or to convert to
another belief, emerges as an essential attribute of
human dignity and serves to establish freedoms that we
must guarantee and fully respect.

With regard to the Middle East, we must denounce
the cruel opportunism of the violence unleashed against
religious minorities who have from time immemorial
been part of the social, economic and even political
fabric of the region. Indeed, no community can survive
and develop over the decades, centuries and even
millennums in the midst of other majority communities
unless there are and have been deep-rooted ties, both
explicit and implicit, of belonging and coexistence.
Such a coexistence of spiritual poles, Viewed over
time, has but enriched the civilizations of the region, in
which my own country too can claim spiritual, ethnic
and cultural ancestors. Chile reiterates in this Chamber
the inalienable right of those communities to live in
their own countries in peace, freedom, full equality
and dignity.

The specific situation in which the Christian
communities of the Middle East find themselves is
a source of special concern, particularly in View of
the structural role played by Christian Arabs in the
ideological construction and definition of secular Arab
identity. The disappearance or virtual exile from the
region of those communities would, in the medium
term, result in the collapse of Arab secularism, and
therefore create a risk that democratic principles would
be eradicated in the Middle East and North Africa.
Based on that reasoning, with other delegations in
the Council, Chile co-sponsored the joint statement
entitled "Supporting the Human Rights of Christians
and other Communities, Particularly in the Middle
East", initiated by the Russian Federation, the Holy
See and Lebanon on behalf of 64 States in the context
of the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights
Council, and the "Joint Concurrence Statement on
Persecution of Minority Communities in the Middle
East", spearheaded by the United States, endorsed by 40
other States and expressing concern about all minority
groups, including Muslims.

In various statements to the Council concerning the
Islamic State, our delegation has stressed the importance
of respecting and guaranteeing the human rights of
religious, ethnic and cultural minorities, pursuant to
resolution 2170 (2014), adopted on 15 August 2014.
From its seat in the Security Council, Chile has strongly
supported all collective actions by the international
community to combat terrorism and violent extremism,
without needing to note that terrorism, as a threat to
international peace and security, cannot be eliminated
by military means alone.

During its past presidency of the Council, Chile
wished to share its perceptions and concerns regarding
the profound causes of the conflict, emphasizing, on
the basis of the interdependence among the three pillars
of the multilateral system, the links between inclusive
development and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Indeed, President Michelle Bachelet
stated on 19 January in this forum:

"In order to understand and tackle those new
challenges, we must adopt a multidimensional
approach that explains the causes underlying those
threats. Those include socioeconomic, gender,
ethnic, tribal, religious and ideological tensions
that may have local, regional or global effects.
That is the only way by which we can effectively
contribute to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
in the world." (S/PV7361, p. 6)

The crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State and
the terrorist groups that have sworn allegiance to it not
only deserve our resounding condemnation, without
any falsely justifying overtones, but also require our
collective action aimed at the total eradication of this
modern scourge that is undermining the very foundation
of civilization. As others have said in the course of this
debate, impunity is not an option. And, as the Secretary-
General has noted, we are faced with an abomination,
an abomination that certainly leads to desolation. We
in the Council and the multilateral system are indebted
to the religious and ethnic minorities in the Middle
East and Africa. Success will be possible only if we
are united around profound convictions and effective
mechanisms. Only then will the sacrifice of the martyrs
of the Levant have redeeming value.

