Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Madam President, let me express our
appreciation for the outstanding performance of
Greece, your friendly country, in its tenure as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council and for the
constructive work it has been undertaking in the
fulfilment of the purposes and principles aimed at the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Our thanks go also to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for the tireless efforts he has been
making in the context of enhancing the partnership
between the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and other international organizations in
the interest of achieving lasting peace and security.

Madam President, from your ancestors, the
ancient Greeks, we learned the meaning of the word
"democracy", meaning the rule of the people. It is a
word that connotes the objective of the advancement of
humanity. It is therefore no surprise to witness today
the manifestation of your desire to develop a more
effective partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a View to
promoting democracy in international affairs.

We, the peoples of the United Nations, have
underscored in our Charter, which we all have accepted
as our ultimate authority, our desire to achieve peace
and security. Convinced as we are of the importance of
coordinated action in this great international
Organization, we have established regional and
subregional alliances as well as broader international
political arrangements based on shared political and
economic orientations in order to strengthen the
foundations of sustainable peace and security.

That is only natural in a diversified world of
escalating tensions. Consolidating a collective
approach in which security issues are dealt with by the

06-5287}

United Nations and regional organizations contributes
to the promotion of peace and security, especially in
the light of the leading role that can be played by
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peacemaking, since they are better placed to determine
the best way of dealing with conflicts in their own
regions. This has prompted the United Nations to
accord greater interest to enhancing a relationship of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations and to consider the
development of a common vision of a global structure
in which capacities complement each other on the basis
of comparative advantages and a clear division of
labour.

The activities undertaken by the regional
organizations must be accorded due importance in the
United Nations, particularly if we take into account the
role played by such regional organizations. Such a role
is presumed to be the strongest link between the
national and international levels in the context of
collective action aimed at developing specific concepts
that all States Members of the United Nations can
abide by. It is to be noted that interaction between the
United Nations and a particular regional organization
strengthens the role played by that organization in its
regional context and Vice versa.

While it is axiomatic that the basis for human
welfare in different regions may be similar in principle,
at the same time different approaches are required in
dealing with each situation according to its own
specificities. There is no doubt that the cooperation and
partnership that are beginning to emerge between the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, and
the African Union represents the strongest evidence of
the great potential that can be tapped by this kind of
cooperation as well as the great advantage to be gained
in the maintenance of sustainable peace and security.
We believe that the recent historic Visit by a Security
Council delegation to the African Union Commission
provides further impetus for modalities of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

However, there remain major, often politically
motivated distortions that result in the application of
double standards in dealing with various conflicts and
the regional organizations that could play a
constructive role in such conflicts. This causes a
certain imbalance between global collective security
and regional collective security. The unstable situation
5
in our Arab region is but proof of this imbalance,
which must urgently be corrected.

It is our View that the United Nations has a great
capacity to achieve the lofty objective of a partnership
that would reflect equally and fairly the concerns and
preoccupations of the various regional organizations, in
pursuit of the greater objective of such a partnership.

Madam President, in conclusion, we would like
to assure you of our support for the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this meeting.
Allow us to extend our best wishes for the success of
the seventh high-level meeting between the United
Nations, the regional organizations and other
intergovernmental organizations, scheduled to begin its
work soon.

