Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I feel honoured to be
among the only two permanent representatives sitting
at the Council table at this moment.

(spoke in Arabic)

I shall deliver a summary of my statement - I
hope that the interpreters will be able to follow. That
way, I can respect the suggested five-minute time
allowance.

The question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is of great importance to the activities
of the United Nations. I welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on this issue (S/2005/740). After
five years of consideration of this issue, it is our belief
that we must continue our work, while remaining
committed to certain basic principles.

First, the Security Council should limit itself to
the cases of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as defined by the items on its agenda. The
Council should not expand its authority by establishing
general policies for dealing with humanitarian issues
and human rights. The elaboration of such general
policies falls within the mandates of the General
Assembly and its Main Committees. Thus, we are
concerned at the mention in the report and the draft
resolution of the possible role of the Security Council
in legislating and taking action under the so-called
responsibility to protect. Of even greater concern is the
fact that the General Assembly, which has been
mandated by the Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to continue its consideration of that
issue in all its aspects, has not yet begun that
consideration.

Second, the protection of civilians requires the
Security Council and the other principal organs of the
United Nations to make greater efforts to consider the
root causes of conflicts and terrorism and not to limit
their action simply to deal with the consequences.

In that regard, we regret that the report of the
Secretary-General, which deals with an issue of such
importance, fails to make any reference to the role of
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council or their mandates, in particular with respect to
preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Third, the report of the Secretary-General notes
in paragraphs 19 and 36 that peacebuilding and
peacekeeping mandates should be integrated
operationally for the protection of the civilians. It is
our hope that the Peacebuilding Commission will be
the beginning of joint action with the Security Council
in a complementary manner.

Fourth, we welcome the Secretary-General's
establishment of a group of legal experts to study the
accountability of United Nations personnel serving in
missions for illegal activities. We look forward to
receiving the details of the integrated strategy that aims
to provide assistance to victims. We also welcome the
proposal to establish an integrated data-collection and
classification mechanism. We request that such data be
made available to the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Fifth, we call on the Secretary-General to give
special attention to African conflicts, which cause
enormous suffering to civilians.

Sixth, the Egyptian delegation is greatly
concerned at the situation in Palestine, as reflected in
the statistics of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
other humanitarian agencies working in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which are contained in the
report of the Secretary-General. In the period from
January 2004 to July 2005, Palestinians were subjected
to more than 2,000 incidents involving the denial or
obstruction of humanitarian access to the Palestinian
people. That situation calls for effective measures to
prevent such incidents from occurring again and to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, abides by its
obligations until the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State.

Seventh, the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to impose new, targeted sanctions on States in
order to ensure humanitarian access raises many
questions. Such situations should be dealt with by
means of cooperation with the Member State
concerned, using all measures, including the provisions
of Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter, not by
imposing sanctions under Chapter VII.

Eighth, Egypt closely follows the work of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee to reinforce humanitarian
protection capacity and affirms the importance of
supporting the Coordinator's role and activities in
order to enhance coordination among the various
bodies. I express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-
General Egeland and Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their important briefings on the issue this
morning.

Finally, this issue should be addressed by
strengthening the framework of international law,
international humanitarian law and the Charter, with a
view to finding a balance in achieving the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.

