Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his informative
briefing. I would also like to thank the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic', and Ambassador Vlora Citaku
for their statements before the Council. We are pleased
that the Council was able to reach a broad agreement
on the frequency of future Council's meetings on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

Ten years have passed since the last strategic review
of UNMIK. We believe that the time is ripe for a new
review that leads to a gradual reduction of the forces
and possible resource savings. There is most certainly
no need to maintain the current level of United Nations
involvement. We are encouraged by the fact that there
is a growing number of Council members who share
that view.

We support and attentively monitor the ongoing
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. The normalization of
relations between the capitals is of crucial importance
to the European Union integration process of Serbia and
Kosovo. We expect both sides to be equally engaged in
the implementation of the Brussels Agreement.

There are domestic tensions and the political
situation remains fragile in Kosovo. It is important for
political forces in Kosovo to focus on the implementation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and
the European reform agenda, as well as dialogue with
Serbia. Progress has been made, but it needs to be
further accelerated. Commitment to the rule of law
and the fight against corruption and organized crime
must continue.

Poland is committed to the process of stability and
security in Europe, including the Western Balkans
region. We are the biggest national contributor - with
approximately 115 people - to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, supporting relevant
rule-of-law institutions in Kosovo on their path towards
increased effectiveness, sustainability, multi-ethnicity
and accountability. Moreover, we contribute
approximately 250 soldiers and civil employees to the
Kosovo Force.

Poland supports the European Union's open
door policy, because European integration is the
only guarantee of long-term stability, economic
development, security and good-neighbourly relations
in the Western Balkans. Furthermore, we underscore
the importance of the Specialist Chambers and the
Office of the Specialist Prosecutor for the country's
international and Euro-Atlantic integration.

Turning to the issue of the transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force, we are convinced that its
transformation into an army should not contradict
resolution 1244 (1999) and should be pursued through
an inclusive, gradual and transparent process, in
accordance with the Kosovo Constitution. The
transformed Kosovo Security Force should serve
the security interests of all communities, including
Kosovo Serbs.

Additionally, we encourage Kosovo to reconsider
its decision to apply customs tariffs on imports from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. There are forums
for addressing such issues and grievances, and the
parties should make good use of them.

Let me conclude in the same manner we have
concluded on several occasions in the Chamber. Poland
regards Kosovo as being fully capable of managing
its own future and realizing its potential within the
shared framework of European values. We are ready to
contribute with necessary assistance, as well.

