Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by welcoming Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
to the Security Council in his new role for the first
time and to thank him for his very clear briefing this
morning. We share his deep concern about the risks of
escalation. However, we also see the opportunities that
he outlined. As he pointed out, in Yemen the stakes are
high whether with regard to the humanitarian situation,
regional stability or the spread of terrorism. I would
like to encourage him to continue to reach out to those
strong and women peers to whom he referred. It is clear
to us that the active participation ofwomen in the peace
process will be decisive. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing today,
as well as for his efforts to address the humanitarian
situation in Yemen and to ensure that it remains high
on our agenda and that of the international community.

I will focus on two points in my intervention: first,
the political situation and the need to strongly support
the resumption of a United Nations-led political
process; and, secondly, the humanitarian situation and
the need to implement the March presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/5).

First, on the political situation, the appointment of
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths provides an opportunity
to relaunch the political process in Yemen. It is essential
that the Council now unite in giving the Special Envoy
its strong support and that we stay focused on making
use of this opportunity. The members of the Council
and regional actors must now use all their influence
to ensure that all the parties engage with the Special
Envoy and the United Nations-led process in good faith
and without preconditions.

We encourage the parties to now move forward
quickly on confidence-building measures, such as those
related to Sana'a airport and the release of prisoners. It
also seems clear that the southern question will need to
be addressed in those discussions.

Mr. Griffiths has made a very good start to his
challenging task. We are encouraged by his early visit
to Yemen and the region, and we fully support the
efforts to pursue broad consultations with an inclusive
approach. Full and unhindered access to all the relevant
parties in Yemen is critical.
Moving on to the humanitarian situation, on
15 March the Security Council unanimously adopted
a statement by the President (S/PRST/2018/5) that
recognizes the vast humanitarian needs and the
immediate steps that must be taken in order to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Those steps
were based on the obligation of the parties to respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

However, regrettably, the implementation of that
strong and clear statement by the Council is clearly
lacking. Restrictions, delays and uncertainty at ports,
such as Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, hinder humanitarian
and commercial imports. Delays and obstacles to the
clearance process of the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen for vessels continue
and act as a deterrent to private shipping companies.

Even when supplies reach the country, access
within it remains a serious challenge owing to the
many bureaucratic impediments and checkpoints. To
date, no humanitarian evacuations, even for emergency
treatment, have been allowed through Sana'a airport.
Strikes on civilians and civilian infrastructure continue
from all sides.

We have also seen renewed missile attacks from
Houthi-held territory targeting Saudi Arabia, which our
Foreign Minister has strongly condemned. Clearly, the
violations of international humanitarian law continue,
and accountability for such violations remains to be
attributed. It is time to move from words to action with
respect to the situation in Yemen. It is time for the
Council to demand that its decisions be implemented in
full. It is time to actively and urgently engage the parties
and to ensure that the will of the Council is heeded.

Sweden's Special Envoy for Yemen, Ambassador
Peter Semneby, visited Sana'a and Aden in late March.
While there, he met with representatives of the Yemeni
Government, the Houthis, the General People's
Congress and the Southern Transitional Council. He
also met with the international, regional and local civil
society actors, as well as internally displaced persons
and other victims of the conflict. During his visit,
the Ambassador urged the parties to engage with the
United Nations-led political process and to respect
international humanitarian law, including protecting
civilians and eliminating all obstacles to humanitarian
assistance. The presidential statement provided by the
Council provides a good basis for such discussions
and should be used by all Council members. Despite
the many and well-known challenges, in his meetings,
the parties showed the same signs of an increased
willingness to engage in a United Nations-led process
that Mr. Griffiths referred to earlier today. We must use
that momentum.

As one of the co-hosts of the high-level pledging
event for Yemen in Geneva on 3 April, we wish to
join Mr. Lowcock in thanking all those donors that
participated, resulting in pledges of over $2 billion to
the Yemen humanitarian response plan. The pledges
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates will contribute significantly to the
implementation of the United Nations emergency
response plan. We now call on all donors to make
their disbursements as soon as possible. The panel
discussion on humanitarian access that formed part of
that conference demonstrated with clarity how difficult
it is for United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
actors to operate in Yemen. It is clear that without
addressing that fundamental issue, the funds raised
will not be able to reach those in need as effectively as
they should.

In conclusion, the 15 March presidential statement
was our strongest yet on the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. It reflected the urgency on the ground; however,
over one month later this urgency remains. We must
make every effort to ensure implementation, while,
at the same time supporting the Special Envoy. The
desperate situation in Yemen demands greater attention
by the international community, and the Council should
further step up its efforts in the coming weeks and
months to provide united support.

