Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other colleagues in warmly
welcoming Baroness Ashton back to the Security
Council today.

As a member of the European Union (EU) and a
permanent member of the Security Council, the United
Kingdom has a strong interest in ensuring that the
partnership of the European Union and its member
States with the United Nations becomes increasingly
effective in addressing the many challenges to
international peace and security. Baroness Ashton has
highlighted today the important role that the European
Union plays across a range of key security issues. I do
not need to cover that same ground, so I will confine
myself to making a few general comments.

First, Baroness Ashton rightly pointed to the
European Union's ability to take a comprehensive
approach to global problems. The European Union is
uniquely placed among regional organizations to
deploy the full range of tools, from military
intervention and political influence to humanitarian
and development assistance. The European Union and
its member States can therefore support and
complement the United Nations across that full range
of activity, from Afghanistan to the Balkans. In
particular, the European Union and the United Nations
can combine powerfully with the Security Council to
prevent and resolve conflict.

The current period of uncertainty and change in
the Middle East and North Africa highlights the need
for a comprehensive and coordinated approach. It is
essential that the European Union and the United
Nations work closely in responding to and planning for
events as they unfold.

In Tunisia, the European Union is already
working on a broad package to assist with
constitutional and democratic reforms and economic
development. My Foreign Minister is in Tunisia today,
discussing how best we can support the reform process.
The United Nations and the EU should be natural
partners in this endeavour.

On the Middle East peace process, where decisive
progress is urgently needed, the European Union has
13
demonstrated the practical application of the
comprehensive approach, in close coordination with
the United Nations. As a member of the Quartet, the
European Union has been involved in pressing for a
political solution to the conflict, while at the same time
providing critical assistance to the Palestinian
Authority's State-building programme, which will
continue to provide the foundations of a future and
viable Palestinian State.

Secondly, the European Union has an important
role to play in sharing its experience and its expertise
with other regional organizations. EU/United
Nations/African Union collaboration in Somalia is a
concrete example of what can be achieved when
regional organizations and the United Nations work
together. The European Union is complementing the
broad support of the United Nations to the African
Union Mission in Somalia by providing funding
through the African Peace Facility. This is just part of a
multi-level EU strategy towards Somalia, which
encompasses regular assistance to the security sector
through development programmes and projects,
humanitarian assistance, naval security operations and
security training. As we approach the end of the
transitional period in August 2011, it is vital that the
African Union, the United Nations and the EU pursue a
coherent strategy to ensure that the transition results in
a legitimate, credible Government that is acceptable to
all the Somali people.

Thirdly, the European Union, as the world's
largest economy comprising the most open and trade-
oriented countries in the world, can be a force for
development by providing a huge potential market.
Open and resilient markets play a key role in
maintaining global peace and security.

Finally, the European Union has an important role
to play in advancing non-traditional contributions to
international peace and security. One such example is
in the area of climate security. Climate security is
likely to feature on the Council's agenda later this year,
reflecting the growing recognition that climate change
is a powerful amplifier of instability across some of the
most volatile regions in the world. We hope that the
European Union can take forward work on climate
security as a key policy priority, in close collaboration
with the United Nations.

The Security Council's primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security requires
14

us to set the strategic direction for cooperation with
regional bodies. These relationships will be of vital
importance in the years ahead. There is more that we
can do together, particularly in areas such as preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding. We look forward to a
strengthened partnership between the United Nations
and the EU, built on shared values and with a strong
commitment to action to support these values.

