Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for
having organized this public meeting of the Security
Council on the subject of Central Africa. My
delegation would also like to thank you for the
background note prepared by Cameroon, which
provides a very useful basis for today's debate. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh
for his detailed and useful briefing.

I am especially pleased to welcome the presence
at the Council table of the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Ambassador Simonovie. His
presence provides another example of cooperation and
partnership between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

The presence in the Chamber of several Ministers
from Central African countries attests to the
importance of this debate. I would like to thank them
for their important contributions to this debate.

Bulgaria, as a country associated with the
European Union, fully associates itself with the
statement delivered this morning by the Ambassador of
Denmark on behalf of the European Union. I would
therefore simply like to make the following additional
comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria fully supports the initiatives undertaken
by regional organizations aimed at preventing and
resolving conflicts in Africa. In partnership with the
African Union and the United Nations, regional
organizations are the appropriate instruments to
guarantee peace in crisis areas. In that regard, my
country welcomes the initiative adopted at the
Libreville Summit of the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa on 2 October to deploy
an international observation force in the Central
African Republic. This very worthwhile initiative is
fully supported by the Security Council.

I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to
United Nations Member States to make a contribution
to the countries taking part in the international
observation force. My country also believes that it
would be appropriate to think about the possible
contribution to be made to this initiative by the United
Nations system through the United Nations Peace-
building Office in the Central African Republic. The
energetic work done by General Cisse within the
framework of this regional effort should be applauded.

Bulgaria shares the view that we need to take up
the question of ways and means to strengthen regional
cooperation. There is no doubt that strengthening such
cooperation will contribute to fully integrating the
countries of the region into the global economy, to
preventing conflicts and to building peace in this crisis-
ridden region. The region's potential with regard to
both human and natural resources is enormous. To take
advantage of those assets, the countries of Central
Africa will have to demonstrate their political will to
cooperate within the framework of regional
institutions.

Many of those who spoke before me referred to
the internal shortcomings of some countries of the
region during various stages of their recent history.
They also stated that those shortcomings are actually
the source of the current conflicts in the region. I
would like to say that I fully agree with that analysis. I
will also add that the nation-States of Central Africa
will never be viable in the absence of full respect for
human rights, the establishment of the rule of law and a
society and political system that are truly pluralistic
and democratic.

I believe there is consensus within the Security
Council about the need for the United Nations to give
greater attention to the Central African region,
including by strengthening relations between the
United Nations system and regional organizations. The
question now is one of determining the avenues to
pursue to improve relations between the Central
African region and the United Nations. One such path
is to pursue cooperation between the Organization and
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). In his report of 17 August 2001, the
Secretary-General detailed the cooperation between
that regional organization and the United Nations, links
that should be maintained and developed. For example,
we should explore the idea of deploying an inter-
agency mission to the countries of Central Africa,
similar to the mission sent to West Africa under the
leadership of former Under-Secretary-General Fall.
Such a mission could produce a report containing
recommendations aimed at developing an integrated
and coherent regional approach for that part of Africa.

Greater cooperation between the United Nations
system and regional organizations will not be possible
unless the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is consolidated and continued. We welcome
the significant progress made recently in that peace
process in that country. I am thinking particularly of
the two bilateral agreements between the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Governments of Uganda and Rwanda. The Pretoria and
Luanda Agreements create an encouraging, positive
and fresh momentum in the peace process in that
country. They represent a window of opportunity that
the international community must support without fail.

Bulgaria also welcomes the goodwill
demonstrated by the countries concerned in recent
months, as well as the praiseworthy efforts made by
South Africa and Angola to promote peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In view of this new
momentum, Bulgaria fully supports the new
operational concepts for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) presented in the special report of
the Secretary-General, and we support his
recommendation that the total strength of MONUC be
increased to 8,700.

