Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the latest report on the
situation in Timor-Leste and for his recommendations
on future United Nations involvement.

New Zealand commends the progress made in
Timor-Leste to date through the work of the Timor-
Leste Government, the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) and through the commitment
of international donors who continue to support these
efforts. But as we have witnessed over the last days in
Dili, Timor-Leste remains fragile. We are grateful for
the presentations given this morning by the Senior
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, and by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Hasegawa, to update us on the
current situation in Timor-Leste.

These developments underline the crucial role of
the international community in continuing to provide
support.

New Zealand supports the extension of the
United Nations mandate in Timor-Leste and the
establishment of a new special political mission with a
specific focus on assisting Timor-Leste in the period
leading up to next year's elections. On that basis, New
Zealand supports the shape and scope of the mission as
recommended by the Secretary-General.

The United Nations role in Timor-Leste is in
transition from the full-scale operations of the past to
the current UNOTIL arrangements, and now to the
proposed integrated United Nations office. However,
neither the current arrangements nor the proposed
integrated mission can guarantee domestic peace and
security in Timor-Leste. Engagement by bilateral
partners and by appropriate multilateral agencies will
be paramount in supporting the rule of law and in
building the institutions of democracy in Timor-Leste.
This includes training and support for the police and
the military, as well as helping the Government to
achieve its social and economic development goals.

New Zealand has consistently supported the work
of the Serious Crimes Unit and the special panels,
which are essential components of an internationally
supported process to see justice served for crimes
committed in East Timor in 1999. We look forward to
the report on justice and reconciliation that the
Secretary-General has indicated he will provide to the
Security Council, including possible support by the
United Nations.

New Zealand is a committed bilateral partner
with Timor-Leste. We will continue to provide
assistance in training and support for the police, the
military and the Government through our Overseas
Development Assistance and our Defence Force
Mutual Assistance Programme.

Looking ahead, the specialized agencies will
eventually become the long-term cornerstones of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. With that in
mind, we call on those agencies to work with the
proposed United Nations office in Timor-Leste to
ensure a coordinated, system-wide approach to the
eventual transition.

We share the hope that the situation in Dili will
return to normal as quickly as possible, and that
reason, wisdom and cool heads will prevail. At this
time, it is important that the United Nations system and
all of us in the international community send the
message that we are committed to supporting and
assisting Timor-Leste for the long term.

