Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First,
I must publicly reiterate to the Secretary-General and
to the entire United Nations family the condolences of
the Government and the people of Cameroon following
the sudden and tragic death on 19 August of several
United Nations staff members, including the sadly
missed Sergio Vieira de Mello, who, with
professionalism and determination, performed the
delicate tasks of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq. His is a great loss for the
international system. With him, we lost one of our
finest gems, a genuine apostle of peace, a wizard of
post-conflict management.

I also wish to convey Cameroon's full sympathy
to Brazil and the other countries struck by that
unspeakable tragedy, and to all the afflicted families.
The entire world, in solidarity, can only condemn in the
strongest terms that barbaric, heinous and cowardly act
perpetrated against United Nations staff engaged with
faith and passion alongside Iraqis. Those martyrs for
peace died helping the Iraqis recover their dignity,
independence and happiness in a climate of peace and
equitably shared economic and social progress - of
which Iraq had been bereft for more than 30 years,
suffocated by a brutal and bloody dictatorship.

We have carefully listened to the two briefings by
coalition members, and we sincerely thank them. At the
present stage, we can only note with interest the
detailed and precise information they have given the
Council and their assessment of the situation.

At our truly historic public meeting of 22 July
2003, my delegation clearly expressed its support for
the recommendations of the Secretary-General
contained in his report (S/2003/715) of 17 July 2003,
particularly for those recommendations concerning the
creation of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI), subsequently established by Security
Council resolution 1500 (2003). At the time of
supporting the creation of UNAMI, Cameroon
suggested that the Council reflect without delay on the
best way for the United Nations to contribute
decisively to solving the thorny question of the lack of
security that is currently affecting all else in Iraq. We
believe that it is time to hasten that reflection and to
take the appropriate decisions on the challenges to be
met.

In the view of my delegation, for a month now it
has seemed necessary to add a military component to
the United Nations mission in Iraq. That could possibly
take the form of a multinational force with a clear and
robust mandate, whose scope of action should be
clearly defined. Even if comparisons do not provide all
the answers, the Council could find inspiration in other
models in which a United Nations force has worked
alongside a parallel international force in the same
country. We are, of course, facing a case with different
characteristics, but, in Iraq, as elsewhere, promoting
peace, security and the social and economic progress of
a suffering people demands action from the Security
Council. Whether it is the people of Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or Iraq, necessity
dictates what must be done.

The Secretary-General has reaffirmed his
determination to continue the unfinished yet promising
work of Mr. Vieira de Mello and his team. It is up to us
to create optimal security conditions to ensure the
success of that work. We owe this to them.

The other activity to pursue in carrying on with
the efforts that Mr. Viera de Mello has made is to call
on the countries of the region for cooperation to
support the reconstruction efforts in Iraq, as well as the
political process, which must very soon lead to free and
democratic elections.

Finally, I would like to appeal to the coalition to
be more open to the United Nations and its Members.
This means that it must be more transparent, clarify its
activities and purposes in Iraq and, in particular,
promote the quick restoration to Iraqis of the
administrative, political and economic management of
their country.

We are all involved in the renewal and
reconstruction of Iraq, whether we like it or not. This is
a challenge that we must meet together to honour the
memory of Mr. Viera de Mello and other United
Nations staff members who were victims of the heinous
19 August attack.

