Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you personally,
Madam President, and the United Kingdom delegation
for convening today's meeting. We are grateful to
Mr. Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his comprehensive report on the efforts to
bring the positions ofthe parties to the conflict in Yemen
closer and work for a resumption of the negotiation
process. We have great hopes for Mr. Griffiths's ability
to help the parties realize the futility and unviability
of a military solution. We thank Mr. Ging, Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for his briefing, which shows clearly that
Yemen and its people are enduring a massive
humanitarian disaster.

We fully support the Special Envoy's initiative
to launch intra-Yemeni consultations in Geneva in
September. In our View it is desperately needed and
represents a unique chance to end this bloody war.
However, it will be important to ensure that as we get
closer to the negotiations, every key stakeholder is
available to help the parties find common denominators.
In our view, maintaining a calm atmosphere around
Al-Hudaydah and refraining from offensive action
would facilitate the implementation of this initiative.
Everyone must show restraint and reject any resort to
force. We agree with the Special Envoy that what is
needed is de-escalation and measures to build trust,
including freeing prisoners and detainees. We would
add that we need to unite the efforts of every Yemen
in combating terrorism on the Arabian Peninsula.
We should point out that from the very beginning
of the military operation we have emphasized that
Al-Hudaydah port, and Yemen's other ports, must be
able to function reliably, since there are no alternative
routes into the country for a steady and uninterrupted
flow of humanitarian and commercial cargoes.

Restraint is all the more essential in view of the
fact that two thirds of the people of Yemen are in need
of help. The civilian infrastructure lies in ruins and
the country is facing a new cholera epidemic. In that
regard, it will be vital to continue the humanitarian
efforts. We have noted the courageous work being done
by United Nations humanitarian personnel, as well as
the independent contributions of a number of Member
States, including Yemen's nearest neighbours. Russia
has also been providing assistance to the people of
Yemen through both Sana'a and Aden.

But it is obvious to all of us that humanitarian
efforts are not enough to bring the conflict to an end,
and neither is military action. We all agree that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
It is essential that we shift the focus on the current
situation to a political dialogue. The Special Envoy has
a key role to play in this, and we support his efforts,
including through practical efforts with the parties
aimed at getting them to cooperate closely with the
United Nations. It is important that he work in Yemen
in person, maintaining a direct dialogue with all the
main Yemeni and regional players. The potential for
collective international assistance to the Special Envoy's
efforts is far from being fully utilized, in our opinion,
and we still need to come up with a capable, balanced
and focused format for supporting efforts through the
United Nations, which - and this is crucial - will act
on a consolidated basis.

We would like to emphasize that establishing a
political process in Yemen would be an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation throughout
the subregion. We would like to recall our proposal
for launching a process for developing a package of
security and confidence-building measures in the
Persian Gulf and eventually the entire Middle East. This
type of structure, in which every key country of the
region should participate - including the Gulf States
and Iran - could not only help to strengthen universal,
comprehensive and undivided security in that part of
the world but also resolve long-standing and new crisis
situations, including the conflict in Yemen. Threats and
clashes must give way to dialogue and cooperation. We
must get to work right away on joint efforts to restore
a healthier atmosphere, which incidentally would make
a tremendous contribution to helping Mr. Griffiths
succeed. Russia will continue to consult with all
interested parties with the aim of implementing our
concept of security and cooperation in the Persian Gulf,
which we believe is urgent and essential.

In conclusion, we urge all the parties involved
in the conflict in Yemen to take advantage of the
opportunity offered by Mr. Griffiths's proposal to
organize negotiations in Geneva in early September,
the success of which will be facilitated by a rejection of
military action and a willingness to work for a political
settlement. And the only priority should be a concern
for the interests of the people of Yemen.

