The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Germany.

First, I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive and very timely reports. The reports
speak for themselves. The human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the
rebel-controlled areas, is appalling. We fully support
the conclusions that the High Commissioner has drawn
and will take them into account when we assess how to
best support the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The report we have just heard stresses two key
factors that can contribute to the devastating human
rights situation and the lack of progress in solving the
conflict: one is the culture of impunity, and the other is
the link between the plundering of natural resources
and continuation of the fighting. Let me add a third
factor that fuels the conflict.

The Council has repeatedly highlighted the
continuing supply of arms to the belligerents by all
parties to the conflicts, both Congolese and foreign.
Unless we succeed in stopping the arms flow to the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will not
have a durable stabilization of the entire Great Lakes
region, and the Congolese population will be victim of
yet more abuse and atrocities.

Impunity should not be granted to gross human
rights violators, not even for the sake of integrating
high-ranking officials in institutions of the transition
period, as part of the peace and reconciliation process.
Perpetrators should be brought to justice, all the more
if they belong to military or governmental institutions.
Against this background I would like to ask Mr. Vieira
de Mello, as well as the Secretariat, if, in their view,
there is a genuine readiness by any of the parties to
bring the perpetrators of human rights violations to
justice.

My second question concerns the situation of
vulnerable groups, women and children in particular.
The High Commissioner has already clearly pointed
out that gang rapes and other forms of sexual violence
against women and girls are used as tools of warfare.
Germany has also received disturbing reports on the
recruitment of child soldiers, some as young as nine
years of age. Is there any chance to identify, not only
the perpetrators, but also the political and military
leaders who provide political coverage for such
repugnant violations of human rights?

Also, in View of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), Germany would like to know about efforts to
strengthen the gender perspective in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), especially with a view to the
DDR process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I have two suggestions. I believe access
to clearer information on the human rights situation in
the different rebel-controlled areas would be useful for
the Council's future deliberations. We are especially
interested to learn of the current situation in Kisangani
and other areas controlled by the RCD.

My second suggestion pertains to the
comprehensive report mentioned by the High
Commissioner at the beginning of his briefing, I think
it would be useful to make this report available to all
members of the Security Council.

Resuming now my function as President of the
Council, I would be well prepared to distribute this
report as a document of the Council.

I now call on the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

