Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has
played a pivotal role in Liberia in the eight years that it
has been working in partnership with the Government
and people of Liberia. The United Kingdom would like
to thank the troops, police and civilian staff of UNMIL
for their dedication and hard work under the excellent
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ellen Margrethe Loj. It supports the renewal
of UNMIL's mandate.

The elections next month, the second such
elections since peace was established, mark a key
milestone for Liberia's democratic development.
Preparing for them has rightly been a priority.

The United Kingdom would like to see similar
effort devoted to other issues critical to Liberia's future
stability, such as national reconciliation and land
reform. Urgent progress on the establishment of
national security forces capable of maintaining law and
order and the planning and implementation of the
transfer of responsibilities from UNMIL to State
authorities will also be critical.

The United Nations technical assessment mission
scheduled for early 2012 will be an excellent
opportunity to make a comprehensive assessment of
the situation in Liberia. That will inform the Council's
decisions on changes to UNMIL's future tasking. We
are therefore disappointed that resolution 2008 (2011)
did not take up amendments that a number of Security
Council members put forward and that followed the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2011/497) and had the support of the host
Government, namely, that the Council review the
authorized military and troop strength by 30 May 2012,
based on the findings of the technical assessment
mission. We regret that, given the time available to us
before the 30 September expiry of the mandate
authorized by resolution 1938 (2010), a more serious
and committed effort was not made to address such
concerns.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
leading efforts to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
worldwide, ensuring that peacekeeping missions
support political processes and help to deliver long-
term stability. We do not expect any peacekeeping
mission to be exempt from regular review by the
Council, and will continue to work to ensure that all
missions are configured and resourced in line with that
purpose and that their mandates and configurations are
adjusted in a timely and responsible manner.

