Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank the presidency and the
delegation of the Russian Federation, as well as all the
delegations that used the official name of my country
in their statements. Roughly one month ago, the Chair
of the General Assembly Third Committee asked all
delegations to use the official names of countries when
they make statements. Some tried to make an exception,
but the Chair of the Third Committee interrupted them
and compelled everyone to respect the official country
names, in line with the rules and regulations and for
maintaining the political discourse. That Committee
Chair therefore succeeded in upholding respect for
the way of addressing each other. I humbly ask the
Security Council to follow the example of the Chair of
the Third Committee.

The founding fathers of our Organization carefully
drafted the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
because it represents the foundation of the provisions
of the Charter itself. They began the Preamble with
those words,

"We the people of the United Nations
determined to live together in peace with one
another as good neighbours, and to unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security".

Unfortunately, those noble principles have been
flouted over the past seven decades, given the practices
of some States that have tried to impose their hegemony
on our Organization and turn it into an instrument to
achieve their political objectives by manipulating those
principles in order to justify their military aggression
and deprive peoples of their rights. That has happened
in Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen and
many other countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America. Furthermore, those States have tried to invest
in terrorism in Syria, as we are witnessing today in my
country.

Are the hopes of the founding fathers to live
together in peace with one another consistent with the
conduct of certain States, including some permanent
members of the Security Council that support armed
terrorist groups in my country, Syria? Are the hopes
of the founding fathers to live as good neighbours
consistent with actions of certain States in the region
that have issued takfiri fatwas to the terrorist groups
and provided them with funds, weapons and training
camps? Are the hopes of the founding fathers to pool our
strength to maintain international peace and security
consistent with the launching of aggression after
aggression against my country, Syria, by the United
States, Britain and France under flimsy pretexts? Are
those hopes consistent with the establishment of an
illegal United States coalition as a means to carry out
the most heinous crimes against Syrian civilians, the
most recent ofwhich were the air strikes on the villages
of Al-Boubadran and Al-Sousa on 15 October, killing
23 martyrs, most of whom were women and children;
and the latest attack on Baka'an and Al-Sha'afa villages
in the rural area of Deir ez-Zor two days ago, leading to
the deaths of40 civilian martyrs? In only one week, 100
civilians have been killed by the United States coalition
forces in the rural area of Deir ez-Zor.

Such practices by those States against our region
and other regions of the world show that they do not
respect the aspirations of the founding fathers or the
principles of international law. For them, it is as if such
principles were nothing but a kind of sorcery.

As one of the founding fathers of the United
Nations, my country continues to believe in the role of
the Organization - a role that respects the principles
of the Charter and the provisions of international
law; a role that respects the sovereignty of States
and rejects blackmailing policies imposed by certain
influential States; a role that is based on impartiality,
honesty and non-interference in the domestic affairs of
any Member State; a role of good offices and not one
that seeks to dictate conditions, ultimatums, threats
and guardianship.

The Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue
held in Sochi represented an opportunity for the
Syrian people to engage in dialogue without foreign
interference. All sectors of Syrian society participated
in the Congress. We therefore hold a positive view of its
outcome, including the establishment of a committee
to discuss the current constitution. We are eager to see
the formation of such a committee as soon as possible.
We were the first to present our list of the members
supported by the Syrian State. No one, therefore, can
question our support for that process or our commitment
to the outcome of the Sochi Congress.

In that regard, my country reiterates the important
role played by the Russian Federation and Iran as
guarantors of the Astana process. We note in particular
that the idea of establishing a committee to discuss the
current constitution was the result of an agreement by
the Syrians who participated in the Sochi Congress,
as affirmed by the Russian Deputy Permanent
Representative, Mr. Vladimir Safronkov, and supported
by the two guarantor States of the Astana process. We
have always been part of the process, so no one can
ignore our role or their role therein.

Concerning the role of the United Nations and the
mandate of the Special Envoy, especially with regard
to the third list, I would like to make our position quite
clear. We wish the Special Envoy every success and
we welcome his role as a facilitator of the committee's
work. However, he cannot impose himself as a third
party, in line with the mandate entrusted to him and
with the Charter and principles of the United Nations
in terms of impartiality, honesty and non-interference
in domestic affairs, which are an integral part of the
sovereignty of any State. The issue of forming the
constitutional committee is based on certain key
general principles that we believe to be indispensable
to the establishment and functioning of the committee.
In brief, those principles are as follows.

First, there must be a true commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and of its people. There is
no place for terrorism or support for terrorism in Syria.
Any constitutional process must not undermine that
commitment pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, and Security Council
resolutions relevant to Syria.

Secondly, the political process must be Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led because the Syrian people have
the exclusive right to decide the future of their country
without external interference, given that the constitution
and all related matters are an issue of sovereignty
that must be decided by the Syrians themselves. Any
concept that represents interference in Syria's domestic
affairs is unacceptable.

Thirdly, no prior conditions or conclusions
with regard to the work of the committee and its
recommendations are acceptable. The constitutional
committee is sovereign and takes its own decisions,
which are not subject to any other State or party, such
as the so-called small group on Syria, which decided a
priori on the outcome of the constitutional committee
with the aim of sabotaging any progress made on the
political process so that the outcome would be in line
with the interests of the members of that group.

Fourthly, it is unacceptable to impose any kind
of arbitrary duration or timetable concerning the
committee, because that would be counterproductive.
Our steps must be thoroughly considered and discussed,
since the constitution will define the fate of Syria and
future generations. No pertinent issue in that regard
should be addressed in haste. We wish to see progress
achieved, but the foundations must be solid.

In conclusion, my country, Syria, has always
been serious in its efforts to achieve a political
solution through intra-Syrian dialogue without foreign
interference. However, the fight against terrorism is
a priority issue at all stages of the political process,
as are the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes; the launch of the reconstruction
and recovery process; and the liberation of the Syrian
territories that remain in the hands of terrorists and all
occupying and illegal foreign forces.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.
