The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Djibouti, Egypt, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sudan, Turkey and Yemen, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain),
Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti),
Mr. Bebars (Egypt), Mr. Sharma (India),
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Aldouri (Iraq),
Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Goussous (Jordan),
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait), Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Ly
(Mauritania), Mr. Loulichki (Morocco),
Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan),
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Maitland (South Africa), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Cengizer (Turkey) and Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Yemen) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
17 August 2001 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which was issued as
document S/2001/799, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Monday, 20 August 2001, regarding the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
17 August 2001 from the Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 17 August 2001 from the Charge
d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Mali to the
United Nations which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini, Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, during
the Council's discussion of the item entitled 'The
situation in the Middle East, including the

7,7

Palestinian Question .

This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/800.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the request contained in a letter dated 15 August 2001
from the representatives of Mali and Qatar to the
United Nations, document S/2001/797.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
to the following documents: S/2001/754, S/2001/783,
S/2001/785 and S/2001/798, respectively letters dated
31 July and 13, 14 and 16 August 2001 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations;
also documents S/2001/768, S/2001/770, S/2001/775,
S/2001/780 and S/2001/787, respectively letters dated
6, 7, 8, 9 and 13 August 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations; and
documents S/2001/790 and S/2001/791, letters dated 8
and 10 August 2001 respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, on whom I call.


