Ms. Furaha (spoke in French): At the outset, we
would like to thank the Council for the opportunity it
has given to the women of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which bears witness to the extent to
which the Security Council attaches importance
to women's role and their participation in public
affairs. We also thank the various partners, including
the Department for International Development, the
National Democratic Institute and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which has always
supported our involvement to ensure that we are able to
carry out our work.

We are here today to speak about the participation
of Congolese women in the electoral process and their
role in it. First of all, we note that, during the 2006
elections, Congolese women were widely mobilized as
voters, candidates, observers and witnesses in the hope
of achieving a peaceful and developed Democratic
Republic of the Congo with inclusive and participatory
governance. Furthermore, we note that 52 per cent of
women were registered to vote. In spite of the fact that
less than 15 per cent of the candidates were women and
their weak election results at the same rate, it should
be noted that there was an important awareness-
raising among women's awareness, who had a great
opportunity to exercise their civil rights as voters,
candidates, observers and witnesses.

The national and international stakeholders played a
key role in that mobilization ofwomen. The international
community, through MONUSCO, played a lead role in
the organization and holding of those elections. The
fact that local and municipal elections, which had been
expected to be an opportunity for women, were not
held became a source of discouragement. Women voted
more for men and their illiteracy negatively affected
their choice.

From 2011 to 2018, we noticed a genuine decline in
the motivation of citizens, in particular among women
politicians and potential candidates. The reason for
that discouragement can be found in various issues,
including age-old customs, the lack of financial
resources, political reasons and so forth. As voting
cards served as identity cards, some women registered
to vote in order to obtain an identity card, but not in
order to actually vote, which had some consequences
for female candidates.

The 2010 review of the Constitution and the fact
that elections were not held in 2016 led to an impasse
and political crisis and to debates about the legitimacy
of President Joseph Kabila Kabange, the National
Assembly and the Senate. That led to peace initiatives
to defuse the crisis, including the New Year's Eve
agreement. Unfortunately, however, we noted a weak
representation of women, with only 18 per cent in the
dialogues organized by the African Union and three
women out of 32 participating in the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo. We note that during
those processes, the number of women candidates
remained below than 15 per cent.

TheobjectiveoftheRienSansLesFemmesmovement
is to achieve gender equality in decision-making
roles at all levels within the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. One of the first endeavours undertaken
by the movement was to draw up a petition with over
207,315 signatures to the national Parliament to urge
that the hurdles preventing women to participate as
candidates in the elections be removed, in accordance
with article 14 of the Constitution, on gender parity.
Unfortunately, the response of the National Assembly
was not encouraging and consequently, we saw a low
percentage of women registered on the electoral lists
and their last-minute adhesion to join other political
parties that would accept them but would not guarantee
their election.

We are also seeing the weak democratization of some
political parties and their inability to form a political
elite that can assume the challenges ofparticipative and
inclusive governance, the non-implementation of the law
on funding political parties, and provincial and national
assemblies with a representation of less than 15 per cent
of women since 2006. Despite the competence of some
women politicians and candidates, the majority of the
Congolese people remains hesitant to vote for women
being able to vote. There is little funding for electoral
expenses and campaigns, a lack of encouragement
for voters to go out and vote for women, and an
unfamiliarity with the voting machines among women.
In that context, there are also other challenges and fears
linked to the holding of democratic, transparent, free
and peaceful elections in 2018.

We also note, in the context of the partnership
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the international community, that the Government has
stated that it does not want to relive the experiences of
the past, when funding was given with the intention of
influencing the elections. That comment is concerning
to the Congolese people since refusing external
funding for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is not encouraging. It is also worrying that there is a
risk of accreditation being refused to international
and even national observers, in some cases, as well as
the mobilization of international partners to monitor
the elections.

With respect to the challenges related to peace
and security, there are fears about the willingness of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to guarantee the
nationwide security of the elections and the prevention
of gender-based violence before, during and after the
elections, as well as concerns about the need to ensure
free, transparent and peaceful elections so that the
results will be accepted. We also note that the lack of
consensus about the use of voting machines and the
debates about voter registration remain disruptive.
We must also underline that specific support for
female candidates is particularly needed. Against
that backdrop, we would like to make the following
recommendations to our partners, the Security Council
and the international community.
We recommend that the Congolese Government
be encouraged to ensure the effective holding of
free, transparent, democratic, inclusive and peaceful
elections, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
and urged to understand the importance of the
international community's support in the organization
of the elections so as to ensure that they are fully
credible, as well as to prevent any electoral violence.
We also recommend that it reactivate the logistical and
security role of MONUSCO and persuade the majority
and opposition political parties of the need for the
elections to be effectively held.

We ask our international partners to support
women and other civil society organizations in order to
energize mobilization in favour of the participation of
women in decision-making roles, and especially their
election as candidates. We also support awareness-
raising among voters, as well as training for male and
female observers for the forthcoming elections.

To the Congolese Government, we recommend that
it reassure the Congolese people about the effectiveness
of the December elections, as well as the forthcoming
local and municipal elections. We further recommend
that it make the most of external partnerships to
overcome the logistical and security challenges; ensure
the safety and security of women before, during and
after the elections so as to avoid the country falling into
chaos; implement the law on funding given to political
parties; and establish an interministerial committee
and a national council on gender equality.

