Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
In taking the floor after Ambassador Voto-Bernales, I
too would like to say how pleased we are to welcome
him to the Council.

I associate myself with the statement that will be
made soon by the Ambassador of Finland on behalf of
the European Union.

I thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his statement, and
I also welcome the work he is doing under difficult
circumstances in Jerusalem, in the Palestinian
territories and in Israel as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.

One month after the hope born of the meetings
held in New York, and right here, within our Council,
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis, unfortunately, has
worsened. France remains extremely concerned by the
continuing deterioration in the security and
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and in the
West Bank, and also by the lack of any progress in the
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.

The continuing firing of home-made rockets from
Gaza into Israeli territory and the continued
intensification of Israeli military operations since the
start of the summer, which have led to many civilian
victims and have caused considerable material damage,
are sources of profound concern for us. The recent
inter-Palestinian clashes, particularly between the
security forces in Gaza, are also very worrying. This
volatile situation requires a strong and swift reaction
from the international community and the parties to
avoid additional deterioration, which would lead to
further destabilization of the region.

We cannot remain inactive, particularly given the
disastrous economic situation in the Palestinian
territories. France welcomes the re-starting of the
temporary international mechanism, which makes it
possible to channel assistance directly to the
Palestinian people. However, this mechanism, although
necessary, is not sufficient. Again, we call upon Israel
to transfer taxes due to the Palestinian Authority. Full
implementation of the agreement on access and
movement, particularly through re-opening the
crossing points to the Gaza Strip, is essential to the
resumption of Palestinian economic activity.

In the political sphere, the international
community, above all, the Quartet, must be involved in
solving this conflict, which remains a major source of
instability and frustration in the region. In this respect,
the latest communique of the Quartet opened up
prospects that we hope will become reality. We hope
that the Quartet will get down to preparing for an
international conference to relaunch the peace process.
The role of the countries in the region remains crucial,
as was shown by the welcome initiative of the League
of Arab States in September to reactivate the 2002
Beirut Summit peace plan.

Of course, the action of the international
community cannot be a substitute for determined
action by the parties themselves, who must
demonstrate responsibility, take up again the path of
negotiation and respect their obligations.

We call upon the Palestinian Authority to adopt
the necessary measures to stop the rocket firing and the
acts of terrorism and Violence against Israel and to
encourage the immediate release of the kidnapped
Israeli soldier. We expect the Hamas-led Government
to respect the three principles set out by the Quartet:
renounce violence, recognize Israel and accept
previous agreements.

We also want the Palestinian Authority to ensure
public order and put an end to the serious internal
confrontations that we have seen. We renew our
support for President Abbas and fully support his
efforts to strengthen the Palestinian national consensus
around the objectives that he has defended since he
was elected to the presidency of the Palestinian
Authority. The formation of a national unity
government on a platform that reflects the principles of
the Quartet would be positive, both for the Palestinians
and for the peace process.

In the same way, France expects Israel to stop its
disproportionate military operations against Palestinian
cities and refugee camps and abstain from any
unilateral measure that could weaken the Palestinian
Authority as an institution and as a partner in
negotiation. We condemn the repeated arrests of
elected Palestinians, and once again we call upon Israel
to free the members of the Government and Legislative
Council and politicians that they have illegally
imprisoned.

Lastly the settlements and the continuing
construction of the separation wall inside the occupied
Palestinian territory Violate the geographic, economic
and political viability of the future Palestinian State
and must be stopped. The settlements in and around
East Jerusalem, in particular in the so-called E-l Area,
are also a source of a great deal of concern for us,
because they risk separating East Jerusalem from its
Palestinian environment, cutting up the West Bank into
two parts and compromising the chances for the peace
process.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon, France is
happy to see that the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) is progressing. The cessation of hostilities
is being respected more than two months after it was
concluded. The Israeli army has withdrawn from south
Lebanon, with the exception of the northern part of
Ghajar. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the Lebanese army are continuing their
deployment and strengthening in the south of the
country, including along the Blue Line.

The international community should continue to
work towards the objectives that are laid out in the
resolution: a permanent ceasefire and a long-term
solution, which will include the unconditional freeing
of the Israeli prisoners and the solving of the sensitive
issue of Lebanese detainees in Israel, the
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), the solving of the Sheba'a Farms question,
respect for the embargo on arms not authorized by the
Government of Lebanon or by UNIFIL, and the
cessation of Israeli overflights.

France will continue its efforts and its contacts
with all parties concerned to strengthen the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. It will also continue its efforts to
help in the reconstruction of Lebanon and will host a
conference on this subject in Paris next January.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our
conviction that the conflict in the region will not be
solved by force, but by negotiation and political
solutions. With regard to the crises for which a lasting
solution is essential for the future of the Middle East
and beyond, diplomatic efforts must be intensified by
the Secretary-General, the Quartet and other countries
directly involved. France, with its European partners,
will continue to work for a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

