Mrs. Sweeb (Suriname): First, we would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her extensive briefing.

As so many others on our continent and throughout
the Americas are doing, the Government of Suriname
is following with great concern the situation in and
regarding the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Recent developments are particularly troubling as they
negatively affect the stability and tranquillity in that
sister country, while possibly steering the region away
from the ideals ofa zone of peace.

As it has done in other forums, Suriname reiterates
its strong commitment to the guiding principles of
international law, as enshrined not only in the Charter
of the United Nations and various other international
agreements, but also in our own Constitution. It is the
principled position of my delegation, as stipulated by
our Constitution, to strive for peaceful coexistence and
resort to dialogue in any existing conflict- irrespective
of its nature, whether national or international - and
to uphold those internationally accepted principles
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
non-intervention, and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.

The Government of Suriname therefore rejects any
armed aggression, any form of political or economic
pressure, as well as any direct or indirect interference
in the domestic affairs of other States. Furthermore,
based on our principled position, Suriname cannot
support any Government that is not elected through
democratic processes and procedures in accordance
with countries' respective constitutions. The rule of
law must be respected.

In the light of the foregoing, the Government of
Suriname restates its recognition of His Excellency
Mr. Nicolas Maduro Moros as the democratically
elected president of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. With respect to the internal conflict that
has arisen in Venezuela, Suriname calls for inclusive
and meaningful dialogue, which, we believe, is the
only way to lasting and peaceful solutions, including
to addressing existing humanitarian needs. We implore
all parties concerned to engage in such a dialogue and
indeed to secure and sustain the whole of the Americas
as a zone of peace.

