The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/392, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Members of the
Council also have before them two reports of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
which are contained in documents S/2009/297 and
8/2009/352.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
2
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1881 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

As I expect most members of the Council know,
this could be the last time this month that Uganda
presides over the deliberations of the Council. It is for
me a bittersweet moment. It is a chance to thank all
members for their support and cooperation. Together,
we have accomplished what we could, but a lot more
remains to be done. I also salute the staff of the
Secretariat, many of whom work in the background,
such as the interpreters and translators. They have done
a lot of work and given us incredible support. I would
also like to wish Ambassador Sir John Sawers and the
delegation of the United Kingdom all the very best in
the month of August.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
09-43306

