The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed; Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Senior
Adviser at the International Peace Institute and
member of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations; and Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, for their
participation and for their very useful briefings.

Over the past decade, we have seen the Security
Council address the unrealistic burdens of peacekeeping
operations without taking into account challenges
that are beyond its capacity or the political situation
on the ground. Therefore, the deployment of some
peacekeeping operations has been merely a symbol
of the inability of the United Nations and the Security
Council to achieve a definitive settlement to conflicts
that have lasted for decades.

Although we are all aware that the reform of
peacekeeping operations mandates is unavoidable,
reform efforts have attempted to address technical
and operational deficiencies by guaranteeing units and
equipment, ensuring discipline and proper behaviour
of troops and the physical protection of civilians as
the only criteria of operational efficiency. While these
aspects are very important in promoting the credibility
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations, they are not
enough, in and of themselves, to achieve our goals.

Without a comprehensive vision of how to improve
the situation or a review of the peacekeeping mandate
so it can meet the host country's needs and the priorities
and deal with the local specificities and without a broad
concept of protection that focuses on State capacity-
building, we are jeopardizing significant humanitarian
and material resources in peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding efforts. These efforts will diminish and
might even collapse under national and even regional
social, political and economic pressures. Therefore,
guaranteeing the means, the resources and the necessary
troops for United Nations operations creates a secure
political environment in which it is possible to promote
national ownership and efforts aimed at peacebuilding
and achieving a political settlement to disputes. Such
efforts should carried out through programmes aimed
at building State institutions, especially those that
provide services, such as security, justice, education
and health care. Those are the services that make it
possible to preserve the social fabric of society and
relaunch the economy while improving access to work
opportunities, resources and markets.

In that regard, I would like to highlight a number
of elements that we believe are important to that end.

First, it is essential to guarantee a political
framework and solution to a conflict with international
and regional support. Despite the pressures and the
criticisms levied at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, it goes without saying that
its presence has directly contributed to shedding light
on the degree of humanitarian suffering in Darfur and
it has laid the foundations for national and regional
political efforts to put an end to conflict in the region.

With a View to drawing down the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, it
is important to coordinate efforts with the Sudanese
Government with regard to the length and size of the
United Nations mandate during the transition period,
with a focus on the specificities of the situation in
Darfur. That will require us to address the root causes
of the conflict, promote national reconciliation by
encouraging development and restoring citizens' hope
with regard to their future security and stability. We
must take note of the lessons learned and best practices
of past missions, be they in Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste
or, most recently, in Cote d'Ivoire.

Secondly, a strategic partnership with the host
country that focuses on national ownership and
emphasizes national dialogue, reconciliation and
mutual confidence-building is essential. We must
underscore the importance of national capacity-
building based on national and local priorities, while
guaranteeing cooperation with national authorities and
building their confidence in United Nations missions.
This is fundamental to the success of the mission.

The success of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire in laying the groundwork for the
Ivorian forces to agree on a national framework for the
settlement of disputes is a good example of the role of
United Nations missions in preserving such frameworks
through coordination with different regional partners
and international stakeholders. Contrarily, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan has experienced
real difficulties in achieving a strategic partnership
as it lacks a common vision that could bring Council
members and regional forces together in order to define
the Mission's mandate based on the specificities of the
political and security situation in South Sudan.

Thirdly, exit strategies for the mission must be
laid out when the mandate is being established and
benchmarks and timelines must be clearly defined and
regularly reviewed. That would allow the Council to
control and improve mandates based on the situation on
the ground and depending on emerging needs and the
political situation. In that regard, I note the experience
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia and that of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
mandates of both of these Missions extended perhaps
longer than necessary because ofa lack ofa clear vision
at the outset, when their mandates were being defined
and troops were being deployed, with regard to the
Missions' role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
If we want to achieve our goals, we need to coordinate
with our partners within United Nations programmes
and other agencies, and work with international
institutions and bilateral partners. It is key to develop
peacebuilding programmes in order to improve national
mechanisms that would then make it possible to attack
the root causes of conflict and prevent their recurrence.
In that context, we appreciate the increasingly important
role of the Peacebuilding Fund.

Fourthly, we should study the role of peacekeeping
operations in providing a continuum of responses to
conflict situations. That role is important in the context
of ongoing and full coordination with agencies, entities
and programmes of the United Nations system. We
call for a review of missions the in the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in order to better take into account the
political and operational approach that would be most
comprehensive. That review must be considered in
context and based on each mission's defined framework.
We must promote harmony in developing and
implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations
in parallel to regional policies, as well as in keep with
the relevant sanctions regimes. Taken together, those
measures constitute a complete mechanism for the
promotion of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

I will stop here as it relates to the consultative role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, one that has been
increasingly bolstered in order to promote the Security
Council's capacity to adapt peacekeeping operations to
a comprehensive vision of providing sustaining peace.
It also enables us to address the root causes of conflict.
As a coordinator of that role, Egypt will endeavour to
make the role evolve in order to better meet the needs of
the Council in the upcoming period - especially with
regard to reviewing peacekeeping operations.

Finally, based on our responsibilities as one of the
main troop-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations, Egypt has proposedto host aministerial-level
meeting of all troop-contributing countries in 2018.
We would like to work with the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries so
that the meeting can be successful in promoting our
efforts in the area of peacekeeping operations and an
important turning point. In the context of the African
Union, Egypt proposed setting up and hosting a centre
on reconstruction and development in post-conflict
situation - based on our conviction in the importance
of development in sustaining peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all participants that this open
debate will continue through the lunch hour, as we have
a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Peru.

