Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate of
the Security Council, and congratulate you and South
Africa on the leadership you have shown in guiding the
work of the Council for this month. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/258) and the
Director for her introduction.

Viet Nam is convinced that general and complete
disarmament constitutes a solid guarantee for world
peace and security and that the illicit trade in small
arms can strain relations between States, fuelling and
increasing violent disturbances, especially
transnational crimes and civil wars, each causing much
suffering to human beings. Viet Nam therefore realizes
the need for the international community to strengthen
cooperation against the illicit trade and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.

I wish to reaffirm Viet Nam's support for the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Recent reviews show that
remarkable efforts have been made by countries in
different parts of the world, resulting in the enhanced
awareness of the need for effective control of such
illicit activities and the birth of mechanisms supporting
implementation of this Programme of Action.

In the light of the fact that much remains to be
done in the context of the many prolonged conflicts
and the growing threats of transnational crimes and
terrorism, the United Nations must be supported in
continuing its central role in promoting and sustaining
international cooperation. We share the view of the

Secretary-General that, within the United Nations,
coordination on the issue of small arms could benefit
from further improvement. We look forward to
studying specific proposals to this end, including those
aimed at promoting exchanges between the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the issue.

We commend the Secretary-General for the
comprehensiveness of his report and are of the View
that the recommendations contained therein relating to
a wide range of activities of the United Nations, the
Security Council and Member States deserve and
require careful consideration. Viet Nam reaffirms its
view that the establishment, deployment and extension
of peace-keeping missions and the expansion of their
mandates must be with the consent of all parties
concerned, must respect the independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity of States and the principle of
non-interference in their internal affairs, and must be
considered on a case-by-case basis.

Viet Nam supports the role of the Security
Council in the inclusion of United Nations arms
embargoes monitoring functions in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions, as outlined in
recommendation 5. However, we consider it necessary
to further study the feasibility of the development of
quantitative indicators for the area of small arms with a
view to their being used as a base against which to set
measurable goals and a 2015 deadline for that work to
be done, as mentioned in recommendation 2.
Discussions within the framework of the General
Assembly and the Council in recent years have shown
that there are still different Views among Member
States and that an early consensus is unlikely.

We concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that Member States remain central providers of
security and that that is their sovereign right and
responsibility. The production, importation and
retention of small arms and light weapons in particular
and of conventional weapons in general for the purpose
of national defence and security remain the legitimate
right of every sovereign State, recognized by
international conventions. International cooperation in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and preventing them from falling into the
hands of members of organized crime and terrorists is
necessary, but it must be in accordance with the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, and it must not affect that legitimate
right of States.

Viet Nam is fully committed to implementing the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Since the submission of its
report on the implementation of the Programme of
Action in 2006, Viet Nam has been taking various steps
at the national, regional and international levels to
effectively implement the Programme. To date, no
incidents of illegal trafficking of small arms and light
weapons from or into Viet Nam have been discovered;
the number of criminal cases in which small arms and
light weapons are used has been minimized. The safety
of the people is ensured; small arms and light weapons
manufactured domestically are closely managed and
properly marked, in accordance with the Government's
regulations.

We pledge to continue to work with all Member
States to promote international cooperation in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and to promote the implementation of the
Programme of Action.

