Mrs. Albright (United States): Mr. President, let me
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency.
We are all looking forward to your leadership, which we
all know is characterized by wisdom, diplomatic skill, and
good humour. Finally, may I wish you productive days
and free nights.

I would like to thank everyone for the extremely
kind words addressed to me, and, most of all, for
everybody's cooperation. Believe it or not, I enjoyed the
month and hope that everyone will soon recover from my
presidency, which has variously been described as
"vigorous" and "firm".

Occasionally in this Chamber the members of the
Security Council have the opportunity to try to prevent,
rather than to respond to, a breach of international peace
and security. Today is one of those occasions. The
turmoil within Burundi, fuelled in part by the perpetrators
of Rwanda's genocide, and even by radio stations beyond
Burundi's borders, is a matter of grave concern to the
United States and to others in the international
community.

The draft resolution we will consider today reflects
the Security Council's determination to prevent in
Burundi the kind of massive violations of human rights
that consumed Rwanda in 1994. My Government
appreciates the work of the representatives of the Non-
Aligned Movement in crafting this important and
balanced text. The draft resolution calls upon the leaders
of Burundi to settle their differences and resolve their
fears through dialogue instead of bloodshed, and it asks
the Secretary-General to plan, on a contingency basis, for
a rapid humanitarian response in the event of widespread
violence or of serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Burundi.

Although the fate of Burundi is in the hands of the
people of Burundi, the Council, concerned regional
organizations, neighbouring States and others can help the
moderate elements surmount the pressure for violence that
comes from the extremes. We strongly support the efforts
of former Tanzanian President Nyerere; the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Marc Faguy; former
President Carter; the Organization of African Unity; the
European Union and all who are endeavouring to
facilitate dialogue and reconciliation. We can do so by
keeping the spotlight of world attention focused on the
decisions and actions that the leaders of Burundi take. We
can recognize the efforts of the existing Government to
establish calm, while rejecting those who, by word or

 

action, advocate or perpetrate violence. We can make it
clear that we will oppose strongly any effort to destabilize
the Government or to seize power by force or other extra-
constitutional means.

During my visit in January to Burundi, I told the
leaders of the country that the United States will not
support or assist any government that comes to power by
force in Burundi, and, indeed, would make every effort to
isolate any government that comes to power by force from
the international community. Also, we can stress the
importance of serious negotiations conducted within the
framework of the National Debate, agreed upon by the
signatories to the 10 September 1995 Convention on
Governance. The United Nations considers that Convention
to provide the legitimate basis for government in Burundi.

I think it is critical that the leaders of the various
factions in Burundi not misunderstand the intentions and
motives of the international community. We are not
interested in any action that would undermine Burundi's
sovereignty; we are not attempting to promote the interests
of one faction or group at the expense of another. Our goal
is simply to encourage outcomes within Burundi that are
consistent with internationally recognized principles of
human rights, and with Burundi's own legal and
constitutional processes.

The international community can provide resources
that may help overcome obstacles to reconciliation. These
resources may be in the form of a neutral place for
dialogue; human rights monitors; economic aid or assistance
in building effective political and judicial institutions. My
Government urges the Government and people of Burundi
to take advantage of these resources.

There has been some debate in recent weeks about the
wisdom of even planning for the contingency that, despite
our efforts and those of moderates in Burundi, widespread
Violence might resume. However, my Government believes
this step is essential. Given the horrors of what happened
in Rwanda, and the persistence of outrages in Burundi, we
would fail in our responsibilities if we did not take this
step.

The contingency planning called for in the draft
resolution is precisely the type of exercise envisioned when
the United Nations established its stand-by arrangement
system over the last two years. It is designed to identify in
advance the resources that Member States might be willing
to make available on short notice, to carry out an
emergency humanitarian mission in Burundi. My
Government urges other Governments to cooperate with
the United Nations and with the United States in this
effort. It is an initiative designed to bolster the confidence
of moderates in the Government of Burundi and
elsewhere within that society, and could save thousands
of lives.

My Government also urges the Secretary-General to
provide additional security and investigatory personnel to
the Commission of Inquiry. I learned of this need first-
hand during my visit to Bujumbura in January. The
Commission must complete its investigation into the
events of the attempted coup d'etat of 1993, and the
subsequent ethnic violence.

Finally, my Government stresses the importance of
the Council's commitment in resolution 1040 (1996), and
in the draft resolution, to consider further measures, under
the Charter, if progress towards a comprehensive political
dialogue is not achieved.

The recent report of the United Nations special
rapporteur for human rights cited

"an increasingly marked genocidal trend"
(E/CN.4/]996/]6, para. 118)

in Burundi. Although the courageous efforts of moderates
in Burundi to prevent violence provide grounds for hope,
we must take very seriously indeed the potential for an
upsurge in killing.

The draft resolution is no panacea: it provides no
guarantees, but it demonstrates that the world is
monitoring events in Burundi closely, and that we are
prepared to assist in efforts to promote dialogue and lay
the groundwork for social progress. The history of this
region tells us that those who commit genocide also
commit suicide. Burundi does not deserve that fate; no
nation does. Let us do all we can to help the people of
that land avoid that fate, and to build a future based on
law and tolerance.

