Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the Republic of Korea on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council,
and welcome its initiative to convene an open debate
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). Likewise, we appreciate the
briefing by the Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson.

Since the establishment of the Organization,
the international community has encouraged the
construction of a comprehensive and global legal
regimen aimed at nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. In that context, the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004) represents a milestone in the treatment
of the new threat to international peace and security
embodied in the possibility that non-State actors might
gain access to weapons of mass destruction.

Peru considers it essential to address the issue of
weapons of mass destruction at the global level, since
no country is exempt from the potential of terrorist
activities in its territory. It is therefore essential to
strengthen measures at the international level to combat
that scourge, always in strict respect for human rights. In
that regard, we must jointly implement the international
instruments on weapons of mass destruction - such
as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Biological Weapons Convention, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 1540
(2014) - with the goal of preventing the dual use
of nuclear material, biological agents and chemical
substances, as well as the ability of terrorist groups to
manufacture or obtain access to nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons.

My country is firmly committed to efforts to
achieve complete disarmament and the non-proliferation
of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and
their means of delivery, which constitute a threat to
international peace and security. My country therefore
supports the strengthening and universalization of the
relevant legally binding multilateral agreements and
has adopted various administrative and penal measures
towards the effective implementation of its obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004), primarily in the areas
of immigration and customs control, air and maritime
control, and intelligence activities, in order to avoid
the production and the illicit trade in weapons of mass
destruction.

In that respect, Peru has aligned its domestic
legislation with the standards established in resolution
1540 (2004), as demonstrated in the three reports
submitted by my country on its implementation of the
resolution. The various relevant sectors are currently
working on the development of a new national report
for submission to the Committee. In that regard, Peru
reiterates its full support for and commitment to the hard
work being conducted by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Peru's commitment
to resolution 1540 (2004) was also demonstrated in its
organization, with the support of the United Nations, of
two regional workshops in Lima, in 2006 and 2010, to
disseminate the content and scope of application of the
resolution, and to identify areas of possible cooperation
among the countries of the region.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
task that requires the participation of the international
community as a whole. We therefore call on all Member
States to step up their efforts to that end. The Security
Council can count on Peru to continue to do its part in
this collective effort.

