Mr. Perez-Otermin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public debate today. Allowing the
participation of countries like mine, which are not
members of the Security Council, will help to enrich the
work of this body on an issue that involves and affects us
all.

My country applauds the firm commitment of the
Security Council to raising the awareness of the
international community about the question of Africa.
Also, opening the debate to the participation of States that

 
are not members of the Council increases the transparency
of its work.

Uruguay welcomes with satisfaction and gratitude the
detailed and timely report of the Secretary-General of 25
September last (S/1999/ 1008), which gives an account of
the implementation of the well-timed recommendations
contained in his report of 13 April 1998 (S/ 1998/318). We
acknowledge with particular interest all the initiatives aimed
at facilitating the peaceful resolution of disputes and in
particular the creation by the Economic Community of
West African States of a Mediation and Security Council to
facilitate efforts to achieve understanding between parties
in order to prevent and resolve conflicts in the region,
respecting the principles of sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity, the fundamental
principles of peaceful international coexistence.

As President Chiluba rightly pointed out at the
Security Council meeting on 21 September (SfPV.4047),
the United Nations has a role to play in the constant search
for peace in Africa. We therefore congratulate the Council
on the commendable measures that have been taken and
which are set out in the report of the Secretary-General
before us today. Security Council resolution 1209 (1998) on
illicit arms flows in Africa is a necessary and timely first
step in the efforts of the Organization in devoting greater
attention to the prevention of conflicts.

Uruguay would also like here to underline the
praiseworthy efforts that many African countries are
making to promote peace and security in the region and
achieve sustained economic growth, showing that African
leaders are aware that the greatest efforts must come from
Africans themselves.

We share the concern expressed here by a member of
the Security Council regarding the need for greater
foresight and precision in the content of the mandates. The
Security Council must make greater efforts through the
Secretariat to ensure, to the benefit of African countries, the
greatest possible precision in mandates so that the proposed
objectives are achieved and the necessary provisions to
prevent failures such as those in Angola are put in place.
Specifically, we believe that foresight is as important in
determining the precise moment for the presence of a peace
mission as it is in determining the right time for its
withdrawal, thereby ensuring that when a mission ceases to
exist peace will have been truly established on a solid and
sustainable basis.

Uruguay has contributed troops to United Nations
operations in Rwanda, Liberia, Mozambique and Angola.
It is currently participating in the peace operations in
Western Sahara, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Sierra Leone and, for over a year, it has been
committed to supporting the peace process between
Eritrea and Ethiopia, thereby demonstrating to the
international community its very strong commitment to
Africa - a commitment that we make despite our limited
resources.

The more than 5,000 Uruguayan troops that have
supported peace and economic and social development in
Africa, and which will continue to do so in the future,
together with the people of Uruguay as a whole, will
continue to show solidarity with peace-building,
democratization and the right to better living conditions
for our African brothers and sisters.

