Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for facilitating this
discussion today. My delegation would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing on
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
We also thank the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on LRA issues,
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for his useful briefing
to the Council.

Regarding the situation in Central Africa, we
are pleased with the continued efforts of the political
leadership of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to address the threats affecting
their subregion, as witnessed at the summit meeting
held in January. South Africa commends the excellent
economic growth rates registered by the countries OF
the region despite the current difficult economic and
financial climate. This notwithstanding, efforts must
be employed to ensure that this growth translates into
poverty alleviation and benefits the majority of the
vulnerable and marginalized communities.

We remain convinced that economic development
and security are mutually reinforcing, and we therefore
commend the work of UNOCA in supporting States
of the region in strengthening conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and countering cross-border threats.
We particularly commend the countries of the region
for conducting their elections in a peaceful manner.
As noted by the Secretary-General (S/2012/421), the
concern remains that elections-related Violence could
be a source of instability in the absence of transparent,
legal, participatory and inclusive processes.
We are equally concerned about the impact
of insecurity in the Sahel in the follow-up to the
Libyan crisis on peace, stability and socio-economic
development in the Central African region. The
proliferation of weapons and the spread of transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups continue to pose a
threat to the security of the region. Equally worrisome
in this regard are reports that Boko Haram is now
operating beyond the borders of Nigeria.

My delegation is pleased with the high level of
cooperation taking place between UNOCA and the
United Nations Office for West Africa, as well as other
United Nations presences in the region, in addressing the
common security and socio-economic challenges of the
subregion. The lessons learned could enhance greater
effectiveness and efficiency of both regional presences.
This collaboration has also extended to other regional
bodies such as ECCAS, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea to address maritime security challenges facing
the region.

UNOCA has an important mandate in working
with the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in the affected areas, the United Nations Office to
the African Union and the African Union (AU) to
facilitate cooperation in countering the threat posed
by the LRA. Collaboration with the relevant regional
and subregional organizations is of paramount
importance. Over the past year, the United Nations and
the AU have undertaken a number of joint initiatives,
including visits to countries affected by LRA activities.
These collaborative approaches have assisted the two
organizations in strengthening the international resolve
to combat the scourge of the LRA.

The activities of the LRA remain a serious threat to
peace, security and stability in the region, with grave
humanitarian consequences. South Africa is concerned
about the devastating effects of this armed group
and its continued activities in a number of African
countries, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. The brutality of these activities continues to
haunt thousands of innocent civilians, including women
and children, and has resulted in massive displacements
of people and an acute humanitarian crisis.

The African Union has declared the LRA a terrorist
organization, and accordingly the Security Council
has had to deal with the LRA as such. South Africa
commends the ongoing military cooperation between
the countries affected by LRA activities in addressing
this challenge.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
official launching of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the LRA on 24 March,
including a joint coordination mechanism, a regional
task force and a joint operations centre. The Initiative
will, inter alia, strengthen the operational capabilities
of the countries affected by the atrocities of the LRA
and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to
affected States. Ambassador Madeira has elaborated
on the modalities of the Initiative. It will be vital for
the international community to provide all necessary
support to the Initiative, particularly in logistical,
financial and technical terms, so as to facilitate the
effective functioning of the different components of
the Initiative and build the capacity of the armed and
security forces of the affected countries.

We reaffirm that military action against the LRA
should be conducted in a manner that seeks to minimize
injury to civilians, and be in compliance with the
applicable international law, including international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. South
Africa wishes to underscore that these military
operations should be part of a broader strategy that
should include the granting of amnesty, policies for
facilitating defections and reintegrations, and arrests
of LRA commanders indicted by the International
Criminal Court. In this regard, we welcome the arrest
of a senior commander of the LRA, Caesar Acellam
Otto.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and his team, and we wish him well in his
ongoing endeavours. If UNOCA is to be able to
implement all its plans and programmes for the region,
it is important that it be allocated the resources it needs.

My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted by the Council shortly.

