Mr. Corr (Ireland): First, I would like to thank
the presidency for arranging this public meeting and to
join others in thanking General Cisse and Mr. Calderisi
for their very helpful briefings today.

Belgium will speak shortly on behalf of the
European Union, and my delegation associates itself
fully with that statement. I shall add a few brief
comments in a national capacity.

The interest of the international community in
assisting the Central African Republic is not only
moral but clearly strategic. The country lies at the heart
of an unstable region where conflicts, as we know,
readily spill over borders. The consequences of conflict
in one country can have a profound impact on the
stability of the others. It is, therefore, as the
Ambassador of the Ukraine said earlier, very much a
test case in terms of the effectiveness of the United
Nations response and how we assume that
responsibility.

As General Cisse has emphasized strongly, and as
is clearly echoed in the report ofthe Secretary-General,
the economy is clearly in a very fragile state. This has
been exacerbated by the coup attempt. The Council, in
its presidential statement of 17 July 2001, called on the
Bretton Woods institutions take into account the
specific nature of the situation in the Central African
Republic.

My delegation was heartened to hear the outline
of the current efforts by the World Bank. Two points
struck me that go to the heart of the point made by
Bangladesh and others: when tackling a level of
extreme poverty such as exists in the Central African
Republic, it is very difficult to separate the various
elements at play - political, military, security -
especially in the context of extreme poverty.

In his report the Secretary-General uses the
phrase "a duty of solidarity" of development partners
and the international community, which is a strong but
accurate phrase. One point which does emphasize that,
I think, is the reference in the report to the impacts -
in terms of administrative capacity and the managerial
structures in the public service - of the recruitment
freeze required by previous structural adjustment
programmes. According to the Secretary-General, that
has clearly led to a very severe shortage of managers in
the public service. Many are approaching retirement
age.
This is not a small point, because the Secretary-
General refers very clearly to extreme institutional
weaknesses in the State, to the point where the Central
African Republic has been unable to use even donor
credits, including from the European Development
Fund, although - as was said in the report - the
European Union has now made arrangements in terms
of the ninth European Development Fund or previous
European Development Funds.

The point of conclusion on this is the reference
that was made, to quote the exact phrase used by the
Secretary-General, to the need for extreme solicitude
by the international community and the donor
community, including the multilateral institutions, and
perhaps especially including the Bretton Woods
institutions.

There is clearly a point of competences here,
which my delegation fully appreciates. I also fully
appreciate the positive summary that we were given
this morning by the World Bank. It is a point of
emphasis, but it is one that clearly comes across in the
report, and therefore the forthcoming donor conference
future coordination efforts will clearly be important.

In conclusion, to mention briefly two points, one
is the current political situation. My delegation fully
agrees that, even as we emphasize the importance of
challenging issues of extreme poverty and the current
very gloomy economic situation, it is also important
that the Central African Republic address the root
causes of the crisis politically, particularly weak
governance. It must re-establish political dialogue,
which is an indispensable condition for a functioning
political democratic system. The lack of dialogue
clearly can only sustain a vacuum, which in turn breeds
instability.

My delegation also agrees with the points made
by Ambassador Hume of the United States on the
importance of the issue of the forthcoming trials of
coup leaders. The international community will clearly
be looking closely at transparency, openness and other
factors there, and also at the issue of the return of
refugees in the same context.

Finally, in terms of the Secretary-General's
specific proposals, Ireland very much welcomes the
proposal to strengthen the role of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA), including, as has been
emphasized by General Cisse, in the areas of human
rights, promotion of political dialogue, civil society
and so on. In this the Secretary-General will have -
we hope - the full support of the Council, and
certainly my delegation fully supports the proposals
made.

