Mr. Jovanovie: My country has been a victim of the
brutal unlawful aggression of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), led by the United States of America,
for the third straight day. The most powerful war machine
in the world has made a sovereign and peaceful country
and its proud people into a killing field and a testing
ground for its most sophisticated weaponry and military
games.

Tramping upon each and every principle of
international relations, defying the authority of the Security
Council of the United Nations and its resolutions and out-
performing even the Nazis in its animosity towards and
hatred of the Serbian and Montenegrin people, NATO, led
by the United States of America, has engaged in a mad
orgy of destruction and havoc against one small and peace-
loving country. They disgracefully distort the truth about
the events in Kosovo and Metohija, openly supporting and
assisting separatists and terrorists and demonizing the
Serbian people and my country in a shameless attempt to
manipulate the world public and provide a cover for their
aggression.

By attacking Yugoslavia, NATO aircraft have become
the air force and the ally of the terrorist Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). The NATO aggression has stepped up the
KLA terrorist activities, not only against the Yugoslav
security forces, but also against civilians, including
Albanians. A victim of this aggression, we have no choice
but to defend ourselves and preserve our sacred land of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is the soul of the Serbian
national being. Opposing the aggression, we also uphold the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

The aggression and the massive and reckless bombing
campaign is not limited to the so-called military targets
alone, but brings death to hundreds of civilians and destroys
property. In a callous act, the aggressors did not spare the
memorial park in the martyr city of Kragujevac, in which
tens of thousands of victims of Nazi genocide from the
Second World War are buried, or the museum town of
Cetinje, which have no military significance at all. Two
camps of Serbian refugees from Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and two student hostels were hit, as well.

For the third time in this century, the Serbian people
have been presented with an ultimatum. In 1914, the
Habsburgs issued an ultimatum, demanding the Kingdom of
Serbia so as to throw its sovereignty underfoot, but the
Serbian people rejected it. In 1941, the Axis Powers gave
the Kingdom of Yugoslavia an ultimatum to join them or
be destroyed. The Serbs refused to capitulate and rejected
the ultimatum once again.

Now Yugoslavia is faced with another ultimatum,
this time from NATO - from so-called democratic
countries. It has been offered two alternatives: either
voluntarily to give up a part of its territory or to have it
taken away by force. This is the essence of the "solution"
for Kosovo and Metohija that was offered by way of an
ultimatum at the "negotiations" in France.

The flagrant aggression by NATO countries, led by
the United States, cannot be justified on any grounds
whatsoever. The fact that they change position and
objectives every day is telling proof that they do not
believe in what they are saying themselves. If the
aggression goes on, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will continue to protect its sovereignty and territorial
integrity on the basis of Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. However, once the aggression is stopped, we will
be ready to resume negotiations about political solutions
of the problem in Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of
the 10 principles adopted by the Contact Group on 29
January 1999 and the document signed in Paris by the
members of our delegation.

By attacking Yugoslavia, NATO has not solved the
alleged humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo and Metohija,
which they so maliciously presented as a casus belli; on
the contrary, they themselves are creating a catastrophe of
enormous proportions for all citizens of Yugoslavia and
for peace and stability in the region and beyond.

Their aggression is unjust, illegal, indecent and
unscrupulous. The aggressor displays arrogant contempt
for the United Nations and its Charter and arrogates the
prerogatives of the Security Council as the only organ in
charge of maintaining international peace and security.
The United Nations should not allow them to rob it of its
rights and duties. The Security Council is in a position to
prevent this if it strongly condemns the aggression today
and requests NATO to stop it immediately and
unconditionally.

If the Security Council fails to do so it will be
responsible for the breakdown of the present system of
international relations. Today the Security Council is not
taking only a decision on the fate of my country, but a
historic decision on its own future as well. It is up to the
Council to decide whether it will retain the responsibility
that it bears under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, or whether it will cede

 

that responsibility to NATO. Today, the Council has made
its choice. The right of might will be enthroned instead of
the might of right.

