Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Kubis for his briefing today. His mission
is carrying out an important function at a critical time
for Iraq, supporting the Government as it seeks to
spread stability and security across the country.

At the outset, I want to commend the brave men
and women of the Iraqi security forces. Thanks to
their bravery and sacrifice, Da'esh now controls less
than 12 square kilometres of territory in Iraq. Soon it
will be none. Mosul will be liberated, and Da'esh's so-
called caliphate in Iraq will have been brought to an
end. For us, the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report (S/2017/357) that, until that happens - until Iraq
is free from the terrible scourge of Da'esh - families
will continue to be subjected to horrific violence at the
hands of these fanatics. We therefore cannot relent in
our efforts. We must do everything we can to help them.

The United Kingdom commends Prime Minister Al
Abadi for putting the protection of civilians at the heart
of Iraq's military operations. It is critical that the Iraqi
Security Forces continue to do so throughout the final
and most difficult stages.

The United Kingdom is playing its part and is
supporting the Iraqi security forces through the global
coalition against Da'esh. We have contributed almost
$220 million in life-saving aid to vulnerable displaced
families across the country. The United Kingdom has
also pledged almost $12.5 million to support United
Nations funding facility for immediate stabilization
to support newly liberated areas. We encourage other
donors to contribute to the humanitarian response plan
for Iraq.

The conflict has had a disproportionate impact on
women and girls. That is why we are also providing
$1.2 million to help implement Iraq national action plan
on women, peace and security. As Da'esh's caliphate
comes to an end, Iraq will need political reconciliation
and reform. The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts
of Iraq's political leaders aimed at promoting national
reconciliation, and we urge UNAMI to continue to
facilitate these efforts. We also welcome the support
Iraq's neighbours have provided in this time of need and
urge them to continue their solidarity and friendship.

As the Security Council knows too well, security
and stability will count for little without accountability.
That is why the United Kingdom launched, along with
Iraq and Belgium, a global push to bring Da'esh to
justice. As we have said before, time is of the essence.
We must start gathering evidence of its crimes before it
is lost. Newly liberated areas hold a wealth of evidence
against Da'esh that the international community must
help Iraq collect and preserve. The United Kingdom
has been working closely with the Government of Iraq
and international partners to achieve this end.

I welcome the discussions we have had with a
Government of Iraq on this issue and Prime Minister
Al Abadi's recent and significant statement made at the
end of March, which called for the Security Council to
adopt a resolution to prosecute Da'esh's crimes against
civilians. This message was delivered during the
Secretary-General's visit to Baghdad. We believe the
United Kingdom proposal is the clear way forward for
the Council to answer Prime Minister Al Abadi's call.
We look forward to working with our Iraq colleagues so
that the proposal can be finalized as soon as possible.
As the global community works together to defeat
Da'esh, we must work together to hold it to account.

As the Council lead on resolution 2107 (2013), the
United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report on the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons
and property (S/2017/37l). Unfortunately, despite
the strengthening of bilateral relations between Iraq
and Kuwait, there has been no progress on returning
Kuwaiti property this year. I want to extend our support
to all parties in their efforts aimed at achieving tangible
progress over the next year.

Ultimately, we all want to see a stable, secure,
prosperous and unified Iraq. The United Kingdom
stands ready to work with the Government of Iraq and
our in international partners to build the better future
all Iraqis want and deserve. UNAMI will play a critical
role in this effort. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I
thank the Special Representative and his staff for their
work at such a significant point in Iraq's history.

