Mr. Yap Ong Heng (Singapore): We would first
like to welcome Deputy Prime Minister Mr. Nebojsa
Covic' and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michael Steiner, to the Security Council.
We thank them for their comprehensive and
informative statement and briefing, respectively.
Together with the excellent report of the Secretary-
General on Kosovo, they have set out a useful
framework for a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) to date. This
was a suggestion that you made, Mr. President - and
which we supported - at last month's public meeting
on Kosovo.

Singapore supports the three priorities that Mr.
Steiner has set out for Kosovo: laying the foundations
for economic progress, tackling crime and violence,
and creating a fair and safe society for all communities.
At this stage, these priorities are at the heart of
ensuring the further implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). They aptly build on those priorities outlined by
the previous Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo. We are honoured by Mr. Bernard
Kouchner's presence earlier at this important meeting.

In assessing the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), we must look at the trend lines since the
resolution was adopted. We are glad to note the
substantial progress that has been made in the political
sphere, despite difficult periods of tension and
deadlock. Two political landmarks have been achieved
since Mr. Steiner took up his post: the formation of a
coalition Government and, most recently, the
agreement to include a Serb representative in the
provisional institutions of self-government in Kosovo.
We commend Mr. Steiner for his efforts in this and
other areas of priority.

We note, however, that despite the best efforts of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and of KFOR, the rate of return of
displaced persons from the Kosovo Serb and other
minority communities remains low, and ethnically
motivated attacks continue. Of particular concern is the
increase in violence against officers of the UNMIK
police and the Kosovo Police Service.

We support UNMIK and KFOR stepping up their
efforts to create the necessary conditions for
sustainable returns in an inclusive society in which all
communities can live freely and in peace, and we urge
the provisional institutions of self-government to give
their full support. We also call on all Kosovars fully to
respect the rule of law.

Dialogue and cooperation between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, UNMIK and, recently, the
provisional institutions of self-government -
imperative for the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) - have yielded positive results,
significantly, the transfer of Kosovo Albanian prisoners
by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into UNMIK's custody.
We look forward to progress on returns, the issue
of missing persons and other issues listed in the
Common Document signed by UNMIK and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

We welcome the opportunity to participate in
today's comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). While not
akin to a regular review mechanism for UNMIK,
similar to those for all other United Nations
peacekeeping operations, such assessments by the
Council on a regular basis allow it to review the
implementation of the mandates we gave to UNMIK
and KFOR.

As we have said previously, reviews are a way for
the Security Council to maintain regular oversight and
to impose discipline on a system, through assessing the
progress made in line with set benchmarks. We are
therefore pleased to note that the Secretary-General
has, in his latest report, asked his Special
Representative to develop benchmarks against which
progress can be measured in several critical areas.
These benchmarks, as the Secretary-General pointed
out, are for the purpose of providing the necessary
political road map for UNMIK and the provisional
institutions of self-government.

We agree with the Secretary-General that we
should avoid undercutting the achievements made so
far and that

"premature disengagement could lead to a
vacuum of power and instability that could be
filled by organized crime and extremism."
(S/2002/436, para. 54)

With a well-defined political road map, all of the
actors in Kosovo would have one common,
comprehensive strategy to guide their presence and
support for the territory. A clear benchmark set would
allow them to monitor the progress made and to fine-
tune their involvement with and assistance to Kosovo
accordingly. The aim at the end of the day must be to
establish a viable Kosovo that contributes to regional
stability.

We believe that one important aspect of a
political road map for Kosovo is a resolution of the
final status of the territory. Allow me to reiterate that in
paragraph 11 (e) of resolution 1244 (1999), the Council
decided that UNMIK should facilitate a political
process designed to determine Kosovo's future status,
taking into account the Rambouillet accords. Those
accords call for the convening of an international
meeting three years after the entry into force of the
accords to determine a mechanism for a final
settlement for Kosovo on the basis of the will of the
people. The Rambouillet accords were signed on 18
March 1999, hence the deadline has already passed.
For this reason, as well as others, there is now a greater
urgency to establish a mechanism for determining
Kosovo's final status. The International Crisis Group
report of 1 March 2002 on "A Kosovo Road Map (I):
Addressing Final Status" states:

"The refusal to address Kosovo's final
status perpetuates an inherently unstable
situation. As long as Albanian fears and Serb
hopes of Kosovo's eventual reincorporation into
Yugoslavia are allowed to persist, efforts to
develop normal relations between the two
communities, either within Kosovo or between
Kosovo and Serbia, are unlikely to bear fruit.
While the issue remains open, each side will
continue to regard the other as a threat. This puts
at risk both Kosovo's fragile peace and the
significant international investment in the
province. It also ensures that any international
hopes of withdrawing from Kosovo will be
frustrated."

In its accompanying report on "A Kosovo Road
Map (II): Internal Benchmarks", the International
Crisis Group also states:

"Such benchmarks are indispensable for
assessing Kosovo's internal progress. However,
while the achievement of these standards must
influence the timing of the implementation of an
agreed final status, it should neither delay
decisions on status nor determine what form it
should take. The fact that much remains to be
done internally is no reason to delay a formal
consideration of the relative merits of different
options for final status."

We agree with the Group's recommendation that a
process to move towards the resolution of the final
status should be initiated without further delay. We
note Mr. Steiner's view that the time has not yet come
for such a process to start, but it should not be put off
for too long. At the very least, the process should be
defined. If put together well, in consultation with all of
the major players on Kosovo, a settlement mechanism
could in fact serve as a key confidence-building
measures among the parties to the Kosovo problem -
Serbia, the Kosovo Albanians and the ethnic Serb
minority in the territory.
While not prejudging the final status, the
mechanism would present to the parties an explicit
guide on how the final-status issue could be resolved
eventually, and with such a clear process the political
will of the parties could begin to build upon the
positive trends to address the long-term future of
Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

Although the Security Council cannot and should
not determine the final status of Kosovo at this point,
the Council must also not delay establishing a
settlement mechanism or process that would remove
the uncertainties that perpetuate tension and instability
in the territory. We look forward to discussing the
political road map for Kosovo.

