Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to have a
productive dialogue with Force Commanders, and I
thank you, Mr. President, for sustaining this valuable
initiative for the third year in succession. I thank also
the Force Commanders for having provided us with

very important and insightful perspectives from the
field.

The Security Council should focus on delivering
mandates that empower peacekeepers to do their jobs,
primarily in support of the restoration of peace and
the protection of civilians. We recognize and deeply
appreciate the valuable role of peacekeepers and the
risks that they are exposed to, as evidenced by the recent
tragic deaths in C6te d'Ivoire. We pay the sincerest
tribute to peacekeepers and their work, to their bravery
and their commitment.

I would like to echo a point made by several
colleagues. As a Council we need to be acutely aware
of our responsibility to give missions clear, focused and
realistic mandates. We need to keep a careful eye on
any temptation to bridge Council differences through
blurred or unclear mandate language. The constructive
ambiguity ofa drafting fix in the Council can sometimes
solve problems in New York but create them in the field.

I am speaking near to the end of this debate, and
I am conscious that there have been many questions. I
do not want to pile on many more, but there are a few
points on which I would welcome the views of the Force
Commanders.

There can always be improvement in the Council's
access to military advice, particularly the insight
provided by Force Commanders today and in meetings
with troop-contributing countries in advance of
mandate renewals, to help strengthen the Security
Council's deliberations. We need to consider if more
can be done to improve the Council's understanding of
the operational demands placed on troops and police
by the peacekeeping resolutions that we draft. I would
therefore welcome views from Force Commanders on
what steps could be taken to better incorporate military
advice into mission planning and ensure that such
information is fed to the Council in a sustained rather
than episodic manner.

In order to be effective in complex peacekeeping
environments, United Nations missions must have
the capacity and will to deter those who would derail
the peace process or threaten civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has previously expressed its
support for peacekeepers to demonstrate a deterrent
posture in defence of themselves and their mandates.
The Secretary-General has often set out the benefits
of a robust approach in his reporting to the Council
on particular missions. We have seen how effectively
this has worked in, for example, Abyei. We have also
heard this morning from General Obi about the valuable
proactive and upstream work carried out by the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan during very difficult
circumstances in Jonglei several months ago. I was
struck by how this latter example highlighted the
importance of robust early-warning systems.

I would be interested to hear to what degree Force
Commanders see the need to adopt a robust approach in
their missions, and to what level they feel empowered
to take this kind of approach. Do they, for example, see
national caveats constraining the response by certain
contingents?

Better inter-mission cooperation is key to
improvements in peacekeeping and, as some colleagues
have pointed out, to the greater efficiency that helps
reconcile the pressures for peacekeeping resources on
the one hand and budgetary rigour on the other. The
Council was able to see first-hand the benefits of this
during its recent Visit to West Africa. That cooperation
related to the temporary sharing of resources and some
intelligence-sharing between the political teams of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire. What we did not
see so clearly was local-level cooperation between
those peacekeeping missions' military components and
national security forces designed to prevent incursions
across borders and share intelligence. I would therefore
like to ask Force Commanders if there is more that
missions can do to track the movement of armed groups
over borders and improve local capacity to monitor and
act on such movements, working coherently with all
local actors.

We have heard from Force Commanders about the
challenge of the protection of civilians and the fact that
in order to fulfil their mandate to protect civilians,
forces need more agility and more mobility, but at the
same time face a shortage of air assets and problems
over freedom of movement. I agree with those Council
members who have emphasized the importance of
mobility and flexibility.

In that context, I was interested by the point made
by General Prakash, who made the case for basing
contributions on the standard battalion of infantry. I
would like to ask Force Commanders how they see the
balance between flexibility and mobility on the one
hand and the need for consistency and standardization
on the other.

One final point: with the push for integrated
missions and an increasing focus on peacebuilding,
it is important that we do not neglect the centrality
and mandates of both protection of civilians and
maintaining and supporting security. Security, after all,
provides the foundation for successful peacebuilding.
It is important, too, not to lose sight of the fact that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with the host States and that Force Commanders
engage closely with hosts in order to build national
capacity.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this valuable
and timely briefing. I look forward to the forthcoming
interactive discussion.

