Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to
you for convening this meeting of the Council at the
request of the Arab Group. Four days ago, the Council,
following a meeting in which 58 delegations
participated, called upon the parties to comply with
resolution 1402 (2002) without delay. That resolution,
we have said, is the best road-map toward a final
political solution for the Arab-Israeli conflict. That
solution requires the existence of two States living side
by side - the State of Palestine and the State of Israel -
within secure, recognized borders. By calling on the
parties for an immediate ceasefire, for the withdrawal
of Israeli troops and for the cessation of all acts of
terrorism and violence, resolution 1402 (2002) creates
the conditions for the resumption of negotiations with a
View to a final settlement. These negotiations also
require the return to calm and tranquillity.

Unfortunately, since our meeting and the urgent
appeal made to the States to implement the measures I
have just referred to, we must recognize that there has
been no visible sign indicating the clear will of the
parties to take the royal path towards peace, as outlined
by the Council in resolution 1402 (2002). That is why
the situation remains extremely disquieting. That is
why it is deteriorating daily and why the region seems
to be moving inexorably towards what we do not
want - an apocalyptic end. People are part of that.
The humanitarian crisis is worsening. People are being
sacrificed.

Cameroon wishes to restate to the parties that a
final solution cannot come from the use of force or
terror. The peace which we all desire and to which the
people of the region aspire will not be achieved
through force. It must be the work of all parties.
Cameroon has always said this, and we repeat it today:
there will be no peace in the Middle East unless Israelis
and Palestinians themselves decide to build that peace,
to invent it.

The Council has outlined the path to be followed.
It is high time that the parties assume equally their
responsibilities by immediately implementing resolution
1402 (2002). That is in their best interests because
continuing confrontation, as we have stated, serves no
one.

Cameroon places great hope in the outcome of the
private meetings that the Council continues to hold
with the representatives of Israel and Palestine.
Through these meetings, the Council has delineated
elements that could bring both sides together to the
only acceptable avenue that can serve peace - the
implementation of Council resolutions. The
implementation of these resolutions alone can help
resolve the impasse we find ourselves in today.

We should pay attention to any balanced,
constructive proposal in this regard, if its goal is aimed
at peace. We expect much from the visit of United
States Secretary of State Colin Powell to the region and
we expect much from the efforts of the "quartet". We
call once again on the parties to cooperate fully and
sincerely with these messengers of peace in order to
save the lives of innocent civilians and to work
steadfastly for the advent of peace in the region.

