Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing and to welcome the activity of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) as a
whole.

The new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has already provided a glimpse of his talents
by playing the crucial role of facilitator in the
implementation of article 140 of the constitution. That
made it possible to decrease tensions and to achieve
agreement on deferring the referendum on the status of
Kirkuk for six months. In the difficult context that we
have seen, France provides its full support to the
activities of UNAMI in the implementation of its
mandate, as reinforced by resolution 1770 (2007).

Iraq today still faces major political, security,
humanitarian and economic challenges. Those
challenges do carry considerable risks for the region,
especially for neighbouring countries, and beyond for
the international community as a whole.

We very largely agree with the analysis of the
situation set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/19). Violence has declined in recent months,
and we cannot fail to be pleased at the hope that the
trend will continue. Despite the progress, however,
violence remains at too high a level; this engenders a
lack of security and a very poor humanitarian situation.
The 4 million refugees and internally displaced persons
continue to be a source of major concern, and we must
act swiftly on that issue. Here, we again hail the
generosity of neighbouring States that are hosting
many refugees. Along with its partners in the European
Union, France continues to play its role in international
efforts, including those of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to assist
refugees and internally displaced persons.

The Secretary-General stresses above all that
improvements in the security situation can be
sustainable only if bolstered by parallel progress in the
political sphere. As the report of the Secretary-General
indicates, and despite the Iraqi parliament's welcome
adoption of the Justice and Accountability Law on
12 January, the internal political process remains
deadlocked. It is therefore important that major texts
such as the hydrocarbons package and the electoral
reform bill be adopted and that they be accompanied
by a process of political dialogue and national
reconciliation. It is also important that the Iraqi
authorities continue their political reforms in line with
the provisions of the International Compact with Iraq,
which was launched in May 2007. We hope that
implementation of the Compact can contribute to the
emergence of an inclusive political process. France
fully supports the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and of the new
Special Representative, and will contribute to that
process.

In our national capacity, we are always striving to
offer ideas that can help Iraqis attain their objective of
reconciliation. Hence, we have proposed to host, in a
dispassionate atmosphere and on neutral ground, a
conference of inter-Iraqi understanding, which would
be as broad-based as possible. It is, of course, for the
protagonists, if need be, to consider any follow-up to
that proposal.
08-21255

The neighbouring States process launched in May
2007 at Sharm el-Sheikh is an important mechanism
for reconstruction and stability in Iraq. The ministerial
meeting held at Istanbul on 2 and 3 November was an
important step in this process, a process that must
continue and that must result in concrete decisions. We
support the proposal that the Secretary-General made
in Istanbul, that the Government of Iraq establish a
support mechanism for the neighbouring States process
with a View to increasing its effectiveness. We are also
pleased with action to strengthen the United Nations
presence throughout the territory of Iraq, whether in
Arbil, in Basra or in various governorates, through the
appointment of liaison officers. France also favours a
strengthened international presence and the launch of
projects that are intended to spread throughout the
country beginning with the regions that are more stable
in terms of security. In our View, specific initiatives in
areas such as health could be implemented very
rapidly. In parallel to our support for United Nations
action, my country will also work to open an Arbil
satellite of our embassy in Iraq.

The role of the international community is to
support all efforts that can contribute to the unity,
sovereignty and integrity of a democratic Iraq that
respects diversity. In that regard, France fully supports
action by the United Nations to implement the various
elements of the UNAMI mandate. Only with the
support of the entire international community can the
Iraqi people regain the peace and security to which
they are entitled.

