Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China is very concerned about the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The achievement of peace in that
country has significant implications for the stability of the
entire region of the former Yugoslavia.

Since the Peace Agreement was signed over two years
ago, the situation in that country has generally developed in
a positive direction. The parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with the help of the international
community, are seriously committed to national
reconciliation and reconstruction. All this is gratifying to
us.

We have always believed that only the people of the
various ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
ensure full reconciliation and lasting peace there. We
believe that the Bosnian parties can take the long-term
interests of their country into account, establish mutual
confidence and make common efforts to solve the
problems in the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
especially the question of the return of refugees. They can
lay a sound political basis for their national economic and
social reconstruction.

In principle, we support the idea that the
international community should make an active effort to
help the Bosnian parties to reach their goals of peace and
development. We have noted that the activities of the
regional organizations currently involved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are carried out in accordance with the
requests of and on the basis of consultations with the
parties in that country. We hope that, as the situation
continues to stabilize, the newly established unified
administrations and institutions will play larger roles at
various levels.

I wish to reiterate that China's reservations about the
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter and the
authorization of the use of force contained in the draft
resolution before us remain unchanged. We still believe
that, in implementing the mandate set out by the Security
Council, the Stabilization Force (SFOR) must not misuse
force. Moreover, Chapter VII, as invoked in the draft
resolution, is not applicable to the parts concerning the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the International Police Task Force.

In View of all this, considering the requests of the
parties concerned and based on our support for peace,
reconciliation and reconstruction in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

I also wish to point out that, in implementing the
actions authorized by the Security Council's resolutions,
SFOR must accept in earnest the political guidance of the
Security Council, strictly respect its obligations and report
promptly to the Council on the implementation of its
tasks.
 

