Mr. Da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): For several years the entire international
community and, especially, the Security Council have
been working to restore peace and national reconciliation
in Angola. Many efforts have been made in that direction,
calling upon the parties, and in particular UNITA, to
comply fully with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
as anticipated. Unfortunately, the results we had hoped for
have not materialized.

Given the gravity of the situation, characterized by
the Secretary-General as precarious, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1127 (1997) on 28 August 1997 and
resolution 1130 (1997) on 29 September 1997, again
urging the parties concerned, and in particular UNITA, to
comply fully with their commitments under the "Acordos
de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol.

 

Today, the Security Council is obliged once again to
address the situation in Angola on the basis of the latest
report of the Secretary-General, which unfortunately
indicates that UNITA has not respected past commitments.
Many pending issues remain, including the extension of
State administration throughout the country, including
Andulo and Bailundo, the demilitarization of UNITA forces
and the transformation of radio Vorgan into a non-partisan
broadcasting facility.

With respect to the Secretary-General's report, for
which we are grateful, we support his recommendations to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA) to 31 January 1998.

In conclusion, we would again like to state our interest
in a meeting in Angola between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi, with a view to creating a climate of
confidence, which we think is indispensable for the
consolidation of peace in Angola and which would
moreover foster the true reconciliation of all Angolans.

Bearing in mind the reasons that we have just given,
my delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
We should like once again to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, as well
the MONUA personnel, without overlooking the members
of the troika, for their tireless efforts to re-establish lasting
peace in Angola.

