Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his detailed briefing this
morning. We would like to welcome the presentation in
written format of the quarterly report (S/2019/251) on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2334
(2016), which was requested of the Secretary-General
by a considerable number of members of the Security
Council and contributes to greater transparency in
dealing with this delicate topic.

We would like to touch on three specific aspects.
First, we note with concern the escalation of violence
in the past few days and weeks in a highly volatile
atmosphere that results in unpredictable consequences.
Peru emphatically condemns Hamas's firing of rockets
and incendiary devices, which put the lives of the
Israeli population in jeopardy, cause material damage
and undermine the prospects for a political solution.
We also stress that, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, the legitimacy of Israel's defence
depends on its compliance with the principles of
proportionality and caution. In that regard, in the
context of the first anniversary of the March of Return,
we call on all stakeholders to adopt the necessary
measures to prevent acts ofviolence and the loss oflife.

We regret that the report once again shows increased
settlement activity, demolitions and expulsions in
occupied Palestinian territory, which are contrary to
international law, seriously undermine the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and diminish the
prospects of reaching a two-State solution. The Israeli
authorities should order an immediate cessation of those
activities, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

We also deplore the fact that the peace process has
stalled, due in part to the aggressive and confrontational
tone of various public declarations by senior Palestinian
and Israeli leaders and to actions such as the withholding
of legitimate Palestinian Authority funds. Given the
current precarious situation, we believe that the Council
must be clear in urging the parties to exercise restraint,
avoid further escalation and promote the resumption of
formal dialogue with a view to reaching the only viable
solution, that of two States coexisting within secure
and mutually recognized borders.

Finally, with regard to the situation in the Golan
Heights, Peru reaffirms its historical position, which
is that acquiring territory by force is inadmissible,
as outlined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

