Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, Madam
President, I congratulate Nigeria on its presidency ofthe
Security Council under your wise and able leadership.
We also express appreciation for Luxembourg's
skilled leadership of the Council in March. I also
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing to the
Council this morning.

Since the Security Council's last debate on this issue
(see S/PV.7096), there have been many developments
on the ground and in the political process. In official
letters, we have alerted the Council to the rising tensions
and the deterioration of the situation due to Israel's
persistent violations and intransigence in negotiations.
We appealed to the Council and the international
community to uphold their responsibilities, stressing
the criticality of the hour to salvage the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders and the
long-standing parameters enshrined in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.

We have always recognized the necessity of
international support and engagement by all parties
concerned, including the active mediation role of the
United States, the role ofthe League of Arab States and
the efforts of the Quartet members and the international
community as a whole. Moreover, despite the Security
Council's paralysis, we have never ceased appealing for
collective action to uphold the law, while underscoring
the urgency of confronting Israel's widespread
violations and threats to the physical viability of the
two-State solution. Despite all the difficulties, the
Palestinian leadership has remained committed to
negotiations and acted in consummate good faith.

Regrettably, all of that has been to no avail. The
convergence of Israel's bad faith in the negotiations,
including reneging on the prisoner release agreement
and its unlawful actions on the ground, particularly its
intensification of settlement activities and incessant
aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, seriously
undermined the peace process - now totally
suspended - due to Israel's unilateral decision to halt
negotiations.

The evolution of the situation has prompted the
Palestinian leadership to undertake actions deemed
necessary to assert and protect the rights of the State of
Palestine and the Palestinian people under international
law. All actions have been politically legitimate,
non-violent and aimed at realizing the inalienable
human rights of our people. In that regard, on 1 April,
President Mahmoud Abbas signed 15 instruments of
accession to multilateral treaties, affirming the State
of Palestine's acceptance of the principles therein,
its readiness to uphold legal obligations and its
commitment to promoting the right of the Palestinian
people in accordance with the law. Among those are
the core treaties of international humanitarian law and
the core human rights treaties. We thank the Secretary-
General, Switzerland and the Netherlands, in their
respective capacities as depositariaes, for their serious,
efficient administration of that matter.

That important step was followed by the
advancement of long-overdue Palestinian reconciliation
with the agreement of 23 April. That matter is widely
recognized as critical for the unity of our people and
political system and for the fulfillment of our national
aspirations. Moreover, reconciliation and elections
are central to the advancement of the democratic,
pluralistic and inclusive society we desire to foster.
We are grateful for the support of our Arab brethren,
including Egypt's sponsorship of the Palestinian
national dialogue, as well as the efforts of Saudi Arabia
and Qatar. Moreover, we are grateful for the support
expressed in that regard by the United Nations, the
majority of Quartet members and friendly States and
organizations from around the world.

We reject the occupying Power's vulgar interference
in this intetnal Palestinian issue, cynically done both
during the time of division and now as we move
towards unity. We reject its baseless excuses to
suspend negotiations and take punitive measures as
a result, and call on the international community to
hold Israel responsible for obstruction of the peace
process. In that regard, we have made clear the fact
that the new Palestinian Government will adhere to
the PLO political programme and to commitments
and agreements made. Moreover, we reaffirm that
reconciliation and negotiations are not mutually
exclusive, but necessary steps aimed at achieving ajust
peace based on international law.

Following the strides made towards reconciliation,
a meeting of the PLO Central Council was convened
on 26 and 27 April in Ramallah under the leadership of
President Abbas, with serious discussions on the way
forward. Ihadthe privilege of attending thatmeeting. The
Central Council comprehensively addressed all issues
of national priority, including, inter alia, continuing the
efforts to advance the State of Palestine's status in the
international arena; the vital role of the international
community, including the Security Council and the
General Assembly, in holding Israel accountable for its
violations and in upholding United Nations resolutions
for the achievement of peace; the imperative that any
resumption of negotiations be based on clear terms of
reference, including respect for the pre-1967 borders,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative, a halt to all Israeli settlement activities,
including in East Jerusalem, and respect for the rights
of the Palestine refugees in accordance with resolution
194 (III); the imperative of ensuring the release of the
fourth group of Palestinian prisoners, according to
previous agreements, and the release of the thousands
of other Palestinians in Israeli jails; the need to ensure
protection of our holy sites; and the imperative of
alleviating the suffering of our people in the Gaza Strip
and bringing an end to Israel's unlawful blockade.

All of those priorities and goals are being pursued
by the Palestinian leadership consistent with the
relevant provisions of international law and consistent
with the clear commitment made to pursue political,
legal, peaceful and non-violent means to realize the
inalienable rights of our people and a peaceful solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Despite that proven Palestinian commitment to
peace, Israel has maintained its rejectionist stance and
persisted with its grave breaches, constantly reaffirming
its role as occupier and oppressor, not as peacemaker.
Once again, Israel has thwarted peace efforts and, ifleft
unchecked, it will continue to sabotage negotiations,
upend the situation on the ground and bring a definitive
end to the two-State solution.

In that regard, despite the clear global consensus
on the matter, in recent months Israeli officials
brazenly announced plans to build thousands more
settlement units in the very same Palestinian territory
from which Israel must withdraw if the illegitimate
military occupation is ever to truly end. Israel's own
Central Bureau of Statistics revealed a 123 per cent
rise in settlement building this year relative to 2013.
In just the nine months since negotiations resumed,
Israel declared plans to construct more than 13,000
settlement units, in addition to the construction under
way on thousands of other units, thereby underscoring
its expansionist aims, making a mockery of its alleged
commitment to the two-State solution and tarnishing
the credibility of the peace process. In that regard, as
stated by Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, member of the PLO
Executive Committee, we must clarify:

"Building is not just building; it's not something
that is so benign. Building is the willful destruction
of the two-State solution. It's a constant act of
aggression. It's a war crime."

In occupied East Jerusalem, such illegal measures
have been taken to extremes, seriously aggravating
the situation and inflaming religious sentiment. We
condemn all of those illegal measures and the acts
of provocation and incitement routinely committed
by Israeli extremists, including settlers, Government
officials and religious zealots, particularly at Haram
Al-Sharif, which aim at unlawfully and forcibly
asserting Israeli control, altering the demography,
character and identity of that sensitive area and
undermining the status of East Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine.

Moreover, in that regard, we firmly reject any
attempts by the occupying Power to temporally or
spatially divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound. Such
actions threaten to gravely destabilize the situation,
with far-reaching consequences, and must he halted.
We reiterate the need to ensure freedom of religion and
access to the city by all worshippers, and condemn the
restrictions imposed by Israel that impeded the worship
of Palestinian Christians and other pilgrims during
Easter week, as well as the constant restrictions against
Palestinian Muslims seeking to pray at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

We underscore the centrality of East Jerusalem as
an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
in 1967, and reaffirm that its unlawful annexation
by Israel, which has never been recognized by the
international community, remains null and void. In
line with the collective demarche made to the President
of the Security Council by Palestine, along with the
Chairs of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Arab Group, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, and Jordan and Egypt, the
international community must demand that Israel, the
occupying Power, comply with its obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant United
Nations resolutions on Jerusalem.

This period also witnessed the continued use of
lethal violence by the Israeli occupying forces against
the Palestinian civilian population, a population
entitled to protection under international law and which
the occupying Power is obliged to ensure the well-
being of, but instead purposely violates their right to
life, targeting Palestinians for death, injury and other
forms of harm. More than 60 Palestinians were killed
by the occupying forces in the nine-month period of
negotiations, most of them in refugee camps. That has
included children, among them Wajih Al-Ramahi, 15,
Saji Darwish, 18, and Yousef Al-Shawamreh, 15. It has
also included violence against women, among them the
killing of Amneh Qudeih, age 57, in Gaza.

Here we must refer to the repeated Israeli
allegation of throwing stones as a pretext for killing
Palestinian youth and other civilian protesters. The
murder of Palestinians by Israel, the occupying Power,
for expressing their opposition to the brutal, 47-year
military occupation and its illegal, inhumane policies
and conduct in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
violates international humanitarian law and other
international norms.

Also over the past months, Israeli settler violence
and terrorism has persisted, including attacks on
Palestinian school children, farmers and other villagers;
the murder of an elderly Palestinian man, Saleh Malihat,
who was run over by a settler in a car; and attacks on
olive trees and other Palestinian properties by gangs of
settlers who continue to act with impunity and with ero
accountability for their crimes.

Throughout this period, Israel has also continued its
non-stop arrest ofPalestinian civilians. More than 4,000
Palestinians have been detained since the negotiations
began in July. Human rights violations permeate the
entire Israeli prison system, inflicting grave suffering,
deplorable conditions and humiliation on the more than
5,000 Palestinians in Israeli captivity, including the
187 children being held in Israeli prisons. Endangering
their own lives, Palestinians held under administrative
detention also continue to carry out hunger strikes to
protest their imprisonment without charge or trial. We
again draw attention to their plight and call on Israel to
release the fourth group of Palestinian prisoners and to
release all Palestinian prisoners and detainees.

Added to all of this is the humanitarian crisis that
persists in the Gaza Strip due to Israel's continuing
illegal blockade and the gross collective punishment
of that area's Palestinian civilian population, along
with recurrent violent military attacks. United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, continue to highlight the severity of this
crisis, but to no avail. Especially among the Palestine
refugee population, which constitutes the majority
of Gaza's residents, that unlawful situation is
deepening hardships, with massive socioeconomic and
humanitarian consequences. We again call for an end
to the Israeli blockade and for the sustained, regular
opening of Gaza's border crossings in line with the
relevant resolutions.

Time and again, we have come before the Security
Council and called for action to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to respect its legal obligations,
including under the Council's own resolutions. At this
critical time, the long-standing international consensus
on the parameters of the solution, enshrined in United
Nations resolutions, must be reaffirmed, not set aside.
They include a complete end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967; the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security based on
the pre-1967 borders; and a just solution for Palestine
refugees based on resolution 194 (III).

Time and again, we have called on Israel to genuinely
commit to the path of peace, only to face repeated
frustration and disappointment. Despite the burdens of
occupation and 66 years ofAl-Nakba, we have done our
part to uphold international law and to act in good faith
in the context of all initiatives and negotiations aimed
at resolving this tragic conflict. Regrettably, up until
the present moment that has all been to no avail and our
people continue to suffer gravely from the occupation,
oppression and dispossession so unjustly inflicted on
them.

Yet we have not given up on peace. We call on the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
at this crucial juncture to make it a reality. Israel, the
occupying Power, must be required to comply with the
law and must be held accountable should it persist with
its blatant violations. The time is past due for Israel
to be held to the same rules that all States are obliged
to respect, without exception. That requires, inter
alia, a clear rejection by the international community
of Israel's cynical excuses and pretexts aimed at
entrenching the occupation and evading peace under
the cover of negotiations. Lip service to peace should
never be accepted as a substitute for genuine steps for
peace.

We are all too aware that the status quo is
unsustainable, as we heard from Robert Serry, and
that peace negotiations can never succeed under such
conditions. The State of Palestine is ready to uphold its
obligations and commitments to make peace a reality.
However, a real partner for peace is missing. Israel,
the occupying Power, must change its behaviour on
the ground and in the negotiations and truly commit
to the path of peace. Here, the role of the international
community, including the Security Council, is vital;
it must act collectively to demand and ensure Israel's
respect for its legal obligations and to foster the
appropriate conditions for credible negotiations to
achieve Palestinian-Israeli peace.

The Palestinian people will never forgo their
inalienable rights, and the Palestinian leadership will
continue to take all necessary political, legal and
peaceful measures for the fulfilment of those rights
and the achievement of justice, freedom and peace for
our people. We once again appeal for the international
community's support in that noble endeavour.

