Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important meeting on Darfur and say to Mr.
Eliasson, to whom we reiterate our support for the
accomplishment of his difficult and delicate mission,
that we have taken due note of recent developments on
the ground, which we find far from reassuring.

As early as the consultations of 14 November,
Mr. Guehenno informed us on his contacts in Addis
Ababa and the state of preparation of the hybrid force,
which is very advanced. We note the information that
he has just given us now. That overview allows us to
say that the Council now has sufficient information on
all aspects of this African Union/United Nations
operation and on the behaviour of the different actors.

In the light of those updates and the consideration
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/653),
my delegation would like to make the following
comments.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he
says in his report:

"The situation in Darfur is at a crossroads. On the
one side, there is rising violence, while on the
other there is an opportunity for peace through
political negotiations, and through the
deployment of a peacekeeping force that can help
make a difference." (5/2007/653, para. 31)

This is, therefore, a decisive moment that the
parties to the conflict should be able to seize, which
has not always been the case. Indeed, while
recognizing all the progress that has been made, in
particular since the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007),
we cannot help but be deeply concerned by the many
problems that persist, in particular the climate of
insecurity and the violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

My delegation therefore condemns the climate of
insecurity that continues to prevail in the Sudan,
particularly throughout Darfur, with continuing attacks
against civilians and the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), the African Union
Mission in Sudan (AMIS) and humanitarian agencies.
In that respect, we call for the publication of the results
of the investigation on the attack on the AMIS camp in
Haskanita and the prosecution of the perpetrators of
that reprehensible crime.

We also condemn all efforts to undermine the
peace process, particularly the refusal of certain rebel
groups to participate in the negotiations at Sirte in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and delays by parties seeking
to compromise the deployment of the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). In that regard, the Council should be firm
and impartial in order to be better heard.

At the Council summit of 25 September 2007,
Congo already emphasized the need to grasp all
opportunities presented by the adoption of resolution
1769 (2007). My delegation would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate that call, asking States that
might have any influence whatsoever on the parties to
motivate them to choose the path to peace. It would
also be highly desirable that all efforts be made under
the coordination of the United Nations and the African
Union in order for all of the parties to the conflict to
hear the same voice.

Now more than ever, as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Congo said during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session, it is time
to do everything possible to accelerate the pace of
implementation of the three priority areas underscored
by the high-level meeting on Darfur held on
21 September 2007.

The first is political dialogue. The Sirte initiative,
which indicates the resumption of dialogue between
the parties, should be supported. That inclusive
dialogue will be productive only if the other side of the
Sudanese conflict also evolves in a positive direction.
In that connection, particular emphasis must be put on
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
calling for the settlement of issues through dialogue
and for resumption of full participation by the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in a national unity
government. Any recourse to sanctions, if that were to
prove necessary, must take into consideration the rule
of total impartiality with respect to the parties.

Next is deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Deployment of UNAMID is, without doubt, the only
guarantee for restoring peace in Darfur. There are no
other alternatives. Thus, it is vital to deploy a robust
and credible force, one that can effectively ensure the
protection of civilians and guarantee implementation of
commitments made.

We therefore express our concerns regarding the
difficulties in securing the Mission's budget. Congo is
prepared to make its modest contribution by supplying
two infantry companies to the African Union and
United Nations for use by UNAMID. We wish to echo
the Secretary-General's appeal for medium-sized
transport companies and helicopter units needed,
without which the Mission's intervention capacity
would be gravely compromised.

We also wish to ask the Government of the Sudan
to continue to cooperate with the United Nations and
the African Union by facilitating deployment of the
hybrid force as soon as possible. We welcome
measures already taken with the unilateral ceasefire on
the eve of the Sirte talks. That cooperation, which we
have sincerely hoped for, should help to facilitate all
procedures, including acceptance of troop composition,
acquisition of Base areas and granting overflight rights
to United Nations aircraft.

Finally, there is the matter of humanitarian
assistance. Here, suffice it to quote the Secretary-
General, who, in his report, notes in particular,

"the suffering of the people of Darfur, who
continue to be threatened by violence and
insecurity and to languish in camps 17 months
after the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement".
(5/2007/653, para. 34)

It was enough for us to see the images of those helpless
children, women and men in Darfur to know where our
duty lay. Therefore, Congo will support all initiatives
that will help promote dialogue and peace in Darfur,
but also any other impartial coercive measures, if they
proved necessary.

