Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): It is a great
honour to be the first to speak in a debate which it is
clear from the length of the speakers' list is arousing a
great deal of interest.

I should like to pay tribute to the Ambassador of
France, who typified this last month as the sort of debate
which we should have in open session before we get
down to a serious discussion of the follow-up. I think it
is very encouraging that there has been such a strong
response and that the countries that will be speaking in
this debate represent such a very broad cross-section of
countries that have honourably contributed to United
Nations peace-keeping over the years. It will be very
important indeed to hear their views.

Just under three years ago, Mr. President, the British
Prime Minister, John Major, sat where you now sit, and
at the end of the first-ever Summit-level meeting of the
Security Council, read out a Presidential statement that
commissioned the report that has come to be known as

 

"An Agenda for Peace". That report offered the United
Nations a new vision of its role in international peace and
security and a series of concepts, such as post-conflict
peace-building, whose common usage today is witness to
how far we have progressed in the last three years.

The position paper by the Secretary-General we are
considering today updates the original "Agenda for Peace".
I should like to say at the outset that my Government
warmly welcomes the paper. It is timely and important. It
is timely, not only because of the United Nations fiftieth
anniversary year, which has just begun, but because it is
right, over two years after the publication of "An Agenda
for Peace", to reflect on the progress made and the distance
that must still be travelled until the United Nations is as
effective an organ for collective security as its founders
hoped it would be. It is important because in the years
since the publication of the first report the United Nations
has faced increasing challenges, particularly in intra-State
conflicts, and needs to learn both from its successes and its
failures. It is important also because in this new paper the
Secretary-General has offered a number of practical
proposals to improve the United Nations performance in the
light of that experience. My Government can
wholeheartedly endorse many of those proposals, and does
so in a manner complementary to what will be said on our
behalf in this respect by the Ambassador of France, who
will be speaking in the name of the European Union later
in the debate.

The United Kingdom has long championed greater
recourse by the United Nations to preventive action. More
such action is taken now than was taken a few years ago,
and the structure and practice of the Department of Political
Affairs have evolved, in our view, in the right direction.
But we believe the United Nations could still be more
imaginative and more proactive. There should be greater
coordination between the different parts of the United
Nations system to identify potential crises, and a greater
willingness to address such crises early, before they escalate
into armed conflict. For our part, the British and French
Governments have jointly expressed their willingness to
provide for preventive missions' equipment and personnel,
ranging from the senior diplomatic figures mentioned by
the Secretary-General in his paper to logistics experts and
interpreters. We have already made illustrative lists of such
people available to the Secretariat. I hope other Member
States will follow our example and that the Secretariat will
draw upon it and use it.

Preventing conflicts may be cheaper than resolving
them after they break out, but, as the Secretary-General
notes, it is not cost-free. While we are not convinced of
the case for a fixed sum contingency provision for
preventive action in the regular budget, we would be
willing to consider a small enlargement to the existing
provision for unforeseen and extraordinary activities and
for making it available for all preventive action and
peacemaking. We could also consider greater use of
voluntary contributions to finance longer term preventive
missions. We are impressed by the value of small United
Nations support missions of the sort the Secretary-General
has deployed in Burundi, and believe that there will be
further instances in which that model may usefully be
followed.

Sadly, however, preventive action will not always be
effective. There will continue to be a need for a
substantial number of United Nations peace-keepers. And
we agree with the Secretary-General that a clear line
needs to be drawn between peace-keeping and peace
enforcement. It is similarly quite clear to my country -
currently the fourth-largest contributor of troops to United
Nations peace-keeping operations - that peace-keeping
is most likely to be successful when it is strictly impartial
and based upon the consent of the parties. The United
Nations, as well as a number of Member States, including
the United Kingdom, has already done a lot of work to
develop a military doctrine for modern, multidimensional
United Nations peace-keeping based upon these key
principles.

My Government would endorse most of the
Secretary-General's comments regarding command and
control of peace-keeping operations. Unity of command
is vital. But that must be complemented, as the
Secretary-General recognizes, by the fullest possible
information to troop contributors, in theatre as well as
here in New York. In the case of Headquarters, I hope
that, as soon as resources permit, the weekly situation
report may again be made available to Council members
and troop contributors. It served as a vital informational
tool to them both. In theatre, more needs to be done to
inform and consult contingent commanders, or national
military representatives assigned to the mission
headquarters, about operational planning and
decision-making.

Nor is the need for better-quality information
restricted to troop contributors. The populations of the
territories in which United Nations operations are
deployed must be given reliable and impartial
information. This Council, as well as the General
Assembly, has often called for a more proactive approach

 

to the public information function in peace-keeping
operations. We therefore strongly welcome the comments
made by the Secretary-General in his position paper and the
instructions he has issued regarding planning for an
information capacity, including United Nations radio
facilities, in all future operations.
But it is not only the operational aspects of peace-
keeping that deserve our attention. We must also continue
our efforts, and we hope that the Secretary-General will
continue his efforts, to improve its administration and
management. We welcome the recent decisions by the
General Assembly to streamline the budget cycle and to
commission more transparent budgets that better reflect the
operational requirements of peace-keeping missions. We
believe that the management of field missions needs to be
similarly transparent to help to ensure that the large sums
of money that we and all other Member States spend on
peace-keeping are used wisely and effectively.

The Secretary-General draws attention to the need to
ensure more rapid deployment of United Nations
peace-keeping operations, and we agree that this is a high
priority. But the formation of a distinct rapid-reaction force
is only one way of approaching that issue - and, in our
View, not necessarily the most cost-effective or the most
realistic way of doing it. The United Kingdom has already
responded to the Secretary-General's stand-by planning
initiative and is ready to send a force planning team to New
York to provide greater detail of the assets that we might
make available to the United Nations.

More needs to be done, we believe, to build on the
embryo system of stand-by arrangements so far established,
including on the provision of equipment to less well-
equipped troop contributors. The sort of planning data base
that the United Nations needs to develop requires a detailed
and continuing dialogue and exchange of information with
Member States. My Government stands ready to participate
in such an exercise.

More thought could be given, too, to ways in which
better-equipped contributors with high-readiness forces can
be deployed quickly at the outset of a United Nations
peace-keeping operation, being then replaced by other troop
contributors that may need more time to prepare for
deployment.

We wholeheartedly agree that the role of the United
Nations does not end with the departure of a successful
peace-keeping force. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's comments regarding post-conflict, as
well as preventive, peace-building - particularly the
emphasis on an integrated approach, making best use of
the wide political and technical expertise of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies. And we believe that
there are further steps that need to be taken to achieve the
proper coordination and coherence of those efforts.

In the section of the report on weapons proliferation
the Secretary-General has focused attention primarily on
what he describes as micro-disarmament - namely,
practical disarmament in the context of conflicts that the
United Nations is dealing with. The spread of small arms
and anti-personnel land mines is indeed a matter of
considerable and continuing concern and one that is of
relevance to peace-keeping and, to a lesser extent,
preventive action. We support fresh efforts to address
these problems.

However, we would not wish to see the serious
question of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction neglected because of that. This is an area in
which the Council has a fundamental role to play with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Steady progress is being made in efforts to
prevent the spread of these weapons of mass destruction,
and these efforts must be sustained. In particular, a
successful conclusion to the forthcoming conference of
the parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, leading to the
indefinite and unconditional extension of that Treaty, is of
fundamental importance.

In many of the areas I have referred to, United
Nations cooperation with regional agencies and
arrangements is crucial. The paper makes a number of
wise points and suggestions in this area, and I welcome
the Secretary-General's offer to assist regional
organizations, particularly in the fields of peacemaking
and peace-keeping. The need, in our view, is particularly
pressing in Africa, where so many of the demands for
preventive action and peace-keeping arise.

In his speech during the general debate in the
General Assembly's forty-ninth session, the British
Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, made a number of
specific proposals to enhance the capacity for
peace-keeping and preventive action in Africa. They
included the designation of peace-keeping training skills
centres and logistics basing centres. We have been
working up these and other ideas in consultation with a
wide range of African countries and the Organization of
African Unity, as well as the United Nations and a
number of countries outside Africa. Those discussions are

 

producing practical ideas but also a political will to work
together more closely to develop more effective capabilities
in Africa to respond rapidly to crises in both the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations. We
look forward to working with others in the weeks and
months ahead to carry this initiative forward.

Preventive action, peacemaking, peace-keeping -
these are obviously the preferred tools: persuading,
negotiating, cooling heads. But sometimes that is not
enough. Aggression needs to be reversed, halted in its
tracks or prevented from recurring, and support for
terrorism must be halted. In these cases the Security
Council has to have resort to the instruments provided by
Chapter VII of the Charter. No such measures are taken
lightly. Armed force should be used only as a last resort.
We recognize the validity of the Secretary-General's
argument that recent experience has shown that the United
Nations as such is not well equipped to carry out such
actions. But, short of that last resort, sanctions, to which the
Secretary-General referred, remain, in our view, a valid and
sometimes necessary option.

We attach importance to devising sanctions regimes
that have the greatest effect on the target Government and
its supporters and the least effect on innocent civilians. But
we should not be blind to the ruthlessness of regimes that
use sanctions to justify their own appalling treatment of the
civilian population. Nor should we be seduced by what are
called smart sanctions - sanctions that are partially and
narrowly targeted. There may be opportunities for this sort
of instrument, but in general they are notoriously hard to
enforce and are therefore unlikely to have the desired effect
of bringing about a change of policy.

The Secretary-General was right to point up some of
the problems raised by sanctions. But the posing of
paradoxes, such as the conflict between sanctions and
development, is hardly a sound basis for making difficult
policy decisions. Moreover, a decision to impose sanctions
presupposes - because it is taken under Chapter VII -
that there is a threat to international peace and security.
Such threats are themselves inimical to the development
objectives of both the transgressor and the victim. Is it,
then, the threats and the unlawful actions that damage
development, or is it the sanctions imposed to counter
them? The Security Council must be able, if the
international situation warrants it, to impose sanctions at
short notice and without undue delay.

While we do not, therefore, agree with all the points
made on sanctions by the Secretary-General, we do agree
that there is a need to strengthen the overburdened section
of the Secretariat dealing with sanctions. This would
allow the issues of monitoring the application and effects
of sanctions and of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to be addressed in a more coherent and
effective manner. We look forward to the
Secretary-General' s taking action to recognize this priority
in the allocation of Secretariat resources.

Lastly, the Secretary-General is quite right to stress
once again that none of the instruments he refers to can
work unless the United Nations has a sound financial
basis. We, the Member States of this Organization, cannot
ignore the financial crisis of the United Nations or fail to
find means to address it. It is crucial that we reach
substantive conclusions through the open-ended General
Assembly working group on finance during the first half
of this year.

This Supplement to "An Agenda for Peace" provides
much food for thought for the Council. But it provides
food for thought also for the Assembly, including its
Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations. My
delegation will listen carefully to what is said here today,
both by members and non-members of the Council. I
hope that we can soon thereafter, on the basis of those
views, start work on an early and positive response to the
paper on the part of the Council.

