Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We are
still following, not without unease, the first steps of the
3
State of South Sudan. The issue of peace in Darfur is
one reason for that concern. The pursuit of peace and
security in Darfur remains an ongoing concern of
Gabon.

In that regard, we commend the adoption by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
19 July of a communique in which it requests the
Security Council to proceed to renew the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). UNAMID played an essential role
in the Doha negotiations. It also improved its
performance in the area of the protection of civilians.

Resolution 2003 (2011), for which Gabon has just
voted, meets its concern over seeing UNAMID
continue to play a major role in restoring peace and
stability in Darfur. Despite the progress made in the
pursuit of peace in that region of the Sudan, the
security and humanitarian situations in Darfur remain
fragile and threaten the gains of the Doha process.

Therefore, the Malabo African Union summit
called for the launch of the Darfur peace process. We
welcome that decision. We firmly believe that the
Darfur political process, proposed by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, chaired by
President Mbeki, then endorsed by the Malabo summit,
would be the way to strengthen the positive results of
the Doha process. Moreover, those two complementary
processes must ultimately enable the Darfurians
themselves to take true ownership of the restoration of
peace, justice, reconciliation and development in their
region.

In that regard, while acknowledging the need to
create a favourable security, humanitarian and political
environment, Gabon is convinced that the launch and
successful outcome of the Darfur peace process should
not falter over preconditions that threaten to undermine
even the pursuit of peace, justice and reconciliation in
Darfur.

The text that we have just adopted takes up
consensus goals of the Council. Of course, it is still far
from what was called for by the Malebo African Union
summit, but it records the will to commit to the Darfur
peace process.

