Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would also like to
thank Assistant-Secretary General Keita for her
comprehensive briefing on the most recent situation in
Mali, and I would also like to extend our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well as to all
MINUSMA personnel for their work in maintaining
peace and stability in Mali. I furthermore welcome to
the Chamber the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara.

In line with resolution 2423 (2018), allow me
to highlight three pertinent points with regard to
supporting the peace process and development in
the country.

First, Indonesia welcomes the progress achieved
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The establishment of interim
administrations in northern Mali and the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration process marked the good intentions of all
signatory parties to deliver their obligations under the
agreement. That aside, Indonesia believes that the pace
of progress should be accelerated if the March 2019
deadline is to be achieved. Focus should be placed
on key provisions, including the effective functioning
of interim authorities, territorial and administrative
restructuring, the operationalization of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism and the development of the
northern development zone.

We took note of the postponement of legislative
elections to 2019 and hope that the elections will
proceed in a peaceful, inclusive, transparent and
credible manner. We cannot overstate the importance
of a political process in achieving national
reconciliation and reconstruction. We therefore hope
that all parties will continue to show political will to
ensure the implementation of the agreement within the
specified timeline.

Secondly, we remain concerned over the security
situation in Mali, as detailed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/ll74). We note with
concern the continuous targeting of MINUSMA by
asymmetrical attacks from armed groups, as stated in
the Secretary General's report, as well as the increased
use of incidents involving the use of improvised
explosive devices. We view it to be of crucial importance
to strengthen capacities, address equipment shortfalls
and ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. We pay tribute to and our prayers are with
the peacekeepers who lost their lives, as well as those
who continue to risk their lives on a daily basis, even
as we speak. We in Indonesia take pride in having our
peacekeepers on the ground to assist our brothers and
sisters in Mali.

In addition, it is important for the international
community to enhance the capacities of Malian law
enforcement, including police personnel, inter alia,
through training and capacity-building. We appreciate
efforts to promote technical assistance to the Malian
specialized unit tasked with combating terrorism and
transnational organized crime, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General. It is also our view that
State capacity should also be enhanced to ensure the
presence of State authority in all areas, establish a safe
environment for civilians and limit the influence of
violent extremism and terrorism.

Indonesia is also deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and human rights conditions in Mali,
which remain precarious and continue to deteriorate.
Given the interlinkage of issues, we believe that it is
of crucial importance to adopt a more integrated and
comprehensive approach, including by addressing the
root causes of conflict and security challenges in Mali.
In that regard, assistance for development and economic
recovery is much needed and we call on the international
community to provide support to Mali's development
agenda so as to enable it to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. Economic development is in line
with sustaining peace and that is an important step in
helping Mali to become safe and secure.

Thirdly, peace and stability in Mali have a direct
impact on the rest of the region. That is evident given
the cross-border nature of many issues, including the
activities of armed groups, as well as illicit arms and
drug trafficking. Therefore, it is our view that lasting
peace and stability in Mali can be achieved only through
strengthened cooperation among all countries of the
region. It is equally important to support regional and
subregional organizations, as they are better positioned
to address regional peace and security issues. The
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations must be enhanced to that
effect, including with the members of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.

With regard to United Nations engagement in Mali,
we welcome the development of an integrated strategic
framework. We believe that considerations concerning
any future engagement by the United Nations in Mali,
including the possible adjustment of MINUSMA,
should take into account Mali's national priorities and
institutional capacities. We believe that this is important
to ensure that the progress thus far achieved can be
maintained, while ensuring the long-term stability of
the country. Indonesia remains committed to playing
a constructive role in the achievement of lasting peace
and stability in Mali.

