Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation, of course, endorses the statement made
earlier in this debate by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.

The incidents that continue to occur in the waters
off Somalia demonstrate every day that piracy is not a
problem of the past but constitutes a grave threat to
international maritime navigation and legitimate
fishing activities. Spain firmly condemns all acts of
piracy and believes that it is necessary to join forces
internationally to put an end to this scourge.

The means used in the seizures off the coast of
Somalia have evolved in recent times. The pirates
undertake daring and highly organized operations,
perpetrating their crimes at ever-increasing distances
from the coast. It is therefore necessary to enhance
means of protection so that the delivery of
humanitarian aid, international navigation and
commercial activities can be safe once again in those
waters.

As stated in the 13 November report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/590), introduced to the
Council by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, the coordination of the
efforts of the international community and the Somali
authorities will be crucial in order to successfully deter
pirates and armed robbery in the region.

Spain is one of the many States behind the
European Union naval Operation Atalanta, a fine
model for contribution to safety at sea, together with
forces deployed by NATO and regional States and
organizations. Through coordination of its own forces
and those of third parties, the World Food Programme
seeks to protect its vessels as they deliver humanitarian
aid to Somalia. Secure maritime corridors have been
established in the Gulf of Aden for the vessels of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
their provisions.

As the Permanent Representative of Sweden
noted earlier, the European Union has decided to
extend Operation Atalanta to December 2010. Spain
and the entire European Union believe that it would be
important to receive a strengthened Security Council
mandate in order to provide more effective coverage to
the entire area under threat.

One of the greatest challenges to be met is the
rise in piracy that is affecting the security and
economic development of the region as a whole. Much
remains to be done, as shown by the high number of

vessels and crews still being held by pirates, including
Spanish vessels. The most recent incident was the
capture of the fishing vessel Alakrana, which was
fortunately freed yesterday.

On behalf of the Government of Spain, I would
like to express my thanks for the cooperation of the
countries of the region in this fight, in particular
Kenya, whose contribution is crucial to apprehending
and trying the pirates. We would also like to thank the
Republic of Seychelles for its cooperation. I would also
like to emphasize the assistance of the African Union
through AMISOM. and of the troop-contributing
countries, in particular Uganda and Burundi.

Spain has played a full part in the work of the
Security Council on that issue, together with other
Member States with a particular interest in combating
piracy. We have sponsored the various resolutions that
have been adopted on the matter. We will therefore be
pleased to co-sponsor a draft resolution allowing the
Council to extend the mandate set out in the provisions
of resolution 1846 (2008) and subsequent resolutions.

The Government of Spain is aware that the deep-
rooted causes of piracy in the waters off the coast of
Somalia are to be found not at sea, but on land.
Somalia continues to be beset by a cruel civil conflict
that has cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of
Somalis over decades of chaos and hostilities.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner
Office for Refugees, the number of internally displaced
persons is approaching 1.5 million.

Hence, the international community must
strengthen its support for the Transitional Federal
Government, the legitimate Government of Somalia.
The Government of Spain, inter alia, participated
actively in the donor conference for Somalia held in
Brussels in April. On that occasion, Spain committed
nearly €8 million, which has already been disbursed.

Spain trusts that, with the resolute support of the
international community, the Transitional Federal
Government will be able to complete the reconciliation
process under way and, pursuant to the Djibouti
agreement, achieve progress on an inclusive national
dialogue embracing the largest possible number of
stakeholders from Somali society. We also believe it
necessary to decisively address security sector reform
and to work on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration projects.
We need to define a comprehensive strategy for
Somalia here at the United Nations, and it is therefore
necessary to rely on the African Union, the European
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other regional actors involved.

The European Union is taking important steps to
reinforce security through the preparation and future
approval of a joint mission to train the security forces
of the Transitional Federal Government. Spain is
willing to play its part in that operation and, indeed, to
lead it. That will mark our ongoing contribution to the
Somali police via the African Union, now standing at
$8 million.

Spain, as President of the European Union as of
January 2010, will lend all its support to ensuring that
identification of a common strategy for Somalia
remains at the fore of the international agenda. To that
end, Spain intends to convene an international
conference on Somalia in the first half of 2010, in
coordination with the efforts of the international
community in support of the Transitional Federal
Government. We trust that the outcome of that
international conference will be a political strategy that
will make a decisive contribution to bringing peace,
good governance and reconstruction to Somalia.

