Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on Indonesia's
Security Council presidency this month.

I also thank our briefers and Indonesia for organizing
today's debate on how training and capacity-building can
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. In that regard,

the United States is engaging with partners to provide
innovative approaches to improving peacekeeping.
We know that high-quality training and
accountability can directly contribute to the safety
and security of uniformed peacekeepers. Just as
importantly, qualified professional troops and police
can deliver more effective and efficient missions
that better protect civilian populations. Uniformed
personnel must also have an understanding of the
mandate, the background and the conditions of their
peacekeeping environment. There are many troop-
and police-contributing countries that may have the
political will to help peacekeeping operations achieve
lasting solutions and seek partnerships to fulfil their
peacekeeping potential. That is where the United States
excels. We will continue to answer the call to help,
as the largest bilateral training and capacity-building
partner in the world.

Our commitment to the effective development
and delivery of peacekeeping training and capacity-
building is long-standing and our efforts are working.
Police trained in conjunction with the United States
regularly pass United Nations predeployment
assessments and United States-trained Rwandan
police units in both the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic received United Nations medals of service
excellence in recognition of their leadership and efforts
to protect civilians - qualities we should demand from
all deployed uniformed personnel. On the military
side, we are working with a partner troop-contributing
country to pilot a predeployment certification exercise
to validate the readiness of deploying battalions.

Through our peacekeeping initiatives, the United
States does more than conduct training courses.
Our long-term partnerships help enable troop- and
police-contributing partners to prepare, deploy and
sustain fit for purpose peacekeepers. We hope that
other training and capacity-building partners will
follow suit. Our assistance activities further aim
to address mission shortfalls that might undermine
the performance or effectiveness of a peacekeeping
operation. For example, we have provided training and
equipment to 41 partner countries to develop 82 distinct
critical enabling capabilities - such as engineering
companies, level-2 hospitals and riverine units - for
deployment to peacekeeping operations.
Our training also aims to increase the number
of qualified civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping. More than 11,000 female military and
police personnel have participated in United States
peacekeeping training events, through the United States
Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI) and the
International Police Peacekeeping Operations Support
Programme. As part of our efforts to achieve the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in all
stages of the peace process, we have further integrated
gender-related topics into training for all peacekeepers.
In GPOI partner countries, we are investing in
infrastructure, such as building female barracks and
latrines, to accommodate female peacekeepers at
training sites.

We do those things because we know, as you pointed
out, Madam President, that having qualified women
in meaningful roles makes peacekeeping missions
more effective. However, safety and security are not
just about training and capacity-building. They str
primarily about improving peacekeeper performance.
That is why we drafted resolution 2436 (2018), adopted
by consensus last September, and why we welcome the
Secretary-General's commitment to implementing an
integrated performance policy.

Resolution 2436 (2018) makes it clear that
the Security Council needs better information on
performance in order to make better decisions.
From training and capacity-building to ensuring
accountability for underperformance, we cannot fix
what we do not know. As the representative of the United
Kingdom also noted, better reporting on peacekeeping
will help us make better decisions in the Council. We
will therefore continue to work with partners towards
the full and speedy implementation of resolution 2436
(2018). Through that effort, we will further strengthen
peacekeeping, including with tailored, targeted training
and capacity-building. In turn, that will enhance the
safety and security of peacekeepers and the communities
they protect so that we can arrive at lasting conditions
for the political solutions that we seek.

