Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank the
members of the Security Council for this opportunity to
brief them on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the latest developments with
regard to the electoral process under way and the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement.

The scheduled holding ofpresidential and legislative
elections at the national and provincial levels is fast
approaching, as we are now only nine days away from
the beginning of the official campaign and less than
six weeks away from the scheduled date of elections
on 23 December. It should be noted that, despite
continuing differences, in particular with regard to the
use of voting machines and the reliability of the voter
registry, all stakeholders remain firmly committed to
the electoral process. The main opposition candidates
for the presidential elections agreed on a single
candidate on Sunday in Geneva. After a three-day
conclave facilitated by the Kofi Annan Foundation,
they appointed Martin Fayulu to represent them within
a new coalition called Lamuka, which means "Wake
up!" in Lingala. The coalition announced that a public
meeting would be held in Kinshasa in the near future
to introduce the joint opposition candidate, an agreed
programme and the campaign staff.

The choice of Martin Fayqu, however, as the joint
presidential opposition candidate has given rise to
strong opposition among the militant elements of the
Union pour la democratie et Ie progres social (UDPS)
and the Union pour la nation congolaise (UNC). In
response to their challenges, the leaders of the UDPS
and the UNC announced their parties' withdrawal
from the agreement signed the day before. Concerning
the Front commun pour le Congo, it has just made
public the team that will support the campaign of its
candidate - Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary - whose
programme should be unveiled on 15 November.
At the same time, preparations for the holding of
elections continue.

On 31 October, President Joseph Kabila Kabange
chaired an inter-institutional meeting to assess
the electoral process, in which the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as a partner
organization, was invitedto participate. The Government
reported that it had disbursed $322.2 million to the
Independent National Electoral Commission on
23 October, with the latter announcing that it had been
provided the means for ground and air transport and
was ready to distribute election materials throughout
the country in time for the 23 December elections. In
addition, as announced by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the training of approximately
600,000 election workers is under way so as to ensure
the smooth operation of 75,563 polling stations at more
than 23,000 different sites.

Although the accreditation process for witnesses,
observers and journalists has begun, Congolese civil-
society organizations have announced their intention to
deploy thousands of observers on the ground so as to
ensure the transparency and credibility of the process.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) also expressed its desire to deploy an electoral
observation mission. That commitment at the regional
level was reinforced by two high-level visits last week
in Kinshasa: one by the SADC Electoral Advisory
Council and one by the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security.

In order to contribute to the holding of peaceful
elections, a platform made up of various religious
leaders - through the Commission for Integrity and
Electoral Mediation - has just organized a forum
for peace and reconciliation with the aim of bringing
participants together to sign an act of commitment
for the holding of peaceful, credible and transparent
elections. Similarly, the Conference e'piscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) will hold its fifty-seventh
plenary assembly from 20 to 22 November in Kinshasa,
also in order to evaluate the electoral process.

It is worth noting that, in a recent interview with
international press, the Vice-President of CENCO
and new Archbishop of Kinshasa, Monsignor Fridolin
Ambongo Besungu, emphasized the need to reach
consensus with regard to the voting machines so that
that element does not constitute an obstacle to the
holding of elections.

In spite of this dynamic that is setting the course
for the elections on 23 December, the opposition is
concerned about the narrowing of the political space,
including the impossibility of holding meetings
throughout the country and a lack of equitable access
to public media. The opposition also condemns what
it regards as the alleged use of State resources for the
benefit of the candidate of the Front commun pour
le Congo.

There is still much progress to be made to create
an environment conducive to credible elections. It is
precisely for that reason that I am sparing no effort
in my good offices. I have initiated meetings with
all the candidates for the presidential election and, in
each of my encounters, I have insisted on the need to
demonstrate tolerance and a patriotic spirit in order to
reach consensus on their differences so as not to miss
the opportunity to make the 23 December elections a
veritable success.

I am also appealing to the Congolese authorities
to ensure that the freedoms of expression and
demonstration - which are the prerequisites for the
establishment of a democratic debate - are respected.
Elections that are accepted by the broadest possible
majority ofCongolese men and women will mark a major
turning point in the history of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by contributing to the strengthening of
institutions, peacebuilding, democratic gains and the
sustainable development of the country.

(spoke in English)
These long-awaited elections will take place in
a volatile security environment in many parts of the
country. Allow me to highlight several of our biggest
concerns today.

First, I have grown increasingly alarmed over the
situation in Beni in recent months, where we continue
to face major challenges in implementing our mandate.
As I mentioned to the Council during my previous
briefing (see S/PV.8370), civilians, the Forces armees
de la Republique De'mocratique du Congo (FARDC)
and MONUSCO alike are being targeted by the Allied
Democratic Forces and Mayi-Mayi groups. Despite
FARDC efforts and the Mission's robust patrolling and
ongoing joint operations - the latest of which started
yesterday - the attacks continue and are increasingly
taking place near the centre of the town of Beni.

As members know, we are not only facing
security challenges in Beni, but also supporting a
major Ebola response effort. The recent visit by the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
and the Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations helped to underscore the
commendable results that can be achieved through
coordinated efforts. Teams from the Ministry ofHealth,
the World Health Organization and other humanitarian
partners are doing a remarkable job, with the support
of MONUSCO.

However, we are still seeing a growing number
of cases in the major population centres of Beni and
Butembo, as well as significant community resistance
to response efforts. Women are disproportionately
affected, representing about 60 per cent of all probable
and confirmed cases, due to a number of factors,
including their roles as caregivers of the diseased.
The Mission will continue its support to Ebola efforts
as a matter of the utmost priority while also taking
into account a gendered response lens. Our teams
on the ground are providing extensive logistical and
protection support to partners and are engaging with
local authorities and communities to encourage their
acceptance of response efforts.

Secondly, there is potential for armed group
interference in elections in specific areas throughout
eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - particularly in Tanganyika, South Kivu and
the Grand and Petit Nord areas of North Kivu. Armed
group violence in those key provinces could affect the
secure deployment of electoral material and may prevent
certain parts of the population from voting on election
day, thereby impacting the inclusivity of the process. It
will be especially important for the Government to take
steps in the coming weeks to secure polls, particularly
to ensure the participation of women, who make up
50 per cent of registered voters.

Thirdly, we are also carefully watching the
situation in the Kasais, following the forced return of
Congolese migrants from Angola. Given the pace of
returns, the limited capacity to receive returnees on
the ground and the difficulties they face in returning
home, there is a possibility for ethnic tension to flare up
in certain areas of the Kasais. Despite the remoteness
of the area, in which the Mission has a very limited
footprint, MONUSCO has been providing support to
humanitarian partners and engaging with Congolese
and regional actors to advocate for a more measured
pace of return.

It is in that dynamic context that we move towards
the long-awaited elections in just over one month's
time. Our collective focus must now be on ensuring the
credibility of the process. It is ofparamount importance
that candidates have equal access to political space
during the campaign period and that restrictions
on peaceful demonstrations are lifted consistently
throughout the country.

Further progress in the implementation of
confidence-building measures and the existence of a
level political playing field throughout the campaign
period leading up to 23 December will significantly
enhance the credibility of polls and contribute to post-
electoral stability. I will continue to advocate with all
parties in that regard. I count on the members of the
Council to support our efforts and to convey the same
messages in the coming weeks.

