Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for asking for the floor once more.

General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX)
considers occupation as the worst form of the crime of
aggression. The content of that resolution therefore
provides the optimal response to what was just said by
the representative of the Israeli occupation of the Arab-
occupied territories.

Israeli State terrorism is distinguished in this
international Organization because it is documented. It
began with the assassination of the representatives of
the United Nations, starting with Count Bernardotte, in
1948, and continued with the terrorist political crimes
committed against Palestinian leaders, the
assassination of children at Qana, in southern Lebanon,
on two occasions, and the assassination of Palestinian
and Arab leaders outside Palestine - and we all know
what they did in Dubai and whom they killed there.
The documentation of Israeli State terrorism therefore
really needs an encyclopedia, a specialized one that
would focus attention on Israeli war crimes and Israeli
crimes against humanity perpetrated by every
Government of Israel since its establishment in
Palestine, in 1948. The paradox here is that those who
preach and talk about their pain as a result of the Nazi
Holocaust, which is not of Arab making, as all
members know, blatantly and openly say that they want
the Palestinian people to taste the bitterness of a new
holocaust, but this time it is one of Israeli making.

We are not the only ones who say that Israel is a
State that commits war crimes and crimes of
extermination. There are prominent western officials
who agree with us, including some senior officials of
the United Nations, many of whom have testified
before the Council. President Jimmy Carter was not
alone in saying that Israel was exercising apartheid
against the Palestinians; Bishop Desmond Tutu and
Special Rapporteurs Ian Sinclair, John Dugard and
Richard Falk also have said it. Israel remains the only
State in the world that adopts policies of targeted
killing and allocates financial resources in its national
budget for them - something that is condemned all

over the world. That budget is approved publicly by the
Israeli Knesset. I respect the fact that it is late, and I
will stop there.
38

