Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Today, we have
little reason for optimism. The main problems of the
crisis under review - namely, the humanitarian situation
and the political process - have barely budged since our
last meeting on this issue.

The humanitarian situation resulting from the
conflict and the fate of Georgia's one-quarter of a million
refugees and displaced persons have always been the
primary preoccupation of my country in this issue. In this
context, we are horrified by the complete lack of progress
on their repatriation. Fewer than 500 of the quarter
million have been repatriated voluntarily over the past
three months - which is absolutely laughable. At this
pace, it would take about 182 years before the repatriation
was completed. And it is small wonder that under these
circumstances spontaneous repatriation is under way, with
ail the risks it entails. But even that has affected only a

 

few tens of thousands of people, according to information
provided by the Russian delegation - that is, a small
fraction of the total refugee population.

Meanwhile, in Georgia itself these refugees and
displaced persons have been forgotten by the world. They
suffer outside the field of vision of CNN cameras, and their
suffering has resulted among other things in a full-blown
health crisis: recently we dealt here approving the export of
some vaccine against diphtheria - one of the diseases now
plaguing Georgia. And it is pitiful that the operation of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UN HCR), the one organization that does help, is
facing a financial crisis that might force it to curtail its
work in one of the world's spots where it is needed most.

Repatriation has to be speeded up by at least two
orders of magnitude, so that its end can be timed in
months, not centuries. My delegation is in fact particularly
chagrined that this draft resolution makes no reference to a
repatriation timetable such as the one the UN HCR has
repeatedly proposed - in vain - to the Quadripartite
Commission, dealing with refugee issues; nor does our draft
propose any other measure that would refocus our attention
on the need to bring refugees and displaced persons back to
their villages and fields.

No movement on humanitarian issues of course
follows from the absence of movement on political
issues - the two are interrelated. We are distressed that no
progress has been made in the last six weeks or so to
resolve the political and constitutional crisis. If anything,
the crisis deepened when Abkhaz leaders very unadvisedly
adopted certain unilateral constitutional steps.

In the light of these steps it is all the more important
that our draft resolution once again clearly and
unambiguously reiterate our support for Georgia' s territorial
integrity. Its territorial integrity formed also the basis of a
joint paper which the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Russian
Federation submitted to the parties as a basis for further
discussions - which, alas, again went nowhere.

The Secretary-General has made many efforts
personally, but even these have not been fruitful. We urge
him, however, not to be discouraged and to continue trying,
again and again, to get high-level talks on Abkhazia off the
ground. We do, however, agree with him that a general
preoccupation with events taking place elsewhere in the
Caucasus region hinders his efforts, and indeed that the
crisis in Chechnya may impede the politics of seeking an
Abkhaz settlement. This is just another reason why we
hope the Chechnya crisis will be resolved soon - albeit
not at any price. Heaven knows that the Caucasus region
is already plagued by a goodly number of conflicts, and
history shows that they influence one other. Would,
therefore, that the impact of the crisis in Chechnya were
indeed limited to politics, and the politics only of
Abkhazia.
If there is anything positive in this altogether gloomy
situation, it is the work of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). UNOMIG has reached
its full authorized strength. It has correspondingly
expanded its activity. It is cooperating well with the
peace-keeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). Its freedom of movement is
being observed. Even its status in Georgia has been
successfully settled. All this is very welcome news.

And we are also happy to learn that an arrangement
has been reached on the cooperation between the United
Nations and the CIS forces, on the basis of the Secretary-
General's proposals of 4 November last. This cooperation
will, we hope, lead to an improvement of the security
situation on the ground. It seems to be especially poor in
the Gali region - which the Secretary-General's report
touches on in several paragraphs. We certainly hope that
the combined activities of the CIS peace-keepers and of
UNOMIG will help calm the situation.

If there is one other thing we would like, it is richer
reporting on the operations of the CIS peace-keeping
force. We are grateful to the Russian delegation for the
briefings it occasionally provides to Council members
during informal consultations, and indeed I have used
today some numbers precisely from these briefings. But
we believe it would be very advantageous for their
content to find its way into official documents of the
Security Council, for the benefit both of greater
transparency of the CIS peace-keeping operations and of
fuller information for United Nations Members. No new
ground would be broken in doing so: The United States
delegation, for example, regularly provides comparable
briefings on Haiti, which, as we all know, are publicly
available as part of the official record.

Extending the UNOMIG mandate until 15 May will
in effect synchronize the timetables of the United Nations
and the CIS operations, something we have advocated in
the past. We therefore fully support this extension and the
draft resolution before us.

 

