The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

We appreciate the latest efforts made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in the comprehensive
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the progress that has already been achieved.
Voter registration in Kosovo is to be held on schedule,
at the end of this month. China has all along stressed
the importance of the participation of minority
communities, which is necessary to ensure an impartial
and fair election.

Integrating the strategy used to build trust among
the various ethnic groups in the area of Mitrovica, as
requested by the Security Council mission to Kosovo,
is also indispensable for the holding of elections in
Kosovo. UNMIK should continue its efforts in this
regard.

Another important consensus reached by the
Security Council mission to Kosovo is the need for the
total disarmament of illegal armed groups. Now the
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) is gaining in strength and
will play an increasingly important role in ensuring law
and order and the administration of justice in Kosovo.
We understand that the KPS has recruited, or is about
to recruit, a large number of members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army, which might affect whether the KPS
can fulfil its role impartially in providing law and
order. We hope that UNMIK will proceed with caution
on this matter.

The situations in Kosovo and Macedonia are
somewhat related, so it is necessary to pay attention to
the illegal flow of arms and the humanitarian situation
along the border of Kosovo and Macedonia. UNMIK
has the responsibility to take effective measures to stop
the illegal cross-border flow of arms. The situation in
Macedonia is at a critical stage. We hope that the
parties concerned, in the spirit of respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Macedonia, will
mediate the ethnic tensions between Macedonian and
Albanian communities in an objective and impartial
manner so as to avoid the escalation of violence and
deterioration of the security situation, which would
have a negative impact on the peace and stability of the
region as a whole.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

