Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I would like first of all
to thank Ambassador Richard Ryan, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning Angola, for his
presentation of the report of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Angola Sanctions (S/2000/l225) this
afternoon. We know how seriously Ambassador Ryan
has been working since he took over the chairmanship
ofthe Committee on Angola in January this year, along
with the other members of his Committee, for the early
examination by the Security Council of the report and
the recommendations of the Monitoring Mechanism.

In the same breath, I wish to express our thanks
to the former Chairman of the Angola Committee,
Ambassador Paul Heinbecker of Canada, for his very
able stewardship of the Committee last year. We take
this opportunity to pay tribute to Ambassador
Heinbecker's predecessor, Ambassador Robert Fowler,
whose vision and dedicated work laid the foundation
for the important work of the Monitoring Mechanism.
We are very pleased to welcome Mr. Joao Bernardo de
Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola, in
our midst today.

My delegation has taken careful note ofthe report
of the Monitoring Mechanism, and we fully endorse
that report as well as all the recommendations of the
Monitoring Mechanism. We are confident that the
recommendations will help make a further dent in the
capacity of the Uniao Nacional Para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) to acquire arms and logistics
paid for through illegal exploitation of Angolan
diamonds in order to wage war against the Angolan
people, war which over so many years has inflicted so
much misery on the population of Angola, has brought
about a humanitarian disaster and has retarded the
development process ofthe country.

We have no doubt that Mr. Jonas Savimbi knows
full well that he cannot achieve a military victory in
Angola. The reverses he has suffered recently are clear
evidence of that. The only alternative open to him if he
wishes to be a serious stakeholder in the political life
of Angola is to renew his commitment to the Lusaka
Protocol and to participate in its implementation.

The fact that Mr. Savimbi persists in waging civil
war is a clear indication that his motive is other than to
serve the cause of peace and stability and the well-
being of the Angolan people. Indeed, it seems that it is
the lure of Angola's diamond resources that principally
motivates him.

Mr. Savimbi and UNITA have been a bad
influence elsewhere in Africa. The misery the people of
Sierra Leone are enduring is also attributed to the lure
of diamonds and to the looting of the mineral and other
natural resources of their country. We also know of the
similar situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Furthermore, the destabilizing role of Liberia
in Sierra Leone and Guinea has its motivation in taking
advantage of conflict diamonds. It is reprehensible
indeed that the greed of a few in Africa and elsewhere
should cause so much suffering to so many people in
the African continent. That cannot be allowed to
continue.

The nefarious trade in conflict diamonds involves
not only sellers, but buyers as well, in addition to other
greedy beneficiaries who supply rebel forces with
weapons paid for with blood money from the sale of
conflict diamonds. It also involves many unscrupulous
elements in the air and sea transport trade. The nexus
includes not only private individuals and business
persons but, in certain instances, even political leaders
who allow their territories to be used as transit points
for the movement of illegal arms and fuel to forces of
senseless rebellions, all for the personal rewards they
reap in the process. This is done with impunity, in
violation of sanctions regimes established by the
Security Council.

The Monitoring Mechanism, like the panels on
Sierra Leone and on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, followed the leads and came up with very
credible conclusions in that regard. We in the Security
Council must go beyond the "naming and shaming"
system to impose appropriate sanctions against those
found guilty of complicity in sanctions-busting.

We strongly support the recommendations on
setting up a global certification scheme for the
diamond trade, as this would help make clear the
difference between legal and illegal diamonds in that
trade. We urge weapons exporting countries to further
strengthen their control of arms exports in order to
prevent their arms from reaching the forces of rebellion
and destabilization against legitimate Governments. We
also support strong action, as mentioned in the report
of the Monitoring Mechanism, against aircraft, ships
and persons in the transportation industry involved in
busting embargoes on arms shipments. In this regard,
in order that the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) can assume the responsibility for
surveillance in the southern African region as proposed
by the earlier Panel, we call upon the international
community to provide the necessary financial and
technical support to SADC without further delay.

Finally, we urge the countries where UNITA
elements have sanctuary, and from which they provide
support for the sinister designs of UNITA, to exercise
stronger control over the activities of such elements so
that the use of their territories does not constitute a
factor in UNITA's perpetuation of the sterile conflict in
Angola.

We warmly commend the Chairman and the
members of the Monitoring Mechanism for all their
work and their comprehensive report. My delegation
supports France's proposal for the establishment of a
permanent monitoring mechanism for all sanctions
regimes and for sanctions-busting in particular. In the
meantime, we support the extension of the Mechanism
mandate for another three months.

