Lieutenant General Martins Filho: Before
starting, I would like to pay tribute to Chief Private
Exwin Lahansang, from the Indonesian engineer
company deployed in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), who passed away this
morning as a result of a heart attack. I express my
deepest condolences to his family and to the Republic
of Indonesia.

I wish to congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Indonesia to the United Nations on the inauguration
of its presidency of the Security Council, as well as
to thank the Council for this opportunity. The idea of
this debate on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
is indeed noble. It will enrich all of us, give us an
opportunity for reflection and bring forth a myriad of
ideas and experiences.

MONUSCO is one of the largest and most complex
peacekeeping missions under the umbrella of the United
Nations. Since its inception, the Mission has matured
and adapted itself well to the dynamic challenges and
changing requirements. Despite the evolving scenarios
and mandate requirements, one facet has remained
constant, that is, the Mission has focused on innovation
and professionalism with a view towards efficiency.
The force and the Mission headquarters have worked
well in synchrony, as part of a comprehensive approach
to face the challenges on the ground in order to fulfil
our mandate. In that respect, working in coordination
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and counting on its cooperation has become
challenging and fundamental for the peace, stability
and development of the country.

The main priority for the Mission remains changing
the mindset of all peacekeepers, civilians, military
and police, who must comprehend the environment
and the challenges and perform accordingly. A
proper mindset is the basis for all that follows, from
selection, preparation and training to the performance
of individuals and troops.

The core of our mandate - the protection of
civilians - remains unchanged and requires building
confidence among the population, implementing an
effective intelligence system and our capability to
prevent. In fact, preventive deployment and neutralizing
the armed groups are the most effective ways to protect
the civilians of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As is well known, there is no purely military
solution for the problems and challenges we face in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the solution is
political and involves all components of the Mission.
That is why the focus of our analysis, planning and
operations since last year has been a comprehensive
approach that incorporates the views, priorities and
expertise of all concerned personnel deployed in the
Mission area.

We must also communicate better with locals
and the international community. Prevention does
not provide headlines. That is sad, but it is reality.
The positive outcomes, the good things MONUSCO
has done and the hard work of our peacekeepers are
not known. For example, few people in the world,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
know that, during the past three years, more than 6,000
children were rescued from different armed groups
and returned to their villages, or that, just recently, on
28 April, following the deployment of our troops in
Mpati, North Kivu, 114 children were freed from armed
groups as a result of joint, comprehensive work by the
Mission's components.

In that regard, the force has implemented
the "protection through projection" concept very
effectively, in conjunction with that of "protection
through presence". We are still learning, but the results
have been impressive. The number of attacks against
villages and cities prevented just because we were
able to deploy our troops at the first sight of a threat is
significant. During the month of April alone, the force
deployed more than 44 company operational bases and
26 standard combat deployment platoon sites, while
also carrying out more than 8,500 patrols, day and
night, and deploying Quick Reaction Force elements
4,163 times. The total number of operational activities
surpassed 13,600.

In terms of neutralizing the armed groups, it is
worth mentioning that the most desirable outcome is for
them to be disarmed and demobilized. More than 5,000
members of armed groups have surrendered so far
this year, or have tried to do so. However, the process
has not been completed because the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are not
yet well established.

The MONUSCO force has also implemented
many initiatives to bring peace and development to
communities. The so-called quick-impact projects have
contributed to preventing ethnic conflicts at low costs.
In Kamako, Kasai Central, for example, water has been a
flashpoint for the tensions among five communities: the
Luba and Lulau, on one side, and the Tetela, Tshkokwe
and Pende, on another. A quick-impact project to collect
water, inaugurated on 9 January, was welcomed by all
communities and has worked well in terms of lowering
tensions. Another example is Lukweti, North Kivu,
which is a remote and isolated Village - no roads or
communication with the outside world. The Village had
been under threat of attack by the Nduma de'fense du
Congo-Renove, which left the area after the deployment
of our troops. The force prevented the attack and then
developed a quick-impact project, which is ongoing,
to build an antenna and a bridge. Those initiatives are
contributing to providing protection and development.

To focus on the main subject of this debate, I would
like to highlight that training is an essential pillar to
ensure the desired performance of our peacekeepers.
Our troops must deploy in the Mission area fully able and
equipped to carry out all operational tasks. Training is a
continuous process that must also focus on the specifics
of the Mission and its operational environment, which
serves to underscore the importance of in-mission
training. Predeployment visits, which focus on training,
with the participation of representatives from the field,
the development of in-mission training programmes for
current and specialized operations and the deployment
of mobile training teams are examples of initiatives that
have been implemented to improve the quality of the
troops deployed in the Mission.

In that respect, MONUSCO welcomes the recent
decision to deploy a team of jungle warfare experts in
the Beni territory to improve its capabilities to plan
and conduct offensive operations in the challenging
jungle environment. We also welcome Headquarters
initiatives to provide field missions with manuals,
training exercises and courses at different levels, which
will contribute to achieving the minimum level of
homogeneity required for such deployments.

In terms of capacity-building and performance, the
following measures have been implemented.

Regular safety and security audits of all company
operational bases and enhanced force protection
measures have been implemented to strengthen defence
and force protection. The force has also formalized
and promulgated standard operating procedures on the
related subjects concerned.

Regular evaluations of contingents have been
carried out, with the results having been shared with
Headquarters, with the aim of enhancing preparation
and operational effectiveness standards. The
contingents with significant performance issues have
been reported on. MONUSCO has also adopted the
online performance evaluation tool.

Tabletop exercises and stress testing of various
contingency situations are regularly practiced at
all headquarters and field unit locations. Recently,
a command post exercise was also organized for the
furtherance of the Mission's objectives.

An analysis of existing security mechanisms
for military observers has been completed with a
view to suggesting explicit security guidelines for
implementation. All security strands have been
incorporated in the revised security guidelines for the
purpose of standardization and uniformity.

Casualty evacuation based on the 10-1-2 timeline
response concept remains a challenge for MONUSCO,
owing to the Mission's infrastructure, aviation
challenges and the size of the area of responsibility.
However, the Mission has implemented it where possible.

The command and control arrangements have been
strengthened through regular field Visits by the force
leadership, brigade commanders and force headquarters
staff. The existing reporting mechanism has been
reviewed to ensure real-time flow of information at
all levels.

MONUSCO has implemented new air-threat and
risk-assessment standards for all military aviation
missions. The current deployment of the aviation
assets is based on that threat assessment and the
operational requirements.

The force has undertaken various measures for
enhancing and encouraging female engagement in
MONUSCO, which will provide guidance and direction
on the various ways MONUSCO can operationalize
female engagement. The force headquarters has obtained
formal certificates from all contingent commanders on
caveats, and no caveats have been declared.

I would like to reassure you, Madam President,
Council members and all Member States that the
MONUSCO force is committed to fulfilling the
Mission's mandate with innovation and professionalism
and that the troops deployed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have been proactive, showed willingness
and worked hard to overcome the challenges and
difficulties encountered on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to convey my heartfelt
gratitude to the Council presidency for organizing this
open debate on the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, as well as for extending an
opportunity to me to express my thoughts. May peace
prevail in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

