Mr. Wolf (United States of America): The
Secretary-General's report (S/2005/740) and Under-
Secretary-General Egeland's presentation - which is
very much appreciated - paint a disturbing picture.
But we are encouraged that this meeting helps to
reaffirm the international community's commitment to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The world continues to be plagued by violent
conflicts, with civilians now the major category of
casualties of war worldwide. We would like to stress,
however, that the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States and their Governments and
that international efforts should complement
Government efforts rather than assume responsibility
for them. Improving the protection of civilians from
the devastating effects of armed conflict depends
largely not on what we say or do here, but on what
Governments do to protect their own people and on
how they allow others to assist.

Let me now turn to some specific cases of
concern. We continue to be gravely concerned about
the ongoing crisis in Darfur, and especially about the
impact of conflict on civilians in that region. While
large-scale organized violence has substantially
diminished, civilians continue to be subject to
lawlessness and banditry, and women and girls
continue to be raped. More than 2 million people
remain displaced from their homes. In addition,
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers have been
increasingly targeted.

Sadly, there have recently been casualties, both
deaths and injuries, among African Union
peacekeepers who have been working to restore order
in Darfur. This continuing insecurity has a direct
detrimental impact on the international community's
ability to deliver assistance and provide basic services
for the victims of the conflict.

The situation in Darfur illustrates the urgent role
that all parties to a conflict, but especially States, must
play to safeguard civilians, including those who are
internally displaced. Clearly the Sudanese Government
has not fulfilled many of its responsibilities towards its
people in Darfur, and the rebel groups continue to put
them at risk as well. It is also important to reiterate that
internally displaced civilians living in camps can
continue to face serious human rights violations.

Several other countries, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have delicate situations of
transition, where many protection challenges have
increased. United Nations peacekeeping and assistance
missions, together with support from non-
governmental organizations, help ensure that civilians
in these regions are not denied the dividends of peace.

We are encouraged by the fact that the Security
Council has been more consistently addressing the
regional dimension of civilian protection. Furthermore,
Security Council resolutions and peacekeeping
mandates regularly identify key protection issues,
including the deliberate targeting of civilians; forced
displacement; the use of sexual and other forms of
gender-based violence; the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, in violation of international law; the need for
unhindered humanitarian access at reasonable times
and places; and the safety of United Nations and
associated humanitarian personnel.

We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for their efforts on this draft resolution. We
look forward to continuing negotiations on the text. As
we once again reaffirm the commitment to reinforce
and strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and in resulting situations of humanitarian
crisis, let us ensure that our words and intentions
become actions.

