Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to join my colleagues who have
thanked you, Madam President, for having convened
this very important meeting with the presence of the
United States Secretary of State regarding the situation
in Iraq. I am pleased that Mr. Al-Jaafari of Iraq and
Mr. Mladenov are here.

We hope that the Iraqi authorities and the brotherly
Iraqi people will have every success in restoring peace
and security throughout the country and combatting
and putting an end to terrorism. Some speakers today
have gone beyond the agenda item under consideration,
which is the situation in Iraq. That is what is on the
agenda. They have spoken about the situation in my
country in a misleading and very provocative manner, in
particular with respect to the fight against the terrorist
group of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

I was very interested to hear the preliminary
statement by Mr. Kerry. I noted the balanced wording
of his statement, which reflected the importance of
the challenge in Iraq and the region, in particular with
respect to terrorism and the threats posed by ISIL and
other terrorist organizations in the region. Some of the
other statements, unfortunately, attempted to divert our
attention from the crucial issue at hand today, that is,
the support to be provided to two Governments and
two peoples, Iraq and Syria, in combatting ISIL, Jabhat
al-Nusra and other affiliated terrorist organizations in
line with resolution 2170 (2014). The war in Syria and
Iraq against terrorism is a single war against the same
enemy. The victims in both countries are the victims of
one single heinous terrorist group.

My country's Government is an active participant in
combatting the terrorist groups ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra.
We have undertaken those activities unilaterally within
Syria over the past three years. We always emphasize
the importance of counter-terrorism efforts, putting
an end to terrorist financing and combating terrorists
who come to our country from other countries. We also
stress the importance of accountability with respect to
countries and States who support terrorism.
Today, we are extremely relieved to hear the
international community acknowledge the facts that
we have transmitted tirelessly to the Council and to
Member States. We have always spoken of terrorism, the
existence of terrorism and incitement to terrorist acts.
We have highlighted those Governments supporting
terrorism, the media's support for terrorism, fatwas and
the people who claim to be ulamas and who support
such terrorism. There are indeed training camps for
terrorists. Some of those camps are in neighbouring
countries. Moreover, some attempt to mask the identity
of those who support terrorism.

The international awakening in the fight against
ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra, even if tardy, is a matter
of relief. We therefore reaffirm that any international
counter-terrorism efort must be based on full respect
for the Charter and the provisions and principles of
international law, in particular those upholding the
sovereignty of States. Accordingly, there is a need to
coordinate upstream with the Syrian Government in the
framework of any credible efforts to combat terrorism.

In conclusion, an effective fight against ISIL
requires combatting its ideologies, based on the
obscurantist Saudi Wahhabi ideology, which is the
source of extremism in the Arab and Muslim world.
I recall that thousands of Saudi terrorists have joined
ISIL in Syria and Iraq. The majority of the terrorists
who carried out the 11 September attack were Saudis,
not Syrians. In addition, the ideas of Bin Laden also
came from Saudi Arabia. 1 would like to reiterate that
the events that are throwing the region into turmoil are
the result of collusion between Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and Qatar and are undermining the future of the region.

