Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May 2011. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. Allow me also to
express our sincere thanks to the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights and Head of the New York
Office of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings this morning.

Civilians continue to account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. It is against
this backdrop that the States Members of the
Organization pledged in the Millennium Declaration to
expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies. Protection for civilians is a
basic principle of humanitarian law. Civilians not
taking part in the fighting must on no account be
attacked and must be spared and protected. The 1949
Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional
Protocols contain specific rules to protect civilians. In
situations that are not covered by these treaties, in
particular internal disturbances, civilians are protected
by the fundamental principles of humanitarian law and
human rights law. However, a large number of civilians
continue to be exposed to the atrocities of conflict.

The vulnerable situation of civilians in post-
conflict societies needs special attention. Long after
guns have fallen silent, such people remain traumatized
by the atrocities of war. For peace to be sustained, they
must be rehabilitated and reintegrated into their
communities more effectively, and the perpetrators
must bear the resultant cost.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the important
tools available to the United Nations to protect
civilians in armed conflict. As one of the largest troop-
contributing countries, Bangladesh is playing its part in
ensuring peace and security in different parts of the
world. In several situations, such as in Cote d'Ivoire,
our peacekeepers have also been injured by the parties
to the conflict while performing their duties. We feel
that the issue of the resource gap in peacekeeping
missions should be adequately addressed.

Similarly, it should also be kept in mind that
United Nations blue helmets cannot be seen as the only
instrument to protect civilians in such situations. The
host country has the primary responsibility for
protecting its civilians. International efforts including
the use of force should be the last resort, and the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter must
be respected. Allow me to add here that the presence of
uniformed female personnel may play a pivotal role in
a State's ability to protect its citizens. In that regard, I
would like to take this opportunity to refer to the
efforts of the all-female Bangladeshi formed police
unit working in the peacekeeping mission in Haiti.

I would like to mention what my delegation
considers to be two overarching themes for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.
The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders, including various political,
humanitarian, military and development components of
United Nations missions in the field. We appreciate
some improvements in that regard. However, much
needs to be done. My delegation stresses the need for
effective coordination, particularly between the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs.

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
stresses the need to combat impunity, safeguard access
for humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers. My delegation expresses its
grave concern over such violations and breaches of
law. For example, total disregard and rejection of
humanitarian and international laws and values,
especially that of the occupation forces in the occupied
territories of Palestine for years now, is a disgrace to
humanity.

In Libya, civilians continue to be attacked during
the conflict. We are greatly worried by the reports of
deaths, injuries and violence. The delivery of essential
medical supplies and other relief items and the
evacuation of third-country nationals, the wounded and
others who require emergency medical assistance have
also been severely affected.

Finally, my delegation strongly urges the
international community, particularly the Council, to
take effective steps to ensure respect for and
compliance with the Geneva Conventions in all such
situations in a uniform manner. We urge parties to
conflict to comply strictly with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law for the
protection of civilians and provide unimpeded access
to humanitarian aid. We call on all parties to conflicts
to strengthen the protection of civilians through
heightened awareness at all levels, particularly through
the training, orders and instructions issued to armed
forces.

