Mrs. Mesquita-Borges (Timor-Leste): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, for assuming
the rotating presidency for this month. I also thank
you for convening this meeting. I also want to thank
Miguel Trovoada, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his briefing
to the Council and for his strenuous efforts to assist the
Bissau-Guinean authorities to resolve the crisis.

I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique,
Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and my own country,
Timor-Leste.

The CPLP member States regret the current
political impasse and remain deeply concerned about
the current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We call on all
stakeholders - namely, the organs of sovereignty, the
political parties, civil society and others - to engage
in constructive, inclusive political dialogue, while
respecting democratic principles and the Constitution.
Statesmanship is required to move forward with
both the national reform agenda and along the path
to stability, which requires national leadership and
ownership. In that connection, we highlight the fact
that the constitutional order, as well as the role played
by the judicial system, continue to be upheld in Guinea-
Bissau. We also highlight the non-involvement of the
armed forces. While it is the sole responsibility of the
authorities in Guinea-Bissau to resolve the political
crisis, it is crucial that the process fully respect the
Constitution and the rule of law. The current impasse
has impacted the reform agenda that has been initiated,
in particular in the security and justice sectors, which
have been stalled for over six months.

The national strategic development plan - entitled
"Terra Ranka" - reflects the aspirations of the Bissau-
Guineansforgreaterpolitical stabilityandsocioeconomic
development, as well as for the consolidation of the
rule of law and the protection and promotion of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights. The
document, presented by President Jose Mario Vaz and
the former Prime Minister Domingos Simoes Pereira at
the donor round table in Brussels in March, garnered
the support of the international partners. It is deeply
concerning that the instability in the country has forced
international partners to delay disbursements ofpledges
made in March. Such delays will only affect the people
of Guinea-Bissau, who are already suffering a highly
negative social and economic impact.

We call on the international community to continue
supporting Guinea-Bissau and its people in the
implementation of the State reforms and development
plans, while stressing that the key responsibility
for achieving the necessary stable environment for
political and institutional cooperation rests with the
national stakeholders. Last week, my country provided
$250,000, as the first tranche of a pledge made during
the Brussels round table, as part of an effort to support
national reconciliation dialogue activities. Last July,
Portugal also began the implementation of its strategic
cooperation programme as follow-up to the €40 million
pledge announced at the Brussels round table.

The CPLP wishes to recognize the concerted efforts
of the international community to assist Guinea-Bissau
in this crisis. In that regard, we appreciate and commend
the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in
particular those of Ambassador De Patriota as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC.

We also welcome the efforts made by regional
leaders and by regional organizations such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In particular, we thank
ECOWAS for the important role played by the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in maintaining
peace and security in Guinea-Bissau. We also welcome
the recent visit by the ECOWAS Special Envoy, His
Excellency Mr. Obasanjo, and express appreciation
for all his efforts. ECOMIB has played a critical role
during this time of instability, and the CPLP expresses
its full support for a possible extension of its mandate.
We encourage donor countries and the Security Council
to provide sufficient political and financial support for
ECOMIB's work.

This indeed is a crucial moment for Guinea-Bissau.
It is of the utmost importance that the international
community stand by the country in consolidating
the much-needed path to stability and development.
The extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Bissau in its present format
would definitely rightly express the United Nations
commitment and engagement towards Guinea-Bissau
and its people.

To conclude, we take this opportunity to highlight
the recent visit made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and current Chair of
the Council of Ministers of the CPLP, His Excellency
Mr. Hernani Coelho, and the Executive Secretary of the
CPLP, Ambassador Murargy, to Guinea-Bissau from
10 to 12 February. In that regard, we call for the early
convening of the International Contact Group, in line
with the call made by ECOWAS in December, in order
to support the process of national dialogue towards
the consolidation of peace and democracy in Guinea- The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 now invite
Bissau. We, the CPLP, remain ready to assist in the Council members to informal consultations to continue
holding of the meeting in March, asjust stated by the our discussion on the subject.

re resentative of Guinea-Bissau. .
p The meeting rose 11131040 am.

The CPLP stands ready, together with the rest of
the international community, to continue our support to
Guinea-Bissau in respect ofnational ownership.
