Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Bolivia's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for October, and to wish you every success
in your work. We appreciate the holding of this open
debate, and we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing. We also thank Mr. Hagai
El-Ad for his participation in the meeting this morning.

The unresolved conflicts in the Middle East
continue to ensure that the situation there remains
critical and unstable. If we do not rely on wisdom and
reason and commit to respecting international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, we will put peace
and security in the region injeopardy. Those challenges
require an environment conducive to addressing them,
including the united efforts of all concerned to fight
violent extremism and terrorism and tackle their root
causes while examining their cultural, social and
political backgrounds.

The Palestinian question has been on the agenda
of the Security Council for decades, and yet the
international community has been unable to settle it.
The achievement of such a settlement would have a
positive impact on the stability of the region as a whole
and on international peace and security. The Palestinian
question is the central issue for Arab and Islamic
nations. A lasting, just and comprehensive, peace must
be based on international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international legitimacy
regarding self-determination and the inadmissibility
of the annexation of territory by force. That requires
meaningful negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties to reach agreement on issues pertaining
to a final settlement, based on agreed-on terms of
reference, including the Arab Peace Initiative, for the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State along the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; ending
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan and the Lebanese occupied territory;
immediately ceasing all settlement activities; on the
return of refugees; acknowledging the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, and not changing the status
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other Islamic and Christian
holy sites, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That would
ensure that both parties could live side by side in peace
and security.

The unjust blockade of Gaza has entered its
eleventh year. The people of Gaza are enduring an
agony of suffering from the humanitarian crisis. Based
on instructions from His Highness Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, we
have provided them with $150 million in humanitarian
assistance. We have also provided the Gaza Strip with
fuel for generating electricity. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) recently celebrated the opening
of the new scholastic year, and the State of Qatar has
contributed $50 million to the UNRWA educational
programme, helping its schools to open on schedule.
Those efforts are part of our positive role to foster the
stability that peace requires.

The crisis in Syria is having serious repercussions
and demands an urgent political settlement based on
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2254 (2015), with the full participation of
the Syrian people, in order to meet their legitimate
aspirations while maintaining Syria's national unity,
sovereignty and independence. Until a political
transition and national reconciliation are achieved, there
must be accountability for crimes under international
law and international humanitarian law. We underscore
the importance of supporting the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.

It is nearly a year and four months since the illegal
blockade was imposed on my country, the State of
Qatar, in a contrived crisis that seeks to control its will
and invalidate its political decisions on fabricated and
farcical grounds. That contrived crisis only undermines
the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf
(GCC). For more than three decades, that regional
entity has been able to maintain its unity. In the light
of the crises in the region that require collective action,
we must preserve the GCC.
The countries imposing the blockade have not been
successful. The State of Qatar has been able to deal
with the unprecedented crisis in the Arab Gulf wisely,
through an ongoing policy of openness and building
bilateral and multilateral partnerships in different
areas, despite the campaigns of hatred and deception by
the countries of the blockade, which seek to justify their
irresponsible actions against the people and residents of
the State of Qatar.

Since the beginning of the crisis, the State of Qatar
has underscored its commitment to dealing with it in
accordance with international law and the relevant
existing bilateral and international conventions and
agreements on conflict resolution. The State of Qatar
therefore reiterates its commitment to the mediation
led by His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, Emir of the sisterly State of Kuwait. We are
grateful to the States that have supported us during
the mediation to resolve the crisis. We are ready to
negotiate without preconditions and in full respect for
our sovereignty, as we have reaffirmed time and again
in various forums.

In order to find solutions to that contrived crisis,
which causes legal and social problems pertaining to
family fragmentation and the deprivation of students
from the right to study as a result of the unilateral
measures imposed by the countries of the blockade,
the State of Qatar resorted to the International Court of
Justice, which, on 23 July, issued a ruling by adopting
provisional measures in favour of the State of Qatar
against the United Arab Emirates for violating the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. The ruling included provisions that
requested the United Arab Emirates to ensure that
families were reunited and that the affected Qatari
students were given the right to finish their studies in the
United Arab Emirates and to receive their educational
records. It also gave the affected Qatari citizens access
to the judiciary in the United Arab Emirates. That
proves the sound legal position of my country.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm that the State of Qatar will continue its
foreign policy based on international law, friendly
relations and constructive cooperation within the
multilateral system. We believe that such an approach
is the best way to end all international crises, including
those in the Middle East.

