Mr. Yap (Singapore): I shall be very brief. First,
we thank Mr. Klein for his comprehensive briefing and
the Secretary-General for his excellent report.

Let me also state at the outset that Singapore
supports the sterling work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Klein and Commissioner
Coeurderoy, as well as their colleagues in the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the International Police Task Force
(IPTF). They work under difficult circumstances.

As the Secretary-General has noted, there are still
some in Bosnia and Herzegovina who have not
abandoned the path of sectarianism and separation. The
goal of creating a multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must not be derailed. The
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of UNMIBH be extended for a further period
of 12 months therefore has our endorsement.

My colleagues before me have already raised
several issues and made several observations about
recent developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the activities of UNMIBH. We are in agreement with
many of them. In the interests of time, we will refrain
from repeating those points. We look forward to
hearing the response of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the questions raised.

We have only question to raise, in connection
with paragraph 13 of the report of the Secretary-
General, which lists endemic problems that seriously
impair police performance. These have been
highlighted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other delegations.
We know that the problems are outside
UNMIBH's mandate. However, as the Secretary-
General has also pointed out, these are fundamental
issues that need to be addressed if the local police is to
take over from a robust international security presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would therefore
appreciate an assessment by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of the steps and measures that
could be taken by the United Nations and the
international community to help the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina resolve these problems.

