Ms. Osman (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate, which allows non-members
of the Security Council to express their views on the
worrisome situation in the Middle East, in particular
in the occupied Palestinian territory. It is our sincere
hope that the views expressed here will be considered
seriously by the members of the Council for the sake of
maintaining peace and security in the region.

Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, on behalf of the Organization oflslamic
Cooperation, and by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Malaysia is greatly concerned over Israel's recent
irresponsible statement on its intentions to annex the
West Bank. Given that Israel has managed to expand
illegal settlements at an unprecedented scale, continues
to demolish Palestinian homes and structures, continues
to bring unimaginable death, suffering and misery to
the people of Palestine, be they in the West Bank or
Gaza, that statement has come as no surprise. It follows
Israel's stated intention to annex the Golan Heights
just a few weeks earlier, which regretfully, the United
States has recognized.

Malaysia is deeply disappointed that the United
States would recognize the forced and illegal occupation
of a land that belongs to a sovereign State. We hope
that the United States can demonstrate leadership in the
Palestine-Israel conflict. As the leader of the free world
and the leading country advocating democracy, the
United States can certainly bring about the necessary
changes so that we can make tangible progress in the
peace process. In that regard, the United States, as well
as other members of the Security Council, must do
their part to allow both Palestine and Israel to resume
negotiations on finding a solution to the Palestine and
Israel conflict. Malaysia is confident that, with the
support of the international community, much more can
be achieved than what we have arrived at today.

Malaysia condemns the continuous use of force
by Israel against Palestinian protesters during the
rallies in March this year to commemorate the first
anniversary of the Great March of Return. The regime's
total contempt and disregard for the findings of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the protests in the occupied Palestinian territory,
published less than a month ago (A/HRC/40/74), has
only proved the intransigence of the Israeli regime.
The international community has a duty to collectively
ensure that Israel's continued violations are put to an
end. The escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank in recent weeks, leaving dozens more
innocent Palestinian civilians dead, paints an even
bleaker future for the prospects of a two-State solution.

Malaysia reiterates its call on all States Members of
the United Nations and the international community to
continue pressing Israel and demand that it immediately
and completely cease all illegal settlement activities in
the occupied territories as well as the ongoing illegal
demolition of Palestinian homes. Israel must end all
other violations of international law and international
humanitarian law and fully comply with all the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), and the Charter of the United Nations.
Malaysia strongly condemns the proclamation by
the United States to recognize Israel's sovereignty over
the Golan Heights. The Golan Heights are and will
always be an indivisible part of Syria. Malaysia finds
it unacceptable that the United States would recognize
the forced and illegal occupation of land that belongs
to a sovereign country. Malaysia calls on the United
States to respect and uphold its responsibility under the
resolution 497 (1981). Israel must be made to withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.

The current deadlock in the Middle East peace
process needs firm and pragmatic solutions in
accordance with international law and norms. It is
therefore important that the international community
create conditions conducive to peace talks in order to
improve prospects for finding a peaceful solution to
this long-standing conflict. Malaysia remains steadfast
with respect to its long-standing and principled position
for the inalienable rights of Palestinians, including the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State
of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We are unequivocal in our
conviction that the Security Council must reassume its
rightful role as the ultimate broker, particularly with
respect to the Palestine-Israeli conflict. The long-
standing trust deficit owing to the Council's inaction
must be overcome now.

