Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
Sudan is going through a phase of profound change.
Therefore, before addressing the issue of the prospects
for the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), I would like
to return to the political situation in Khartoum and its
consequences for Darfur.

First, with respect to the political situation,
France calls for the formation of a transitional civilian
Government to reactivate a democratic process and
enable elections to be held as soon as possible. We
therefore call for the early appointment of a consensual
transitional authority, led by civilians, to begin a
democratic process and hold free, inclusive and
transparent elections as soon as possible.

The Sudanese people have shown great maturity in
calling for reforms and political renewal at the country's
helm. The voice of the people must be fully heard. Only
a credible and inclusive process will make it possible
to meet the aspirations of the Sudanese people and
ensure that the country enacts the necessary political
and economic reforms.

France is prepared to support a civilian transition
process and in that context to support the Sudanese
people in their aspiration to greater freedom, a strong
rule of law and sustainable and equitable development.
France takes note of the commitment of the Transitional
Military Council to pursue dialogue with the opposition
in order to establish a civilian transitional Government
and encourages all stakeholders to engage in dialogue
in a spirit of conciliation and consensus and to show
restraint in order to avert violence.

We are convinced that justice for victims is vital in
order to build a lasting peace and a strong democracy.
The very grave crimes that have been committed in
the Sudan, in particular in Darfur, including sexual
violence and violence against children, should not go
unpunished. In that connection, I wish to recall the
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, in conformity with resolution 1593 (2005).

Secondly, in this context of transition, stability
must be preserved in Darfur. We are all clearly very
concerned at the possible repercussions on Darfur of
the political changes under way in the Sudan. France
is concerned about the incidents documented in Darfur
since last week, in particular those between security
forces, and we continue to closely monitor developments
on the ground.

Darfur remains a fragile region where the root
causes of conflict, in particular access to land and
the future of displaced persons, have not been truly
resolved. In that context, we must work together to
ensure that the changes under way do not rekindle the
conflict in Darfur. In recent years we have been able,
in particular thanks to UNAMID, to reduce the level of
violence; we must safeguard that achievement.

In that regard, it is important to swiftly establish
a civilian transition authority that is recognized by the
international community and could be a trustworthy
and responsible interlocutor for UNAMID and the
parties to the conflict. In that connection, I welcome
the mission entrusted by the Secretary-General to his
Special Adviser, Nicholas Haysom.

But we must go further. The major changes under
way in the Sudan could provide an opportunity to
relaunch the peace process. France calls on the future
Sudanese authorities and all armed groups to seize
this opportunity and engage in the peace process in
good faith. It is also crucial that the new Sudanese
authorities facilitate humanitarian access, put an end
to the restrictions on the movement of the UNAMID
and create the conditions necessary for the dignified,
safe and voluntary return of the more than 2 million
displaced persons.

Finally, on my third and final point, the situation
in the Sudan requires prudence with regard to the
timetable for UNAMID's withdrawal. France has
always supported a gradual exit of UNAMID, taking
account of the situation on the ground. In the light of
what the Joint Special Representative, Mr. Mamabolo,
has just shared with us regarding the impact of the
situation on UNAMID, current events must lead us to
be even more prudent and to wait for the situation, in
particular the institutional situation, to stabilize before
we set a timetable for UNAMID's exit.

I take this opportunity to reiterate our appreciation
for the work carried out by the mission under difficult
conditions as well as for the work of United Nations
agencies and humanitarian actors to provide vital
assistance, as Ms. Mueller has just underscored.

UNAMID's withdrawal is essentially a transfer of
responsibility to the Sudanese State, and its exit must
therefore be conducted in close cooperation with the
Sudanese authorities. It is necessary to wait for new
authorities to be appointed to engage in dialogue with
them regarding the mission's exit.

Through their peaceful mobilization in recent
weeks, the Sudanese people, in particular women and
young people, have set an example of dignity and
civic-mindedness. France hopes that the transitional
Government that will be established will fully live up
to the high standards set by that example and intends
to ensure that it has our collective support. It is up to
the Council to support the Sudan and to work to ensure
stability in Darfur in this transitional phase.

