Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. It
is once again testimony to the seriousness with which
your delegation views the situation in the Great Lakes
region and particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his presence this morning and for the very important
statement he delivered. We commend him for his
continued peace efforts in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Levitte for his
excellent presentation of the report of the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is clear from the
report that the mission benefited greatly from
Ambassador Levitte's outstanding leadership qualities
and professionalism. His diplomatic skills in
discharging the responsibilities of the Council have
allowed the mission to successfully execute its mandate
and to provide the Council with a comprehensive report
with valuable conclusions and recommendations.

My delegation is glad to note that the Security
Council mission found much that was encouraging in
its visit to the Great Lakes region. My delegation
wishes to underscore the fact that the window of
opportunity for peace clearly exists mainly because of
plausible peace initiatives by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
commitment of the parties to the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It is therefore our hope
that the Security Council is now convinced about the
urgent need for its continued strong support to enable
the speedy and successful implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement.

The timely planning and approval of phase III in
the deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is crucial for the smooth implementation of
the peace process. In this regard, we welcome the
mission's recommendation that the Security Council
consider approving a transition to phase III for
MONUC activities. In all this, it is again submitted that
the complexity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo peace process should be taken into account
when considering the size and mandate of deploying
phase III of MONUC.

My delegation shares the concern expressed by
the mission about the reluctance to disengage on the
part of the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo
(MLC). We agree that the Security Council should
closely monitor the situation and ensure that the MLC
disengages, as was promised at the meeting with the
Political Committee.

Another concern that remains is the continuing
occupation of Kisangani. We call on the Security
Council to continue to insist that Kisangani be
demilitarized without further delay, as provided for in
resolution 1304 (2000). We also support the mission's
recommendation that the Council consider further
measures to promote compliance with this resolution. It
is correct that this city could play a much broader role
in the economic and political life of the country.

My delegation furthermore reiterates its deep
concern for the dire humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the
eastern part of the country. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that those responsible for human
rights violations in that part of the country are brought
to justice.

My delegation also welcomes the progress made
in the preparation for the inter-Congolese dialogue. We
wish to commend Sir Ketumile Masire, the neutral
facilitator, and we welcome his proposal to convene a
preparatory meeting for the dialogue on 16 July.
However, we wish to emphasize that the dialogue is for
the Congolese people, and it should be conducted
without foreign interference.

With regard to the extension of civil
administration to zones vacated by foreign forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in our view the
Government should take over such functions. We call
on the international community to assist the
Government in carrying out these responsibilities.

My delegation agrees that a complete return to
peace will be stimulated by an increase of economic
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
welcome the reopening of the Congo River, which,
apart from the economic advantages, will also have
positive consequences for confidence-building and the
strengthening of a sense of national unity. The
implementation of quick-impact projects will be
welcome, but we share the recommendation that the
international community consider much broader
economic assistance to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to accompany the onset of peace.

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
concern regarding the plundering of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council should adopt urgent measures to
stop these practices. In this regard, we welcome the
Council's recommendation that if no progress is made
within three months, the Council should consider
taking the measures necessary to put an end to any
continuing illegitimate exploitation.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council mission to provide momentum to the
peace process in Burundi, and we support its
recommendations. We also commend the efforts of the
facilitator of the Burundi peace process, former
President Nelson Mandela, and we continue to support
his important work. My delegation also reiterates its
full support for an international conference on the
Great Lakes region at an appropriate time.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its continued commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the Harare and Kampala disengagement
plans and their speedy and full implementation. We
also wish to reiterate our full cooperation with
MONUC.

