Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on this month's Jordanian
presidency of the Security Council, and commends your
convening of this timely open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Jordan's leadership draws on insights into the region
that are of great benefit to the Council, and it will be
from Amman, in your own country, that His Holiness
Pope Francis, as a witness to peace, will begin his own
pilgrimage of prayer to the Holy Land on 24 May.
For the Holy See, the resumption of peace talks
between Israelis and Palestinians constitutes a positive
development, in regard to which Pope Francis has
expressed the hope that both parties will resolve,
with the support of the international community, to
take courageous decisions. Courageous decisions are
seldom easy, and can place demands on us that may be
politically difficult and unpopular.

Yet when faced with the reality of conflict in the
Middle East all right-minded people see the need for
change. Peace is not simply the absence of war, but
requires that the demands of justice be met for all
peoples and communities. My delegation accordingly
joins its voice once more with those ofall people ofgood
will who welcome, with great hope, the re-engagement
of direct, serious and concrete negotiations so that a
rejuvenated peace process may help unfold better
prospects for the future.

Of great significance, furthermore, is the recent
agreement with Iran with respect to its nuclear
programme, which offers great hope that an era of
distrust may be replaced by a new climate of trust and
cooperation. It is hoped that it will be fully implemented
and open the path to a definitive agreement.

The Holy See has urgently and repeatedly voiced
its clear concerns for the peace and welfare of all the
peoples of the Middle East. Most recently, the ongoing
situation in Syria prompted Pope Francis to reiterate
the Holy See's profound solicitude for the situation in
the whole region. Calling the Catholic faithful to prayer
and fasting for Syria in September 2013, Pope Francis
made a heartfelt plea

"that the violence and devastation in Syria may
cease immediately and that a renewed effort
be undertaken to achieve a just solution to the
fratricidal conflict. Never has the use of violence
brought peace in its wake... War begets war,
violence begets violence".

May the upcoming second Geneva Conference on
Syria be an occasion for a renewed reflection on the
criteria needed to offer a new start for that beautiful
nation, left prey to indescribable destruction and
loss of lives. Due to political preconditions, those
criteria must include an immediate ceasefire without
procrastination, including a renewed commitment to
promoting initiatives of peace instead of the sending
and funding of arms, which have escalated the violence
and conflict.

At the same time, it must involve an immediate
rollout of humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
for the countless refugees and displaced persons being
housed temporarily in neighbouring countries, where
so many suffer life-threatening shortages, inter alia,
of nutrition, safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
The urgency of rebuilding peace trumps the resolution
of other political and social questions, although such
rebuilding will certainly need to include new forms of
political participation and representation that ensures
the voice and security of all groups calling Syria their
home.

Pope Francis has expressed his deep concern for
those experiencing relocation and displacement in
efforts to escape incessant violence, as well as for those
nations challenged by the influx of a great number of
refugees. The international community cannot stand
aloof to their praiseworthy efforts to assist. The Holy
See pledges to continue - through its wide array of
educational, health care and social service outreach
efforts - to work alongside those alleviating the
suffering of all of those who have been marginalized,
uprooted or oppressed by conflict.

Many of the refugees constitute a worrying exodus
of Christians from their bimillenial homelands owing,
among other causes, to the targeting and instability
visited upon them by fundamentalist and extremist
forces. Interreligious dialogue and reconciliation will
therefore be required to restore the balance in the rich
and complex pluralism of Syrian society. The Holy
See stands ready to support all religious communities
in their efforts to reach new understandings and the
restoration oftrust after these years ofviolence, revenge
and recrimination.

The Syrian people have demonstrated by their
history an ability to live together in peace. Regional
and international rivalries that have little to do with
the Syrian communities themselves must therefore
be set aside so that at the heart of the discussions are
not these interests but rather those of the individual
human person and the good of Syria. To this end,
all the interested parties are called to work together
if conditions for lasting peace are to be put in place.
The second Geneva talks must accordingly ensure the
inclusive participation of all parties to this conflict in
the region and beyond. The Holy See wholeheartedly
wishes to support this objective.

Finally, I wish to call to mind the concern expressed
by Pope Francis for the ongoing political problems in
Lebanon, and also for Iraq, which struggles to attain
the peace and stability for which it hopes.

For the United Nations the challenges of the Middle
East are a clarion call for its peacemaking role, the very
raison d'etre for this institution. May this open debate
help muster the much-needed political will to spur the
international community to make a real difference in
the lives of the peoples of the Middle East and help
them to fulfil their dream of long-awaited peace.

The global economic situation no longer permits
the international community to continue indefinitely to
fund growing refugee populations. Political solutions
are the best solutions even for the economies of these
countries, because peace is the necessary precondition
for the socioeconomic stability capable of attracting
development funds. In his address on 13 January to the
members of the diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy
See, Pope Francis therefore urged the whole world, with
great insistence, to address the problems of the Middle
East and to act before any further deterioration of the
situation occurs.

