Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this very important meeting today. Ukraine
fully supports the position of the Security Council that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security and that all acts of terrorism are criminal
and unjustifiable regardless of their motivations.

Almost every day we learn with deep sorrow of
new victims of terrorist attacks that occur in all corners
of the world. This world evil can be eliminated only
through consolidated and decisive measures taken
by the international community. Ukraine is deeply
concerned about the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist entities
associated with Al-Qaida, and by the negative impact
of their presence, violent extremist ideology and
actions on the stability of Iraq, Syria and the region,
including their devastating humanitarian impact on
civilian populations.

Ukraine supports the central role of the United
Nations in the global effort to suppress international
terrorism and in promoting international cooperation
in this field. The United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy continues to be central to addressing
the evolving trends of the terrorist phenomenon, and to
doing so in an integrated and balanced way.

Ukraine is a party to about 20 multilateral
conventions and protocols in the field of counter-
terrorism. The Ukrainian Government is actively
involved in counter-terrorism cooperation with many
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, and the
Financial Action Task Force, as well as Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development - GUAM.

Nuclear terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction continue to be among the most
challenging threats to international security. I am proud
to say that my country plays a leading role in preventing
nuclear terrorism. Furthering its long-standing goals
in nuclear nonproliferation, Ukraine has responsibly
implemented its pledge to get rid of all national stocks
of highly enriched uranium. The meaning of this
voluntary step is clear - Ukraine is a consistent and
reliable partner that makes a valuable contribution to
combating nuclear terrorism and strengthening the
entire system of nuclear safety and security. And this
is despite the foreign aggression that my country has
recently experienced.

Unfortunately, as of recent date, the problem
of terrorism has become pertinent to my country.
As Council members may know, the Government
of Ukraine has been conducting counter-terrorism
operations in the east of Ukraine since March. This
operation fully complies with the Charter of the United
Nations and all their other obligations of Ukraine under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.

It is incredible that terrorism should be occurring
in a country where the terrorist threat was assessed by
United Nations experts as low just a few months before
the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and
the establishment of the terrorist organizations known
as the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics. As it
turns out, foreign factors might encourage this evil to
grow rapidly. The situation in the world in general and
in my country in particular shows that the international
community must redouble its efforts in the fight against
terror.

Ukraine is extremely concerned over the blatant
violation of international counter-terrorism treaties on
the part of some States. One of our neighbors continues
to break its international obligations with respect to
terrorism. In particular, it has completely neglected
its obligations under the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism of 1999
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings of 1997. That State, acting
through various State institutions and physical and
legal entities under its direct control, is committing the
crime of terrorism. It was the unlawful actions of this
neighbour that led to the occupation of the Crimea and
the destabilization of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine.

As is evident in the situation in Ukraine, terrorism
can be used as a form of hidden aggression against
sovereign States. We call upon the international
community to continue to take decisive action to
combat State or State-sponsored terrorism against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its members.
We believe that some of the principles enshrined in the
Declaration adopted by the International Conference on
the Question of Terrorism of 1987 (A/42/307, annex),
reflecting the essence of the notion of State terrorism,
can be taken as a basis for the preparation of a new
legally binding instrument in this field.

Without the bona fide fulfillment of international
treaties and the sincere cooperation of all States parties,
any international effort in the area of counter-terrorism,
including the efforts of the Security Council, shall be
in vain. On our part, I would like to underline that

Ukraine will continue to be committed to cooperation
at the international, regional and subregional levels in
order to make the worldwide environment completely
intolerant of terrorism and its supporters.

