Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this public meeting on Timor-
Leste. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing and
wish to echo his words this morning concerning the
need to avoid a premature and potentially destabilizing
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET).

My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste, as well as of Ambassador Joao
Augusto de Medicis, Executive Secretary of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP).
Their contribution to our discussions will be of great
importance.

I speak as the current Chairman of CPLP, in full
coordination with Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins
of Angola, a fellow member of the Council and of
CPLP.

Brazil considers this agenda item to be highly
important on account of the historic role played by the
United Nations in the birth of independent Timor-
Leste. This is a vivid example of how the United
Nations can harness political will and financial and
human resources in an effective way.

My Government is pleased to note that the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor stresses that much
has been achieved in the areas of public administration,
serious crimes, internal security and Timor-Leste's
relationship with Indonesia, which is based on
friendship and mutual respect.

Notwithstanding several positive aspects, the
report highlights that present deficiencies must be
addressed with the continued support of the
international community. UNMISET was planned on
the basis that Timor-Leste would be in a position to
achieve self-sufficiency within two years of its
independence. However, as reflected in the Secretary-
General's previous report, it has become increasingly
clear that further assistance to Timor-Leste will be
required in a number of areas after 20 May 2004, when
UNMISET's mandate has been expected to expire.

As stated in the Secretary-General's special
report, Timor-Leste's political institutions are gaining
strength, but the early level of their development is a
reminder of their fragility. Although acts of widespread
violence have not occurred during the reporting period,
the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to be
jeopardized by destabilizing groups which continue to
operate across the border in West Timor. Indeed, the
Secretary-General's report points out that sightings of
armed gangs and criminal elements in bordering
districts have continued, as does the suspicion of
possible preparations for destabilizing activity by other
groups with unclear agendas. This morning, Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno has provided the Council
with an example of why fears of destabilization still
persist in East Timor. The Council is confronted here
with the need to address a delicate balance.

In conformity with the report, Brazil strongly
favours retaining a military component within
UNMISET for a further l2-month consolidation phase,
since Timorese capacity to respond to destabilizing
activities still falls short of their security needs and
capabilities. The visible presence of the UNMISET
military component, supported by regular patrolling,
will certainly continue to have a deterrent effect and
help to maintain a calm environment in the country. An
international presence for an additional year would
allow Timor-Leste to reach a long-sought threshold of
stability and development. Furthermore, the military
component would also ensure the protection of United
Nations equipment and personnel on the ground.

The national police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) has
made significant strides these last three years towards
assuming full responsibility for the maintenance of law
and order. However, its capacity, experience and policy
frameworks remain limited, particularly with regard to
the special units. The Secretary-General's report
acknowledges that it will not be possible to create an
effective rapid deployment capability force within the
PNTL to deal with armed groups in the border districts
before 20 May 2004. International civilian police can
make a crucial contribution towards building the
capacity of PNTL as a non-political, professional
police service.

Another critical area for the future of Timor-Leste
is the strengthening of the rule of law. This is a
precondition not only for promoting human rights, but
also for laying solid groundwork for a sound economic
system.

In the field of criminal justice, Timor-Leste still
faces a dearth of judges, prosecutors, lawyers,
investigators, forensic experts and interpreters. It is
also important to address legal problems that might
inhibit economic recovery and public safety,
particularly the need for the adoption of the Civil
Service Act, legislation against corruption and laws
related to the armed forces and the police.

It is also essential to maintain the current level of
public services. The deterioration of such services,
which include health and education, would affect the
most vulnerable and could constitute a blow to
confidence in the future of Timor-Leste. In due time, it
is also expected that the exploitation of oil and gas
reserves will provide the Timorese Government with
sound sources of revenue.

We have reached a critical juncture in Timor
Leste. The international community has made an
impressive investment in the future of the country and
should continue to work in concert towards helping
Timor-Leste's institutions to attain full-fledged
sufficiency.

My Government supports the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General that the Security
Council extend the current mission for a further 12-
month consolidation phase. UNMISET would continue
to be headed by a special representative and the
Mission would retain civilian, police and military
components, although in a reduced and modified form,
as outlined by the Secretary-General. The United
Nations would closely monitor the needs of the
Timorese Government so as to implement the
downsizing of the configuration of UNMISET
accordingly. In the light of these considerations, I
would like to point out that Brazil and CPLP believe
that this debate may open the doors to the negotiation
of a consensual resolution on the future of UNMISET,
taking the Secretary-General's recommendations as a
basis. Together with Angola, Brazil is ready to start
negotiating a draft resolution.

The fact that Timor-Leste is a remarkable success
story for the United Nations should not be
overestimated by the international community. Much
remains to be done. The struggle of the Timorese
people for independence also serves as a catalyst for
tackling challenges on the international agenda. The
Security Council and other organs of the United
Nations must continue to attach to Timor-Leste the
high priority it deserves.

