Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Ten minutes to
summarize two years: that is quite a challenge. I may
have to piggyback to save time and say that I
completely endorse what Ambassador Koonjul and
Ambassador Corr have said about the wonderful work
done by the Colombian presidency - by you and your
team, Sir. I also endorse what they have said about the
usefulness of this wrap-up session, because, frankly, if
we did not have this wrap-up session we would be
leaving the Council without having an opportunity to
leave behind our impressions of what we have done.
We thank you very much for this, Mr. President. We
also want to emphasize the point that was made both by
Ambassador Koonjul and Ambassador Corr, that the
Council's record over the past two years has been a
successful one. Indeed, my list of success stories is the
same as the ones they pointed to, so I will not list mine
here.

I want to emphasize a point. We thought the most
useful contribution we can make in this meeting is to
suggest areas for improvement in future years. We
believe, to quote an old cliche, that an organization
languishes if it only has unloving critics or uncritical
lovers, and I hope we will be seen as a loving critic of
the Council.

We believe that all good organizations should
have the three C's: a culture of action, a culture of
innovation and a culture of reflection. Clearly in the
Council, as demonstrated in the remarks made by
Ambassador Corr, we have a strong culture of action.
We deliver results. Whenever a crisis occurs the
Council responds.

But frankly it is an organization that is weak in
the cultures of innovation or reflection. This is what we
will speak about. To bring about change requires
leadership from the owners of the Council. One thing
which has puzzled me is a question I raised at the
Security Council retreat. Who are the owners of this
Council? Is it the 15 Member States? Is it the five
permanent members? Is it the 191 Member States, or is
it, as stated in the Charter, "we the peoples" of the
world? We cannot fully address this subject, but I hope
it will form the subtext of what I speak of today.

The contribution we would like to make today is
to suggest five concrete areas where we believe further
improvements can be made in the work of the Council.
The first area is to try to undertake a sharpened
strategic overview of the work of the Council. As we
all know, the Security Council has become the busiest
organ within the United Nations family. It meets daily
and has grown in size and complexity. Each time the 15
members meet we discuss individual slices of the
Council's work, whether it is the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Middle East or Burundi. But we
never step back and look at the whole picture of what
the Council is doing.

If you look at the whole picture, it is amazing
how much the load and complexity of the work of the
Council has grown in the last 10 years. For example, in
any single day we can examine conflict situations
across the globe from Asia to Africa. We can also move
from assessing political considerations on how to
encourage parties to abide by peace processes, to
deliberating military recommendations on the size,
shape and area of the deployment of peacekeeping
operations. We can move from responding to a
humanitarian crisis to monitoring financial embargos
imposed by the United Nations Security Council. We
can consider juridical questions relating to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), to examining the
legitimacy and adequacy of Members States in
combating international terrorism. This is a huge
agenda that has grown in the Council.

Each time we meet, we discuss each slice and we
never sit back and reflect on the Council as a whole
and on how it is performing as an institution. One
complete suggestion we would make - and this
probably builds on what both Ambassador Koonjul and
Ambassador Corr have said - is that we should find
time to sit back and reflect on the overall work of the
Council. We tried to do this during the annual retreat of
the Security Council with the Secretary-General. But
often there is no follow-up to the retreats.
Under your presidency, Sir, we had a very useful
meeting on 11 December 2002, and I commend you for
the record you have given us, because this
demonstrates the value of such reflective sessions. Of
course we can have more of such wrap-up sessions.

We should also build on the 15-plus-15 format
that Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock started in his
luncheon meetings, but all in all I think we need to do
more in terms of reflecting on the overall work of the
Council. We believe that is the way we can introduce
the culture of reflection.

The second area where we can benefit from
innovation and reflection is in the area of peacekeeping
operations. Clearly, peacekeeping operations have
become one of the most important instruments of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security. The amount of money that the Security
Council authorizes to spend on peacekeeping -
$3 billion annually - is much larger than the United
Nations regular budget. But in the two years we have
been on the Council, there has never been even one
discussion on how we go about allocating these $3
billion.

Recently there was a book launch ceremony
where Professor Stephen Stedman of Stanford
University, speaking of his book "Ending Civil Wars",
calculated how much the United Nations spends in
each peacekeeping operation per victim involved in the
conflict. You get a remarkable disparity where you can
spend up to a few thousand dollars per Victim in the
Balkans to a few dollars per victim in Rwanda. This
disparity needs to be addressed because at some point,
people will be asking questions as to why there is such
a large gap in how you allocate your resources.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has improved over the years to deal with the
evolution of peacekeeping operations from purely
traditional operations to complex multi-faceted
missions. Our view is that the Security Council needs
to catch up with the DPKO and move from purely
mechanical discussions on peacekeeping operations, to
more reflective discussions. We can, for example, make
better use of the Best Practices Unit of the DPKO, to
draw lessons of successful and unsuccessful
peacekeeping operations and apply them to current and
future operations. A concrete suggestion we can make
here is that in our existing Working Group on
peacekeeping operations we hope there will be more
reflection on how decisions are made concerning
peacekeeping operations.
A third idea which could benefit from innovation
and reflection is, of course, the area of sanctions. We
know sanctions are another key instrument of the
Security Council and we have shared some of the
experiences that all of us, as chairmen of the Sanctions
Committees, had in the meeting you organized, Sir, on
Wednesday 18 December 2002. But we do believe
more reflection is needed in this area. As the Secretary-
General once noted, "sanctions have had the
paradoxical effect of sometimes strengthening the
regime and punishing the people". And as a
consequence, many questions have been raised about
sanctions regimes. For example, there was an article in
Harpers magazine in November 2002 that we should
look at. Again, more reflection is needed in this area. I
hope the Working Group on sanctions chaired by
Ambassador Martin Belinga-Eboutou will be able to do
more work in this area.

To give one example of how improvements can
be made, when we chaired the Liberian Sanctions
Committee, and we put up a travel banned list, we had
no personal details such as passport number for some
of the names on the travel banned list. Then we
discovered that another Sanctions Committee actually
had the details. But because each of the Sanctions
Committees works in locked boxes, there is no transfer
of knowledge from one to another. Clearly this is
something that can be improved upon, and something
the Working Group on sanctions can look at.

The fourth area which could benefit from
innovation and reflection - and I guess you will not
be surprised I mention this - is the area of working
methods and procedures of the Council. Here let us
stress that there have been improvements; more open
meetings have been held. Recent innovations include
the Mexican format begun in February 2002, of having
open briefings followed by informal consultations.

Clearly there is room for improvement. To cite an
obvious example, as we know, the Security Council
creates the most far-reaching international law, but
surprisingly, it does not want to be bound by rules
itself, except by a set of rules and procedures which we
know still remain provisional after almost 60 years. At
some point someone will ask the question: When will
your provisional rules stop being provisional? There
are also other areas where we need to improve working
methods.

One of the things I vividly remember about
working in the Council is in some ways the
mechanization of the work process. Each day when we
come to work, we go to the informal consultations
room, we hear a briefing, sometimes with slides,
sometimes without slides, sometimes we have fact
sheets, sometimes we do not have fact sheets. We go
through a mechanical routine of addressing each issue
almost in a set formula. But often we do not stand back
and ask, at the end of the day, how much value did we
add in that discussion, or did we just go through a
discussion for the sake of having a discussion? That is
why we think, frankly, that there is good reason to
activate and make more useful the Working Group on
Documentation and Procedures. We are aware -
speaking candidly - that there is some resistance to
the idea of making this Working Group more active.
We are aware that there is resistance, but we want to
suggest to those who, in a sense, resist change that it
actually may be in the interests of all 15 members to
have better working methods and procedures, because
in that way we will learn to use our time better.

I would like to make one simple suggestion: the
best way to have change is to provide leadership to that
Working Group. If we could agree, for example, to
have a permanent annual Chairman of the Working

Group on Documentation and Procedures - that has
been suggested by Ambassador Martin Belinga-
Eboutou of Cameroon - I believe that we would be

making a huge leap forward in that area.

Finally, I would like to refer to the most difficult
issue. Indeed, I raise it with some trepidation, because I
am not sure whether easy answers can be found in this
area. But clearly it has to be addressed. It is, of course,
the area of the accountability of the Security Council.
Frankly, I do not see any answers being supplied to this
question, even within the next 10 years. But I hope to
plant a small seed which will grow into a tree some
day.

We all know that all organizations are
accountable in one way or another. Governments are
accountable to their electorate. Corporations are
accountable to their shareholders. The United Nations
Secretariat is accountable to the United Nations
Member States, who own the Secretariat. What is
unclear is who the Security Council is accountable to,
and what it is accountable for. There are no easy
answers to that. Some have cited Article 24,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, which states that the
Security Council acts on behalf of the Member States,
and say that the Council is accountable to the general
membership of the United Nations. But the well-known
book by Bruno Simma - The Charter of the United
Nations: A Commentary - notes that the Security
Council "is not subordinate to the Assembly", as the
Assembly has not been granted the power to hold the
Council responsible for failing to present a report in
accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
or for presenting a deficient report, or even for any
actions by the Council listed in a report.

Clearly, there are no easy answers. But even
though the Security Council may not be formally or
legally accountable to United Nations Member States,
it is also clear that the Council does in some ways
provide a service. It provides a service to the
international community that is in some ways similar to
the job done by the fire department - that is the most
common analogy used. Fire departments traditionally
react whenever a fire breaks out anywhere, at any time.
But as we know - indeed, Ambassador Corr
mentioned this - the Security Council has been more
selective in its responses. Such selectivity can in the
long run damage its credibility, and that is something
that we need to address if we are trying to improve the
Council.

We also believe that it is important for the
Council to understand where it derives its legitimacy
from. It does not derive its legitimacy on its own.
Indeed, if we took the 15 Member States out of the
United Nations complex and created an independent
global security council with the same members, it
would not have the legitimacy that we have sitting
here. It is the United Nations fabric that provides
legitimacy to the Council - the United Nations
Charter, the regular elections by the 191 Member
States of the 10 elected States members of the Council
and, indeed, the general recognition that the Security
Council is part of the United Nations family. But that
relationship with the United Nations family must be a
two-way street. The Council cannot just claim its
legitimacy from the United Nations family without
giving something back in return. And what it needs to
give back is a sense that it is accountable to the United
Nations family for its actions. Let me stress here that,
given the Council's recent success stories, it has a very
proud and positive record, and for that reason we
should welcome the idea of accountability, rather than
shy away from it.

In conclusion, I would like to join my colleagues
from Mauritius and Ireland in thanking the States
Members of the United Nations for having given us the
opportunity to serve on the Council. We hope that we
have not let down those who elected us.

