Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Germany for
scheduling this open debate on "Maintenance of
international peace and security: the impact of climate
change". I thank the Secretary-General for his
statement. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the other speakers, including the President of the
Republic of Nauru, the Parliamentary Secretary for
Pacific Island Affairs of Australia and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner, for their statements
this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
of the Non-Aligned Movement, expressing their views
and concern. In addition, I wish to highlight the
following points, which Bangladesh feels are
important.

My delegation believes that the maintenance of
international peace and security, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. The Charter also
designated the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council to deal with issues related to
economic and social development. In that regard, we
believe that the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change is the primary international
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change.

Climate change is one of the most severe global
challenges facing humankind. I appreciate the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on climate change and
its possible security implications (A/64/350), which
identified several channels, including food insecurity, a
growing scarcity of natural resources, the displacement
of people, the loss of jobs and livelihoods, abject
poverty, large-scale migration and, more important, the
loss of hope, resulting in desperation.

All of those have the potential of driving social
and regional tensions, political unrest, violent conflict
and extremism, thereby threatening international peace
and security. Indeed, some of the adverse impacts of
climate change include the gradual loss of land, floods,
11-42397

 

inundation, droughts, sea-level rise, increased salinity,
extreme weather patterns, decreased food production,
scarcity of fresh water and climate-induced migration.
Global warming in different parts of the world is
already compelling us to face erratic climatic
behaviour and witness increasing natural catastrophes.

Recently, we have seen how wildfires in Russia
and Australia; floods in Pakistan; earthquakes in Haiti,
Chile and New Zealand; the tsunami in Japan; tornados
and twisters in the United States and drought in Africa
have affected developed and developing countries
alike. It is true that climate change-induced food
insecurity, the uprooting of populations and related
adversity constitute a threat to international peace and
security. In this regard, I call upon the parties
concerned to quickly implement the promises spelled
out in the L'Aquila Joint Statement on Global Food
Security, adopted by global leaders in 2009.

Sea-level rise is another looming concern for the
global community, especially small island developing
States (SIDS) and countries with low-lying coastal
areas. The rising sea level is of great concern for
Bangladesh, as it may displace 30 to 50 million people
from our coastal belts by the year 2050. It also will
deprive them of their livelihoods. Climate-induced
displacement of people has already aggravated urban
slum conditions in Bangladesh. Therefore, as
negotiations are held to discuss what percentage of
emission should be or would be allowed, millions of
people in our region are scared of losing their homes
and of joblessness and apprehensive of the fact that
their next generation will not see their ancestral
property. Their survival is at stake.

The effect of climate change will be severe on the
least developed countries and SIDS, and global efforts
to support these countries should be enhanced right
away. In this regard, my delegation calls for the full
and effective implementation of the commitments
under the Istanbul Declaration on the Least Developed
Countries, the Mauritius Declaration and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States.

I urge all stakeholders to fully implement Agenda
21, adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, in 1992 and the commitments undertaken at
other relevant United Nations conferences in the
11-42397

 

economic, environmental and social fields, including
the Millennium Declaration.

Let me stress the need to enhance assistance to
the affected developing countries by supporting efforts
to increase their national and regional capacities,
including in mitigation, adaptation, preparedness and
development. The developed countries should also
ensure the provision of adequate, predictable, new and
additional financial resources and the transfer of
technology to developing countries.

While addressing this matter, we must focus on
the root causes of the problem. My delegation feels
that if they are to tackle the adverse impacts of climate
change, countries with different capacities and levels
of development should fulfil their commitments with
regard to emissions reductions and mitigation actions.
Developed and developing countries should fulfil their
differentiated responsibilities, including pledges and
obligations under the framework of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
negotiations to reduce global greenhouse gas
emissions.

In conclusion, I also stress the need for a well-
coordinated and integrated approach to mitigating the
adverse impacts of climate change at the United
Nations, meaning that all the relevant organs should
complement rather than duplicate their efforts to meet
the challenges of climate change.

