Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I must agree that the situation with regard
to the protection ofjournalists in Ukraine has become
especially harsh due to the military operation launched
over a year ago by the Kyiv authorities against regions
that refute their policies. This has led to casualties
among journalists, as a result of which Ukraine is one
of the leaders in the sad index of journalists' death,
with six journalists killed there in 2014.

The majority of those killed were Russian
media personnel, including Anton Valoshin and Igor
Kornelyuk, reporters of the All-Russia State Television
and Radio Broadcasting Company; Anatoli Klyan, a
cameraman from Channel One; and Andrey Stenin,
a photojournalist from the international information
agency Russia Today. Already this year, several Russian
journalists working in Ukraine have been cruelly
attacked. Correspondents, including women - whose
special protection is addressed in resolution 2222
(2015), adopted today - have been subject to assault
and insult, and their lives and well-being have been
threatened.

In recent months, the Ukrainian authorities have
set up significant obstacles to the professional activities
of a number of Russian journalists, including Zhanna
Karpenko, Alexandra Ulyanova, Elizaveta Khramtsova,
Natalya Kalisheva, Yelena Makarova, Sergey Korenev
and Andrei Grigoryev. Oleg Sidyakin and Marat
Saichenko from LifeNews, Andrei Suchenkov, Anton
Malyshev, Yevgeny Davydov and Nikita Konashenkov,
all working for the Zvezda television channel, have
been seized by the Ukrainian military.

Since the launch ofthe campaign against the Russian
media, some 50 Russian reporters have been deported
from Ukraine under political pretexts. A decision was
taken recently to deny media accreditation of Russian
media personnel to governmental bodies. The so-called
black list compiled by the Ukrainian security service
permits the denial of accreditation and repressive
measures to be taken against the representatives of any
Russian mass medium.

The aforementioned facts - and the list could
easily be extended - attest to Ukraine's violation of its
international obligation not only to protect journalists
but also to uphold freedom of speech. We urge the
prompt adoption of measures to remedy the situation
and to hold to account those responsible for the
information war and the dissemination of propaganda.
This includes any and all information on the conflict
that does notjibe with the official line.

The very first initiative of the Ministry of
Information Policy established this year in Ukraine was
to create so-called information troops. The Ministry's
website has posted a call for enlistment in those troops,
whose task is to ensure the optimum dissemination
on the Internet and social media of information and
assessments that suit the Kyiv authorities. I urge
members to judge for themselves whether this is about
independent journalism, as claimed by the Ukrainian
representative, or an organized information war.

