President Yudhoyono: I am sure that this
important debate on Africa and the challenges to
international peace and security will have a positive
impact on the continent. Peace and security can be
durable only if the sources of conflict are eliminated.
We must therefore respond to the economic, social and
political challenges to peace. That can be carried out
through interregional cooperation.

Interregional engagement between Asia and
Africa dates back to the 1955 Asian-African
Conference that laid the strategic foundations for
robust relations between countries in the two
continents. In the framework of South-South
cooperation, since 1980 Indonesia has offered
capacity-building assistance, generally in the form of
training and workshops in various fields, to hundreds
of participants from African countries. We have also
contributed troops to United Nations peace missions to
the continent. Indonesian personnel have joined peace
operations of the United Nations in the Congo, Liberia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the
Sudan.

Today, Indonesia is also prepared to contribute
police personnel to the peace mission in Darfur. We
firmly support all efforts to build peace in Darfur
today. We urge all concerned faithfully to implement
agreements that would end the long-raging civil war
that has torn the nation apart. Above all, the
Government of the Sudan must fulfil its commitment to
engaging in peace talks and carrying out an effective
ceasefire. All factors that brought about the conflict -
political, economic and social - must be decisively

addressed. Dialogue among the stakeholders in Darfur
must be established and sustained as soon as possible.
The province must be put back on the road to
development. Like the other smaller economies of
Africa, the Sudan needs to catch up with the new
prosperity of its bigger economies. Much of Africa
remains challenged by conflicts that relate to natural
resources, poverty and environmental degradation.

Article 65 of the United Nations Charter is
particularly relevant to Africa. It provides for the
Economic and Social Council to contribute to the work
of the Security Council. As the Charter framers argued,
improving living standards and achieving prosperity
are essential to world peace. As a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Indonesia will do all
it can to contribute to peace, security and development
in Africa.

As to the ongoing conflicts in Africa, we need to
apply three principles of international relations. First,
many conflicts in Africa are inter-State. In those cases,
the principle of consent is essential; national
jurisdiction must be recognized. Secondly, prevention
is better than cure; it is cost-effective and saves lives.
Thirdly, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter it is also called upon to work
with regional organizations whenever appropriate and
practical. The United Nations and regional
organizations must therefore enhance their capacity for
confidence-building, preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking. Those are not new concepts, but their
full potential can be realized through refinement and
practice by both the United Nations system and all
regional organizations.

In the face of conflict, resources must be
deployed and measures must be taken to alter or
stabilize a situation on the ground. Troops drawn from
within the region are usually more effective in
peacekeeping. The United Nations/African Union
hybrid operation in Darfur, which brings together
United Nations resources and those of the African
Union, is a fine example. More African troops should
be trained for peacekeeping so that an African stand-by
force can become truly operational.
5

In Africa, conflicts that seemed intractable five
years ago are now being resolved, giving us hope that
others will also be resolved soon. But we must always
adhere to the tenets of international relations and
address the social and economic challenges of peace. I
am sure that Africa, with the help of an international
community that is committed to global peace, will
solve its problems and contribute more to global peace
and security.

