Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the Russian presidency for taking the initiative
to organize this debate among the Security Council,
the Secretariat's peacekeeping officials and troop-
contributing countries, whose commitment I take this
opportunity to commend.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to make four points. First, despite
some of the new contexts in which they are deployed,
the role of peacekeeping operations is still to bring a
peace process to a successful conclusion. There is no
doubt that the classic situation - of a theatre of war
where a peace agreement has already been signed by
the time an operation deploys - is now an exception.
More often than not we find ourselves in ambiguous
situations that range from a tacit halt to hostilities
to a ceasefire disputed by armed elements, but the
challenge still lies in initiating and concluding a
process that leads to a lasting peace. In that context,
the role of a peacekeeping operation is simultaneously
military - it must stabilize the security situation
and deter potential troublemakers * and political, in
supporting, facilitating and backing up a peace process,
including by addressing the root causes of the conflict.
One cannot work without the other.

Secondly, peacekeepers' operational priority
must always be the protection of civilians. Civilians
are the first victims of modern conflicts. Twenty
years after the genocide in Rwanda and the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations has
made significant progress in putting the protection
of civilians at the heart of peacekeeping operation
mandates. In environments that are complex and, as the
military put it, non-conducive, robust implementation
of peacekeeping operation mandates, in general, and
the protection of civilians, in particular, is essential.
We have seen the relevance of this approach in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the Force
Intervention Brigade created within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo also emphasizes
the degree to which this approach depends, beyond its
mandate, on a peacekeeping operation's management
team, on the force's capacity and on the attitude of the
troops deployed on the ground. In South Sudan today,
everything should take a back seat to the need for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to protect
civilians.

Thirdly, peacekeepers should provide support
to the host State's authorities while preserving the
goal of achieving a transition that can consolidate its
emergence from crisis. If a State is failed or fragile,
peacekeepers can legitimately help to restore the State's
authority and assist it, particularly with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and justice. That requires the United Nations to
develop its expertise in those areas, at the very least
in order to better coordinate international action and
assist the authorities on the ground. That is a challenge
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
will have to deal with when it deploys there.
Clearly, peacekeeping operations cannot and should
not be a substitute for the efforts of countries themselves
or of international donors. That is not their job. On the
contrary, they must always be focused on enabling an
emergence from crisis and re-establishing both the local
authorities and the United Nations country teams at the
heart of peacebuilding efforts. It is up to the Council to
ensure that those efforts are reflected in its decisions,
first of all, but also in the actions and the structure of
the resulting operations, and in the renewal of every
mandate, which should be not a routine matter but a
tool for the dynamic management of a peacekeeping
operation.

Fourthly, peacekeeping operations must be flexible
as well as stronger. They have become major machines
with staffs that can exceed 20,000. Deploying such
organizations is a challenge, particularly in emergency
situations. Its complexity is further complicated by the
constraints imposed by certain resources, such as force
multipliers, logistical support, military and civilian
expertise, trained personnel - including in the area of
languages - and, especially, funding.

In regard to the subject of languages, I would like
to make my annual plea to the Secretariat - which I
am doing as I reach the end of my term, without much
hope of being heard - that it is perhaps more useful to
have personnel who speak the language of the country
concerned than the language of New York. In other
words, in French-speaking missions it is perhaps more
useful to recruit French speakers than people who
can write reports to New York in English. We know
perfectly well that the Secretariat does in fact make it a
priority to choose English speakers.

At the other end of the spectrum, a peacekeeping
operation must be adaptable in the peacebuilding
phase too. It must be able to adjust its approach,
adapt the size of its civilian staff and support the host
State or the country team and donors in taking over
responsibility. We should therefore step up our efforts
to make peacekeeping operations more flexible in both
directions. On the one hand, that means displaying an
ability to deploy rapidly that is not always the case today,
as the example of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali shows. On the
other hand, a peacekeeping operation should be able to
draw down its military personnel in order to restore to
the host State its responsibilities, and it should be able
to do it rapidly and to propose such action itself.

That flexibility also depends on making the best use
of modern technologies. We welcome the experiments
being done with the tactical use of surveillance drones
within MONUSCO and soon, we hope, in other theatres
too. They will enable us to ensure not only forces'
security but also to economize on personnel. The
recent presentation by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on the first results of the experiments in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo convinced us of
their usefulness and relevance, and we should pursue
them.

Inter-mission cooperation is another avenue. When
unforeseen events threaten to destabilize a country,
cooperation between missions is an appropriate
response that can help missions that need them to
strengthen troops and equipment in a timely way. We
should pursue this line of attack further; this is about
budgets as well as efficiency.

Our discussions today should enable peacekeeping
operations to make advances that render them more
robust, more flexible and able to create conditions
that are conducive to successful political processes
wthout making the countries concerned dependent
on peacekeeping activities. France will continue its
efforts in that direction within the Council. It will
also continue to support the many initiatives on all
such areas taken by the Secretariat, in particular, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, whether in
drawing up mandates or considering strategic reviews
or at regular briefings.

Like my colleague from Luxembourg, I cannot
conclude without commending the commitment of
peacekeepers of all nationalities, who sometimes pay
with their lifes for their dedication in the service of
peace. On this occasion, I would like to pay tribute to
them.

