Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
past three months have undoubtedly seen challenges in
Iraq, including continued attacks by those who want to
deny the Iraqi people the opportunity to rebuild their
country and to run their own affairs. Nonetheless,
progress has continued in key areas, and today I will
outline work on essential services, the economy,
human rights and justice. More detail on these points is
set out in the annex which will be circulated separately.

Like Ambassador Cunningham, I, too, would like
to start by saying a few words about the detainees
issue. British personnel in Iraq operate in accordance
with the Geneva Convention and international law -
obligations we take extremely seriously. Abuse of
prisoners is completely unacceptable and the United
Kingdom Government will not hesitate to act where
British troops fail to uphold our obligations under
international humanitarian law or the high standards
expected by the British and international public.

We have worked closely with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) since the
beginning of the occupation. The Ministry of Defence
has investigated thoroughly any individual cases which
the ICRC or other international bodies have raised with
us, as well as incidents where civilians have died in
detention. The United Kingdom internment facility
near Basra is subject to regular ICRC inspection, with
full and unrestricted access to detainees. ICRC
recommendations on procedures in United Kingdom-
run facilities have been implemented.

There have been 33 Royal Military Police
investigations since the arrival of British troops in Iraq,
12 of which are still under way. In 15 of the 21
completed investigations, it was concluded that there
was no case to answer. Recommendations in the other
six cases are being considered by the military
authorities.

The United Kingdom Government has apologized
unreservedly to any Iraqis who have been mistreated
by United Kingdom troops. We will not tolerate such
mistreatment and will continue to investigate any
allegations swiftly and thoroughly. We are determined
not to let cases of mistreatment overshadow either the
good work of the thousands of British soldiers risking
their lives to help build a better future for Iraqis or the
United Kingdom's reputation in the field of human
rights.

I turn now to the provision of services. On water
and sanitation, we continue to work towards long-term
rehabilitation of essential water and sanitation
infrastructure. Civil engineering work has been
completed at three wastewater treatment plants outside
Baghdad, and repairs have finished on a sewage
treatment plant. The Safwan water system has also
been restored, supplying drinking water to 40,000
residents. In Basrah, water quality and volume should
exceed pre-war levels during the summer.

On energy, long-term rehabilitation continues,
with the objective of building a sustainable power grid
network. New generating capacities have been added to
the Kirkuk and South Baghdad power plants. Power
generation is now averaging around 3,800 MW per day.
The goal of the Coalition Provisional Authority is to
improve generating capacity to 6,000 MW per day by
30 June.

There continue to be increases in oil production
and exports, with recent production at some 2.4 million
barrels per day and exports running at some 1.8 million
barrels per day. Forecasts suggest that oil revenues this
year will be in the order of $18 billion, rising on
current projections to $28 billion by the end of 2005.

In transportation, major upgrades are being
undertaken at the three international airports of
Baghdad, Basrah and Mosul. At the port of Umm Qasr,
the salvage of 19 wrecks has been completed to
facilitate traffic flow, and the port has been connected
to the electricity grid. The Iraqi Republic Railway now
operates a daily passenger service between Baghdad
and Basrah, and Mosul into Syria.

Considerable work has also been undertaken to
restore the telecommunications system. There are now
over 760,000 active landline telephone subscribers and
around 390,000 mobile phone subscribers. The total
represents a 38 per cent increase on landline
subscribers before the conflict.

A new Iraqi Communications and Media
Commission has been created, with jurisdiction over
telecommunications and broadcasting.

In health care, while there are still some
difficulties, nearly all 240 hospitals in Iraq are
functioning. Routine immunization of children has
resumed, and, with inputs from the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Ministry of Health,
4,000 health workers and 124 supervisors are
implementing a monthly immunization campaign. The
Iraqi Ministry of Health recently established a 24-hour
operations centre to coordinate health issues.

Turning to education, the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID), Coalition
forces and non-governmental organizations have
rehabilitated over 2,300 schools. Almost all Baghdad
schools have benefited from a small grant programme
for repairs and supplies of their choice. USAID
recently announced a further $12.6 million grant to
UNICEF to continue its work supporting the Ministry
of Education.

I should like now to turn to economic
developments. The unexpectedly high oil price and
some substantial transfers from funds linked to the oil-
for-food programme have boosted the Iraqi public
finances by several billion dollars. As a result, the Iraqi
Ministry of Finance has issued a revised budget for
2004 which identifies new spending and sets a new
envelope for Iraqi ministries.

As of 6 May, the balance in the Development
Fund for Iraq was $10.2 billion. On 5 April, the
Coalition announced that the audit contract for the
Development Fund for Iraq had been signed by KPMG
Audit and Risk Advisory Services following approval
by the International Advisory and Monitoring Board.

New economic legislation has also been
introduced. Measures include ensuring that the Iraqi
Board of Supreme Audit acts as an independent public
institution, combined with inspectors-general in every
ministry.

A new Central Bank law for Iraq establishes a
banking framework and the working practices of the
newly independent Central Bank.

Revisions to copyright, patent and trademark
legislation have been introduced to create the
conditions for fair trade and eventual World Trade
Organization (WTO) membership.

An interim securities law allows the re-
establishment of the Baghdad stock exchange as a
means of raising private-sector capital, but leaves,
importantly, an incoming Iraqi administration to
determine the future shape of securities trading in Iraq.

The Coalition continues to be concerned about
tackling unemployment and recently established a
programme of public works in major urban centres. It
is called the "Seven Cities" initiative and is aimed at
providing additional jobs over and above the 345,000
that the Coalition Provisional Authority estimates have
been created by the reconstruction process.

I will now focus on human rights and justice. The
development of a positive human rights culture in Iraq
is focused on three independent but complementary
platforms: first, an effective Ministry of Human
Rights; secondly, an independent National Human
Rights Commission, including an ombudsman for
human rights; and thirdly, viable, active and
sustainable human rights non-governmental
organizations.

In April 2004, Ambassador Bremer and the
Governing Council approved the appointment of
Bakhtiar Amin, a well-known human rights activist, as
Deputy Minister of Human Rights. Mr. Amin has since
taken over the duties of the Minister. There are now
approximately 130 employees at the Ministry.

Efforts to provide training in secure locations
outside Iraq are ongoing, and, with full support from
the Coalition Provisional Authority and USAID
funding, the Human Rights Ministry has designated
two of its lawyers to act as on-site monitors and family
liaisons in the Abu Ghraib prison.

The Iraqi human rights budget for 2004 is
approximately $14.3 million, while an additional $15
million has been allocated for human rights under the
United States Congress Supplemental Budget. The
Iraqi Special Tribunal has appointed its Administrator,
together with its first seven investigative judges and
five prosecutors. A training course was held for Iraqi
judges in The Hague from 5 to 7 May 2004. Another is
planned for July, while the United States will provide
assistance through a Regime Crime Adviser's office.

The Coalition Provisional Authority Office of
Human Rights and Transitional Justice has nearly
completed refurbishment of a former prison to house
documentation and evidence securely. A human rights
database has also been designed. On 23 April,
Ambassador Bremer announced the establishment of a
National Commission of Remembrance.

The United States Congress Supplemental Budget
included $1 million towards the establishment of a
National Human Rights Commission. Including an
Office of the Ombudsman, the Commission will act as
an independent body that will have the power to accept
complaints concerning alleged Government violations
of human rights.

Another key issue is continued Coalition work to
promote the active participation of women. The United
Kingdom's Department for International Development
has provided two gender advisers to assist Coalition
efforts, while USAID has funded over 55 grants
totalling $3 million that focus on women's issues,
including the establishment of 14 women's centres. A
wide range of women's groups have emerged over the
last year, and the Ministry of Human Rights has begun
to host weekly workshops on women's issues.

Despite the substantial and difficult
circumstances on the ground, much has been and is
being achieved in Iraq. The genuine transfer of
sovereign authority to an interim Iraqi Government on
30 June will be the next momentous step, allowing the
Iraqi people to have the final say in their own affairs
and pave the way for democratic elections by January
2005.

We are accelerating our own preparations for that
historic occasion. Already, 11 Iraqi ministries have
transferred to Iraqi control, while there are plans for
further transfers in the coming days - all part of a
process of restoring full sovereignty to Iraq.

Iraq's creative and talented people will continue
to deserve our support as they move towards elections
and a permanent constitution. Recent events show that
foreign extremists and former regime elements remain
bent on denying Iraqis that control of their political
future, while the rebuilding of Iraq will continue to be
an immense task. The United Kingdom hopes that the
international community will build on its previous
support, uniting to help the Iraqi Government and
Iraq's people at this most crucial time.

Over the next few weeks, the Council will
continue its consideration of a new draft resolution on
Iraq. That draft resolution should clearly mark the
move to a sovereign, interim Iraqi Government. It
should also mark our wholehearted support for that
Government and for continued Iraqi progress towards
democratic elections.

