Mrs. Zanelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its gratitude for the
briefings given by the President and the Prosecutor of
the Special Court for Sierra Leone. We are grateful too
for the work being carried out in that very important
institution of international justice. My delegation also
wishes to welcome the presence of Deputy Secretary-
General Migiro at this meeting.

Peru firmly supports the fight against impunity.
My delegation therefore appreciates the opportunity to
be briefed this afternoon on the activities of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone. This meeting will enable all
States Members of the United Nations, and public
opinion, to be informed about the work of the Special
Court and about the challenges it faces. With two trials
now concluded, with sentencing scheduled for next
June and July, a trial that is to conclude by the end of
the year and the recent start of the trial of the former
President of Liberia, Charles Taylor, the Court has
shown that it is making progress in the task of bringing
to justice those who bear the greatest responsibility for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and the laws of Sierra Leone, thus bolstering the fight
against impunity and promoting reconciliation and the
achievement of lasting peace, not only in Sierra Leone
but throughout the subregion.

The beginning of the Charles Taylor trial marks
an important milestone in the work of the Court. The
fact that this former head of State who allegedly
committed serious atrocities has now been brought to
justice shows us that no one is above the law and that
the commission of serious crimes cannot remain
unpunished. In today's world impunity is not tolerated.
Furthermore, the fact that the trial is taking place in
The Hague with the logistical cooperation of the
International Criminal Court shows how that young
institution is engaged in the fight against impunity and
confirms the wisdom of the international community's
decision to conceive and establish a permanent judicial
institution.

As the Court has unambiguously indicated with
its active and innovative outreach plan to publicize its
activities and proceedings so that the trials will have
the proper impact in Sierra Leone and throughout the
subregion, it is crucial that the trials be accessible. The
local population must clearly see that justice is being
served. That is particularly relevant in the Taylor case,
as was stressed by the Security Council in resolution
1688 (2006). We praise the Special Court's work in
that area, and we encourage it to continue it.

The President and the Prosecutor have shared
with us information on the Court's completion strategy,
under which all judicial activities are expected to end
by the end of 2009. In the context of the formulation
and implementation of the completion strategy,
residual aspects and the legacy of the Court are
especially important. In particular, we wish to highlight
those aspects relating to the creation of conditions and
capacities within the local justice system to try those
responsible for crimes that fall outside the Court's
mandate. Indeed, in order to comply with the
completion strategy and, above all, in order to fulfil its
mandate vis-a-vis the people of Sierra Leone, the Court
requires resources and cooperation.

We thank those who have contributed financially
to the Court's activities, and we call for the support of
States able to provide it. The Court requires the
cooperation of States on a number of matters, as the
Council has heard this afternoon.

I will conclude by encouraging the Special Court
for Sierra Leone to continue implementing its mandate
and bringing justice to the people of Sierra Leone,
which is indispensable in order to lay the foundation
for lasting peace and a prosperous future, not only in
the country but also in the subregion.

