Mr. Stoffer (United States of America): My
delegation, too, would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his informative briefing, and we
reiterate our support for the new Special
Representative in Kosovo. We understand that Special
Representative Haekkerup will be coming to New York
in March, and we look forward to hearing his views on
the challenges that remain in Kosovo.

The prospects of a lasting peace in the Balkans
have clearly brightened somewhat due to the
democratic developments in Yugoslavia last year. The
successful municipal elections in Kosovo last October
and the progress of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
implementing the results over the last several months
also reassure us that we are making steady progress in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We are glad to
hear that UNMIK is moving forward on the necessary
regulations, which will define the institutional
framework of Kosovo's provisional self-government,
including Kosovo-wide elections. We urge UNMIK to
move quickly to promulgate the necessary regulations
and to organize Kosovo-wide elections as soon as
possible in 2001.

However, there are still some dark clouds on the
horizon. The continuing unrest and violence in
Mitrovica and other parts of Kosovo threaten this
progress. We condemn the recent violence in Mitrovica
and lament the tragic deaths that resulted, but we take
note that UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) were
joined by key Kosovar Albanian leaders in urging
restraint and a return of calm in the troubled city. The
declaration issued by Kosovar Albanian leaders in
response to the recent unrest was also promising. It
focused on confidence-building measures, but also
expressed the commitment to freedom of movement
and the establishment of functioning political
structures that include all sides and factions.

While we acknowledge genuine Serb security
concerns in Mitrovica, the way to address these
concerns is for Serbs to cooperate with UNMIK and
KFOR, participate in the administration of the city and
take jobs in the Kosovo police service. We call on the
democratic authorities in Belgrade to send a clear
message to all those in Kosovo to participate in
municipal assemblies and to cooperate with UNMIK in
addressing the political and security issues that will
help reduce violence and encourage Serb refugees to
return and all others who have been displaced to come
back to their homes.

We also strongly condemn the violence across the
Kosovo administrative border, in and around the
ground safety zone. We applaud the vigorous measures
that KFOR has taken to control that administrative
border and stop all material support for the extremists
operating in southern Serbia. We continue to call on the
Kosovar leadership to reject the violent approach of
these individuals, and we encourage local leaders in
and around the ground safety zone to cooperate with
the Yugoslav authorities in finding a political solution
to their problems.

We welcome the recent proposal put forward by
the Belgrade Government to institute reforms, to
engage local Albanian leaders, to develop a series of
confidence-building measures, to restore calm and to
build the foundations of peace in and around the
ground safety zone. Obviously, many details remain to
be worked out, and there are some aspects of the
current puzzle about which we have some concern. In
general, though, we believe the plan provides a sound
basis on which to begin addressing the problems of the
Presevo Valley.

We applaud the Yugoslav Government's restraint
and its assurances that it will continue to respect the
Military-Technical Agreement. The Council has
expressed itself very clearly in this regard. There is no
acceptable military solution to the problems in the
Presevo Valley. As we understand the Yugoslav
proposal, the first step is to put in place a number of
reforms and to begin to engage the population of the
Presevo area constructively, and we applaud that. We
also understand the Deputy Prime Minister Kovic will
be briefing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe later this week on this proposal, and we in the
Council look forward to learning more details about
this plan.

My Government has worked closely with the
Belgrade authorities in supporting a political approach
to the problems in and around the ground safety zone,
and we will be looking forward to ways to implement
the Yugoslav Government's plan.

