Mr. Chambas (Economic Community of West African States): On behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of this body of the United Nations at this
critical time, when the Security Council is faced with
the challenge of taking decisions that will ensure
lasting peace and international security. I am confident
that, with your wealth of experience, coupled with the
famed traditional African wisdom, you will steer the
proceedings of the Council in a fair and judicious
manner.

I wish to thank the organizers of this consultative
meeting, the Security Council and the Republic of
Guinea for inviting me to share the concerns and the
experiences of ECOWAS in the campaign against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
growing activities of mercenaries and mercenary
companies - which others call private military
companies - that have deeply affected the political
stability of Africa, in particular West Africa.

It is not surprising that a Guinean presidency of
the Security Council has decided to include among its
peace and security concerns the theme "Proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and use of mercenaries:
threats to peace and security in West Africa". As I
understand, there are at least two reasons for this. First,
Guinea is the West African country that has carried the
greatest burden of the consequences of internal
conflicts of its neighbours, and the issue of refugees is
but one aspect of this phenomenon. Secondly, it is this
same West African country that suffered a bloody
mercenary attack as far back as 1970. Indeed, other
West African States were later to suffer a similar fate.
Consequently, our subregion became noted for its
instability, characterized by the proliferation of small
arms and by the phenomenon of mercenaries.

The primary objective of the Economic
Community of West African States is to ensure
economic integration and development in West Africa.
However, the inextricable link between development
and peace and stability has meant an increasingly
greater role for ECOWAS in conflict management and
prevention. In many parts of Africa, the uncontrolled
proliferation of small arms - their number is
estimated to be as high as 100 million - has posed a
major threat to development, to political and economic
stability, to civil liberties and to human lives. The
growing number, intensity and duration of conflicts in
Africa - most particularly in the Great Lakes region
and in the Mano River Union basin - are a result of
bad governance, economic failure and the easy
availability of arms and mercenaries. It is estimated
that there are 8 million small arms within West Africa,
and scores of mercenary activities continue to take
place.

Mercenary activities are deplored the world over
and have been consistently condemned by our global
Organization. At every opportunity, West African
leaders have joined in the condemnation of the use in
internal conflicts of foreign soldiers who are available
only for hire in internal conflicts. In the 1990s,
mercenary activities increased, all of them in
contravention of the Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, adopted by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), later the African Union (AU),
and of resolutions of the United Nations that clearly
condemn the hire and use of mercenaries in every form.

Strangely enough, in our subregion, a unique type
of mercenary is emerging that is not the usual type.
Over the past decade, the Mano River Union States
have been besieged by rebel activities. The conflicts in
Liberia, in Sierra Leone, in Guinea-Bissau to some
extent and now, we see, in Cote d'Ivoire have been
fought between Government and rebel factions. These
rebel factions have been found to be involved in
virtually all the conflicts in the Mano River Union
States. They have taken on the semblance of
mercenaries who have no loyalty to any particular
authority and who are always available for hire; but
then their motives are sometimes not easily discernible,
since they can resort to random plundering and
destruction of property, as we now see in the western
part of C6te d'Ivoire.

Whatever may be the nature and type of
mercenary activity that is confronted, there is a need
for global action targeted at eliminating the practice
and usefulness of mercenaries. ECOWAS heads of
State and Government have committed themselves to
ensuring that individual States take all necessary
measures to disallow the use of their territories as a
base for rebel or mercenary activities.

After the end of the cold war, the West African
region, with a population of 250 million people, is
indeed saturated with all types of small arms and light
weapons. These weapons, which are easy to use due to
advancements in technology and easy to move about
because of our porous borders, need greater attention
from the international community. Small arms, which
are defined as weapons of mass destruction by some
experts, are aggravating local, communal, national and
regional conflicts. All over Africa, small arms
proliferation has led to the death of millions of people.
In the Sudan, over 2 million have been killed since
1982; in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
another 2 million have also reportedly been killed since
1996. In West Africa, nearly half a million people have
died in the last decade from the misuse of small arms,
or these "tools of death", as the International Action
Network (IANSA) describes them.

As a result of numerous conflicts, death and
destruction, West African leaders initiated a "security
first" approach to ending conflicts. This led to the
adoption in 1998 of a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons. This
is a bold and ambitious step in the management of licit
and illicit small arms. The Moratorium is a confidence-
building mechanism. Its imposition is a voluntary act
backed by the joint political will of our heads of State
and Government to deal with small arms proliferation.

The Moratorium requires member States to put in
place effective measures to: first, control the import,
export and manufacture of light weapons; secondly,
register and control the movement and use of
legitimate arms stocks; thirdly, detect and destroy all
illicit and surplus weapons; and fourthly, permit
exemptions to the Moratorium only in accordance with
strict criteria.

The Moratorium has led to the establishment of
focal points or national commissions in member States
for the control of small arms, as recommended by the
Code of Conduct, adopted by the heads of State in
December 1999, for the implementation of this
Moratorium. An important aspect of the Code is article
8, which concerns the establishment of a peacekeeping
arms register in all peacekeeping operations within
West Africa. Indeed, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), through its regional Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), is in the process of
establishing with us this register next month in Cote
d'Ivoire with the peacekeeping force that has been
deployed there. The register is to keep a check on the
nature and quantity of small arms used in the ECOWAS
mission in Cote d'Ivoire.

The implementation of the ECOWAS Moratorium
has been subjected to several evaluation exercises. The
last major evaluation of its implementation - its
general compliance with and effectiveness in member
States - was carried out between September and
December 2002.

I must not fail to mention that political will for
the continuation of the Moratorium has never wavered,
as member States of ECOWAS renewed it in October
2001 for another three years. There is yet again a
strong indication that the Moratorium will eventually
become a permanent strategy for the control of the
movement of small arms within our subregion.

May I also use this opportunity to remind
members of Security Council resolution 1209 (1998),
which commended ECOWAS on the adoption of the
Moratorium. The UNDP, as I have indicated, has
supported ECOWAS, through PCASED, in
backstopping the Moratorium since March 1999. We
seize this opportunity to thank the United Nations and
the Governments of the United Kingdom, France,
Japan, Sweden, Canada, Norway, Switzerland and the
Netherlands for the technical and financial support
extended for the implementation of the Moratorium.

ECOWAS remains engaged with the international
community over the twin devils of our time, small arms
and mercenary activities. We call upon the
international community to implement the letter and
spirit of the United Nations Programme of Action and
provide necessary resources to enable the ECOWAS
secretariat to implement the ECOWAS Moratorium in
all its ramifications.

Our community is committed towards ensuring
widespread peace and security in the subregion. To this
end, the ECOWAS heads of State, at their meeting in
January this year, recognizing the gravity of the
proliferation of small arms, its linkage to the
continuing instability across our subregion and the
activities of mercenaries and cross-border crimes,
recommended the establishment of a small arms unit
within the ECOWAS secretariat to strengthen our
capacity to reduce, manage and eliminate small arms
and to enhance human security as a means of
facilitating the harmonious development of our
countries.

I am appealing to the Security Council and the
international community at large to support effective
implementation of the Moratorium and to facilitate the
establishment of a well-resourced small arms unit of
the ECOWAS secretariat.

I look forward to fruitful and interactive
discussions at this forum and once again wish you a
successful tenure as President of the United Nations
Security Council.

