Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Bolivian presidency for having brought the hazards of
mines and explosives to the attention of the Security
Council. My delegation expresses its appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Alexander Zuev and
Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Nifio for their insightful briefings
and commends their efforts to bring about stability in
the world. We also value highly the work done by the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in this
regard and especially the successful mine action in
Mali, the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan,
Iraq and Colombia.

My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations.

Mine action is at the core of post-conflict
humanitarian response, recovery and development
in all 70 States affected. Mines and explosives take a
high death toll and mutilate their victims, restrict the
movement of people and humanitarian aid, make land
unsuitable for cultivation and deny citizens access
to water, food, care and trade. Contamination by
mines and explosive remnants of war affects civilian
populations, United Nations operations and global
peace and security.

The growing number of intra-State conflicts and
the expanded range of explosive hazards have led
to growing requests for United Nations emergency
humanitarian mine-action assistance. Mine action
enables the safe return of internally displaced persons
and refugees and ensures access for humanitarian
actors and peacekeepers. We urge the international
community to support, through predictable, earmarked
United Nations funding, the activities of UNMAS,
which has proved to be an invaluable and efficient tool
in mitigating the hazards of mines.

Effective mine action should include the five
pillars, the first of which is to clear, remove and
destroy landmines and explosive remnants of war
and mark or fence off contaminated areas. Education
about risks, safety and identifying mines and explosive
remnants is essential. Medical assistance measures
and rehabilitation services for victims, advocacy for a
world free from the threat of landmines, and the need
for countries to implement international treaties remain
crucial. At the same time, countries should be helped
to strengthen their national capacities to deal with the
threat posed by mines and explosives.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs can share good practices and develop guidance
on mitigating the threat of explosive weapons in
populated areas. The Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction has,
since its entry into force, played an important role in
addressing humanitarian issues related to the use of such
weapons. We fully share and support the humanitarian
objectives of the Convention.

Based on the importance of the humanitarian
aspects of this issue, from 2003 to 2009 Kazakhstan's
engineer sapper unit in Iraq neutralized more than
4.5 million explosive devices and provided specialized
training to the Iraqi security forces. In the process of
furthering our national capacities in countering the
threat posed by mines and explosives, my country has
established and developed a demining centre.

Kazakhstan is committed to joining the multilateral
effort to ensure the safety and security of civilians and
to sustain peace and reinforce stabilization.

