The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

First, I would like to join those colleagues who
condemned the attack against our peacekeepers
yesterday in Chad. I thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his statement. I also extend my gratitude to
the following for their insightful and extensive briefings
this morning: Ambassador Liberata Mulamula, Visiting
Scholar and Associate Director of the Institute for
African Studies, Elliott School ofInternational Affairs,
George Washington University; Ms. Naledi Maite,
Programme Manager, African Women in Dialogue,
South Africa; and Ms. Linda Vilakazi, Programme
Manager, Zanele Mbeki Development Trust.

This debate, the first of the second week of
South Africa's presidency of the Security Council, is
symbolic, as it places our emphasis on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in the African continent. It is in this
context that we continue our diplomatic efforts to seek
solutions to the challenges in the Sudan, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, and in other conflicts
around the world. We believe in this centrality because
conflict prevention and resolution is less costly than
peacekeeping, in monetary terms and in terms of loss of
life, destruction of infrastructure and displacement of
people. In his essay Clear the Obstacles and Confront
the Enemy, which he wrote on Robben Island prison in
1976, Nelson Mandela reminds us why negotiation is
preferable when he said the following:

"[w]hen we have fought it out and reduced this
country to ashes it will still be necessary for us to
sit down together and talk about the problems of
reconstruction - the black man and the white man,
the African and the Afrikaner".

We pay tribute to the Secretary-General's reform
agenda, especially the peace and security pillar, which
prioritizes preventive diplomacy, mediation and the
development of nationally owned peace agreements and
their early implementation. South Africa believes that
cooperation and coordination among the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations could
play an important role in conflict prevention. In that
regard, South Africa calls for enhanced and continuous
strategic and operational coordination of preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and resolution efforts
by the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
regional economic communities and other international
and local partners.

South Africa pays tribute to the United Nations-
AU mediations efforts in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere on the continent.
The recent operationalization of the AU Peace Fund
will further boost the AU's capacities and efforts in
mediation and conflict prevention on our continent.
The Peace Fund is structured around three thematic
windows, namely, mediation and preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity, and peace support operations. In
that regard, AU member States should be commended
for their efforts to contribute to the Peace Fund, whose
endowment currently stands at $115 million. African
leaders have demonstrated their political will to deal
with and resolve conflicts on our continent.

The role of women and youth in conflict prevention
and mediation cannot be emphasized enough. It is
common knowledge that, where women are involved in
peace processes, those processes are more legitimate,
sustainable and effective. We welcome the role already
been played by African Women in Dialogue, the
Association for Women's Rights in Development and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation, and many other similar initiatives,
in anchoring conflict prevention and resolution by
holding grassroots-level negotiations. We urge the
Secretary-General to deploy more women mediators,
peace envoys and special representatives to assist in
conflict resolution and mediation across our continent.
South Africa has presented a draft resolution on the
women and peace and security agenda to ensure the
implementation of our previous decisions regarding the
role of women in peace and security.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, we urge Member States to renew
their commitment to the principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations insofar as the resolution
of disputes is concerned. The time has come for the
United Nations and the Council to put in more effort
and resources in response to Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter, on the pacific settlement of disputes.

South Africa is convinced that peace and stability
in the world will remain elusive if we do not address
the nexus between security and development. The 2030

Agenda for Sustainable Development gives recognition
to that vital link. In that context, consideration of the
interdependence between security and development
requires that the different principal organs of the
United Nations work together, in a complementary
manner, within their respective Charter mandates, to
ensure a holistic and integrated approach to sustainable
development and durable peace.

I wish to conclude with yet another quotation from
Nelson Mandela.

"We were expected to destroy one another
and ourselves collectively in the worst racial
conflagration. Instead, we as a people chose the
path of negotiation, compromise and peaceful
settlement. Instead of hatred and revenge we chose
reconciliation and nation-building".

South Africa appeals to our sisters and brother
on our continent of Africa to adopt a similar
mindset; instead of hatred and revenge, let us choose
reconciliation and nation-building. Once more, we
urge the Security Council to allocate more resources to
preventative diplomacy.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Namibia.

