Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. ValentinInzko, for his informative
brief, which shows that the current situation clearly still
requires the attention of the Security Council.

Ten days ago, on 29 April in Berlin, President
Macron, together with Chancellor Merkel, reaffirmed
France's commitment to contributing to the stability
of the Western Balkans. This re-engagement in the
region is focused on economic and social development,
security, justice and defence - four pillars of a French
strategy presented in advance of that meeting with the
leaders of the Western Balkans. Bosnia has its rightful
place in this French strategy, which supports the actions
of the European Union. It is to that European future that
the political authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
turn their attention. My country therefore welcomes the
replies sent to the European Commission in February
rather than reopening the wounds of the past. Three
points deserve the full attention of the Council.

First, it is time to put an end to the declarations
aimed at undermining the authority of the decisions
taken by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was succeeded
more than a year ago by a residual mechanism. France
strongly condemns the advocacy of crimes and war
criminals, regardless of their community of origin.
National and international justice has done outstanding
work to identify those responsible for the atrocities
committed during the conflict. All initiatives aimed at
challenging or reinterpreting ICTY decisions - I am
thinking in particular ofthose relating to the Srebrenica
genocide - are likely to undermine the country's
cohesion. We call on all political actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to favour a constructive approach to
strengthen this cohesion, without which the country
will not be able to meet the challenges of development
and the construction of the rule of law.

As such, the formation of a new Government must
be a priority. Instead of being the subject of sterile
polemics, Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and
territorial integrity should be the basis for national
consensus. The improvement of the well-being of the
entire population is at stake.

Secondly, it is urgent to strengthen and consolidate
the judicial system. Let us not forget that the rule of
law and respect for human rights are not luxuries to
which only prosperous countries can lay claim. On
the contrary, it is the condition for fair and sustainable
economic and social development, the vitality of civil
society and the stability of institutions. France calls on
all political movements to respect the competences of
the central State, in particular in the field of defence,
and the decisions taken by national and international
judicial bodies, including the Constitutional Court. The
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions
suffers from the refusal, often motivated by political
calculations, to comply with the decisions taken by the
courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My third and final point is that the European
perspective requires more than a redoubling of efforts
to adopt the reforms that the country sorely needs. In
this regard, France associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the European Union delegation to the
Council. The prospect of integration into the European
Union, when the time is right and the conditions are met,
is an extension of the European Union's massive and
multifaceted engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea,
mandated by the Council, is a testimony to this
support. Beyond this support, it is the responsibility
of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
adopt bold reforms to make progress in European
rapprochement. Those reforms in the economic and
social fields can give new opportunities to the younger
generations and encourage them to contribute to the
country's development.

Stable institutions, a prosperous country and fair
justice are within Bosnia and Herzegovina's reach. Its
leaders must rise to this historic challenge in a spirit of
compromise and political courage. France stands with
Bosnia and Herzegovina' to build this future and make
progress in European rapprochement.

