Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and wish the
delegation of the United States every success in its
important duty.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Italy, on behalf of
the European Union. Our concerns are reflected in that
statement, which underscores the fragility of the
situation on the ground. The recent cycle of violence
has, indeed, demonstrated how vital it is for both
parties to comply with their respective responsibilities
and start the implementation of the Quartet road map.
In the light of Turkey's special historical, friendly ties
with both Israel and the Palestinians, I would like to
make some additional comments.

Turkey is of the view that the separation or
security wall which is being constructed in the West
Bank further complicates the context in which we must
pursue our efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians
together to achieve peace and security. In fact, the
construction of the wall adds a new level of complexity
to the existing web of issues awaiting resolution in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

We recognize Israel's legitimate security needs.
We are concerned, however, about the construction of
such a barrier by the Israeli Government. The structure
that is being built is aggravating the dire conditions of
the Palestinian people. We are concerned that once the
wall has been completed, it will separate the
Palestinian communities, causing them to live in
isolation from one another in cantons in the West Bank.
Furthermore, the fact that the wall as constructed goes
deep into the Palestinian territories does not bode well,
given the number of already vexing issues, including
the status of Jerusalem.

As such, the wall is damaging to the political,
security and socio-economic processes envisioned in
the road map. It is becoming one of the most visible
obstacles to the objective of achieving a just and
lasting peace in the region. Establishing security is,
indeed, of paramount importance, but the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict has several other dimensions which also
need to be addressed forthwith. Any improvement in
the daily lives of the Palestinian people, who are
struggling for their survival - any development that
would ameliorate the living conditions of the
beleaguered Palestinians - would, in our View, reflect
positively on the security situation on the ground and
create a much-needed platform for contact, which must
be resumed between the two sides.

Clearly, the Palestinians must be resolute in
fighting the perpetrators of the heinous acts of terror,
and should immediately start dismantling the terrorist
infrastructure by every means. Murder and violence
cannot be allowed to define ajust struggle.

The wall, on the other hand, is a blunt tool which
punishes a whole people and casts doubt on the
intentions of the State of Israel. Full adherence to the
requirements of the road map will prove to be the
safest solution available to both Israel and the
Palestinians.

