Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank Mr. O'Brien and Ms. Hoff for their briefings
this morning.

At the outset, let me stress once again what has
already been agreed on repeatedly by the international
community: that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. A comprehensive settlement is
required in order to bring about a united, sovereign
Syria that responds to the Syrian people's desire
for a future of security and prosperity that is free of
terrorism, and it must be based on Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2254 (2015), and the
Geneva communique. This will require efforts by the
Syrian Government and the opposition to agree on an
interim phase.

Egypt, in cooperation with our Security Council
partners Spain and New Zealand, is continuing to
seek to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Syria,
particularly in Aleppo, in view of what has befallen
that city. We believe that the Security Council will
not be able to reach a definitive solution so long as a
political settlement hinges on agreement between the
Syrian parties. We have therefore provided the Security
Council, through our draft resolution, with a clear path,
which will be a pivotal step towards helping to reach
this objective. We hope that the Security Council will
be soon able to support this view.

There is aneed for a cessation ofhostilities in Aleppo
for at least 10 days in order to create a humanitarian
space, as well as for an immediate call for a cessation
of hostilities in Syria in general, in order to reach a
definitive ceasefire in accordance with resolution
2268 (2016), with implementation monitoring. This
vision also includes combating terrorism; an end
to cooperation by any party in Syria with terrorist
groups, which now control large swathes of territory
in the country; and the need to work to initiate serious
negotiations between the Syrian parties on the interim
period, in accordance with the Geneva communique
and resolution 2254 (2015).

Let me reiterate our hope that the Security Council
will be able to adopt this view as soon as possible. Iwould
also call once again on all parties within and outside
Syria to overcome their political differences in order to
end this humanitarian tragedy, whose consequences are
being borne by the Syrian people alone.

