Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me thank Mr.
Guehenno and Mr. Ramcharan for their reports. We
strongly welcome the second public meeting of the
Council with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We believe this dialogue
between the Office and the Council should be
maintained and fostered and that it can serve as a
model for other items before us. These meetings also
remind us of the fact that military action alone - as
important as it might be in a given situation - will not
achieve a lasting solution to a conflict. We need a
comprehensive approach to security and human rights,
and human rights are a central element of that
approach.

The two reports confirm that some of the most
horrendous human rights violations in recent history
have been committed on a large scale in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The reports will be
crucial when it comes to bringing the perpetrators of
these unspeakable crimes to justice. In our view, these
reports are balanced and credible; they have to be the
basis for action in order to make sure that these
outrageous crimes must not go unpunished.

We regret that the investigation of the events in
Drodro had to be cut short due to security constraints.
It is indeed an abomination that a team investigating a
recent massacre should have to leave in a hurry
because of fresh massacres looming on the horizon. We
welcome further investigations as soon as possible, as
recommended in the report.

Horrible as the events in Ituri are, it is a sad truth
that similar violations of human rights have occurred in
other parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the past years. The situation in the Kivus, for example,
remains of grave concern to us.

The announcement of a transitional Government
by President Kabila on 30 June 2003 is an important
step towards democracy and peace, which we warmly
welcome. The two reports before us today highlight the
crucial importance of the establishment of the rule of
law and of capacity-building in human rights. We urge
the transitional institutions to make the rule of law and
human rights a priority and to cooperate with the
Office of the High Commissioner, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), whose human rights component
the Council strengthened in resolution 1468 (2003),
and other actors in the United Nations system in this
regard.

We urge neighbouring countries to work with the
transitional institutions in a cooperative spirit.
Interference by neighbouring countries in the conflict
must come to a complete end. They must no longer be
part of the problem, but must become part of the
solution to it.
In that context, I should like to pose a question to
Mr. Ramcharan. What are the possible next steps to be
undertaken in order to engage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the external
parties to the conflict, in particular Rwanda and
Uganda? How does he view the possibility of taking
further steps in that direction?

Germany supports the recommendations made in
the reports before the Council today. The reports' call
on all countries not to grant refuge to the perpetrators
is highly important and requires our full support. In
particular, we commend the High Commissioner's
highlighting of the positive role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in preventing impunity in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We feel that this is
a useful reminder to the Council that the ICC is
emerging as an important mechanism to address
conflict and post-conflict situations, and that concerns
about the ICC's standards and impartiality are
unfounded. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
fellow State party to the ICC, and it is quite normal
that the country should turn to the ICC to seek
assistance in addressing the shortcomings of its judicial
system. We encourage close cooperation between the
new transitional institutions and the ICC.

We also join the call made by the High
Commissioner and MONUC to the future transitional
Government to establish a judicial mechanism to seek
to punish perpetrators, as well as other mechanisms of
transitional justice. That, however, will not be possible
without assistance from the international community.
Germany stands ready, and is willing to contribute to
such efforts with a view to fostering democracy and the
rule of law.

