Ms. Soderberg (United States): Last October the
Security Council adopted resolution 1270 (1999) to
establish the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). That resolution authorizes 6,000 military
personnel to assist the Government of Sierra Leone in the
implementation of the Lorne Peace Agreement, including
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants. It was envisioned that United Nations
troops and ECOMOG forces would each play a critical
role in restoring peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

In December, the members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
announced that they no longer would be able to sustain its
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) forces in Sierra Leone.
We regret that decision but acknowledge the tremendous
sacrifices and contributions of the troops of Ghana,
Guinea, Mali, and especially Nigeria, made in support of
peace and democracy in Sierra Leone. With ECOMOG's
decision to withdraw its forces, it is imperative to avoid
a security gap. The peace process in Sierra Leone
remains fragile and it is in all of our interest to help
ensure its success.

Therefore, the United States supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to expand the mandate of
UNAMSIL to take on the functions of the departing
ECOMOG forces, and the United States will vote for the
draft resolution before us today. To ensure there is no
gap in security, we support the "rehatting" of two
battalions of Nigerian ECOMOG troops remaining in
Sierra Leone. We welcome the Nigerian Government's
agreement with that proposal and urge the United Nations

 

and the Nigerian Government to work closely together to
ensure an efficient and effective transition with adequate
logistical support.

The former rebels still hold sway in much of the
countryside and there are deeply disturbing reports that they
have been intimidating UN AMSIL soldiers and seizing their
weapons, placing the United Nations troops in the bizarre
situation of being disarmed by the rebels, rather than the
reverse. We are deeply alarmed by these reports and
strongly condemn all such actions. We call on the leader
of the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP), Foday
Sankoh, and the leaders of the ex-Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) rebels to bring an
immediate halt to these dangerous and reprehensible
actions. They must permit the United Nations forces to
carry out their mandate in Sierra Leone without
confrontation or violence.

We also call upon United Nations officials to address
this problem quickly and effectively. The mandates of
Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) and of the draft
resolution on which we will vote today grant United
Nations troops Chapter VII authority in the discharge of
their mandate to take the necessary action to ensure the
security and freedom of their personnel.

While much progress has been made, the peace
process in Sierra Leone is now at an especially sensitive
stage. The ceasefire is generally holding; over 13,000
combatants have entered demobilization sites; and some
7,000 have disarmed. But the situation remains volatile.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
society of the estimated 45,000 ex-combatants are
progressing slowly; the process has taken much longer than
all of us had hoped. Logistical problems, fear and mistrust
are among the many obstacles.

Helping the Government and people of Sierra Leone
consolidate peace after eight years of civil war is a high
priority for the United States. Our principal interests are in
helping to ensure a durable peace, building a climate of
respect for human rights and the democratic process,
holding those responsible for atrocities accountable under
agreed mechanisms, and providing humanitarian relief to
the population. A peaceful Sierra Leone is important also
in contributing to stability in West Africa.

We urge the utmost efforts by all concerned to carry
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration through to a
successful conclusion while conditions on the ground are
still conducive to success. The United Nations must move
quickly to ensure the success of the DDR programme that
will pave the way for the consolidation of the peace
process. DDR is a crucial element in encouraging
refugees and the internally displaced to return to their
homes.

We are especially concerned by the plight of the
internally displaced, who outnumber the 500,000 Sierra
Leone refugees and suffer many of the same
vulnerabilities, but are often out of reach of effective
humanitarian access. Roughly one third of the population
of Sierra Leone is internally displaced. We call on all
parties to adhere to their commitments in the Lorne
Agreement to provide unfettered and safe access to all
parts of the country for humanitarian workers. We must
not allow these innocent victims of war to be neglected,
and insist that all parties adhere to United Nations
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.

We want the Lome Agreement to succeed. The
provisions for amnesty in the Agreement represent a
difficult choice, taken by the signatories in order to end
the fighting. We remain committed to justice and
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We are working to help the
Government of Sierra Leone establish a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, as well as the Human Rights
Commission that is called for by the Agreement. We also
favour an international fact-finding mission to support the
work and proceedings of the Truth and Reconciliation and
Human Rights Commissions.

It is our hope that these Commissions can help bring
healing and reconciliation to the people of Sierra Leone.
Many have suffered for too long. With the assistance of
the international community, we can help bring peace and
reconciliation to Sierra Leone.

