Ms. Brandt: Let me, at the outset, thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for organizing
this debate, the Secretary-General for his leadership and
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, for
her tireless commitment to keeping children in conflict
safe.

In January this year, in Borno state, Nigeria,
villages were attacked by armed groups. Houses and
schools were burned. Fatima, a young mother, fled with
her baby and two young sons. Stopped by gunmen, she
was forced to answer questions about her husband and
her religious beliefs. Eventually, the gunmen let her go,
but ordered her to leave behind her sons, aged three and
seven. She walked for weeks with her daughter until
she reached a camp for internally displaced persons
(IDPs). She has no idea of what has happened to her
sons, or whether she will ever see them again. This is
frightening, devastating and increasingly common.

The past year, as the Secretary General's
report (S/2015/409) documents and as his Special
Representative mentioned earlier, was one of the worst
ever for children affected by armed conflict, not least
because of the alarming rise in abductions, especially
mass abductions, of children and adults in Iraq, Nigeria,
South Sudan and Syria.

We have seen mass abductions before, and the
Secretary-General has just mentioned the Lord's
Resistance Army, which abducted children by night,
prompting thousands to make the dangerous nightly
journey to areas beyond its reach. In fact, we will have
the honour to hear more on this from Ms. Eunice Apio
later. The scale and nature of abductions is changing,
however, and the Secretary-General's report gives
several examples of this.

Used to instil fear and terror in populations,
abduction is often only the first in a series of grave
violations. Sexual assault and rape, indoctrination,
recruitment as child soldiers and murder often follow.
Each of these offences blights the child concerned, robs

her ofher childhood and threatens her ability to live a full
and productive life. Each offence violates international
law. It both shames us for not doing more to prevent
atrocities and spurs us to act to prevent all violations
of child rights and call for increased accountability.
Left unaddressed, each offence can contribute to the
recurring cycles of violence and conflict that shatter
lives and communities and perpetuate conflict in
future generations. We therefore welcome the Security
Council's particular attention this morning to abduction
as a new trigger for the listing of parties to conflict in
the annexes of the Secretary-General's report.

Let us also acknowledge the progress we have
made together to release and reintegrate children
affected by conflict. The Secretary-General and his
Special Representative mentioned the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign, which has been central to that
shared progress. Combined efforts also led to the
release earlier this year of more than 2,000 children
by non-State armed groups, including in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank France for organizing
a debate specifically focused on child Victims of such
groups earlier this year (see S/PV.7414).

We cannot, and must not, stop at the release of
children, however. We must also think about what
happens after children are released. How can they
resume normal life when they are inevitably burdened
by physical wounds and psychological scars? Think of
Fatima's young sons. How will they cope when they
return to their mother? Think of the trauma endured
by the young women and girls who have escaped from
Boko Haram. Think of the more than 140 Kurdish boys
abducted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
last year. These children are victims and must be
treated as such. When they are released, the best option
is to transfer them quickly to child protection services,
to trained professionals who can support them as they
recover, rebuild and reintegrate, and who can address
the needs of girls and children with special needs,
including those with disabilities.

We must commit to providing that critical support,
because without it children will not get the opportunity
to heal, and the risk of re-recruitment is real. While
we acknowledge that progress has been made in some
areas, we must remain vigilant, because where conflict
has re-emerged or escalated, the risks of backsliding
are real. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General just spoke about South Sudan and Yemen,
where the use of children has not only continued but
has increased in recent bouts of conflict.

Urgently and collectively, we must turn our
attention to prevention. The best way to do that, of
course, is to step up efforts to end conflict and to
pursue accountability, not just as a means of addressing
past wrongs but also of deterring future ones. But
we must also engage those who are most affected by,
for example, strengthening community protection
measures by engaging local leaders and exploring the
benefits of unarmed civilian protection, as well as by
supporting the methods that families use to protect
their children - including, in some cases, seeking
safety and protection as refugees or IDPs.

Even as we tackle such challenges, new threats
emerge. Children are at risk for new forms of violence
promoted via social media. Aggressive forms of
recruitment for extreme violence, such as participation
in executions and suicide bombings, are real and reach
well beyond conflict zones. And even in places where
children should be safe, they are not. Think of the
attack on a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, that killed
145 children and teachers. Or Gaza last year, where
more than 260 schools were damaged or destroyed.
Or the countries where Governments and non-State
armed groups use schools to store weapons, detain
prisoners and house soldiers. Or the continued use of
explosive weapons and indiscriminate weapons, such
as landmines and cluster bombs, in populated areas.

UNICEF therefore appreciates all the more
Norway's leadership on the Safe Schools Declaration,
which advocates for schools to be safe and protected
spaces and outlines actions to end the military use
of schools. We need more such initiatives, including
negotiations to release children held by armed groups,
and community-based reintegration programmes to help
children not only recover and reintegrate but also learn
new skills to build for the future. Such efforts show
children and their families that we care, that we are
committed to their protection and well-being and that
we cannot and will not tolerate grave violations against
children in armed conflict by anyone, anywhere.

We have failed Fatima. We can only imagine the
heartbreak that she and her children endure daily. And
we do not know if they will ever be reunited. We hope
so, of course. Fatima told out staff in the IDP camp that
she has not given up hope. And neither can we. We must
let her courage inspire us to work even harder. Fatima's
children, and thousands of others, depend on us.

