Mr. King (United Kingdom): We welcome this
opportunity to discuss the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. I would like to start by saluting the efforts of the
agencies that are represented here, and in particular the
United Nations national staff who, as we have heard,
continued to work, and the outstanding work that has
been done by the International Committee for the Red
Cross (ICRC). The United Kingdom looks forward to
continuing to work extremely closely with all the teams
involved on the ground to meet the challenges ahead.

We believe that the humanitarian situation in Iraq
is getting better. But, in saying that, we do not
underestimate the challenges that lie ahead. As, I think,
has emerged clearly from the discussion we are having
here today, a major concern - perhaps, the major
concern - continues to be security. This remains at the
top of the coalition agenda. Our assessment is that
incidents continue, but on a sporadic basis. They
remain localized and, for the most part, at a low level.
We have been taking all possible steps to improve
security and law and order in the short term. We are
beginning to plan for the medium to longer term, and in
particular, to look at how best to transfer
responsibilities to the Iraqis themselves, including in
this area. There are plans under discussion for the
establishment of a trained police force and, indeed, as a
concrete gauge of that, there are already 1,000 Iraqi
police carrying out joint patrols with United Kingdom
personnel.
Let me just say a brief word about the situation in
the United Kingdom area of operation. We are working
to involve Iraqis in the civil administration structures.
We have established committees throughout our area of
operation to engage with the local population on the
restoration of public services. And the situation on
basic services has improved significantly. Eighty per
cent of Basra now has access to running water.
Seventy-five per cent is covered by the sewage system.
The An Nasiriyah electricity generation plant is
running at full capacity for the first time since 1991.
All hospitals have been provided with power, fuel and
water supplies.

We stress that this is only a start. We recognize
that there is more to do. It is useful to us to have a
detailed assessment from the agencies about where the
impact of security concerns is being felt most keenly.
We note and welcome the World Food Programme
reports, which have reaffirmed today, that there is no
food crisis, and we welcome this opportunity for an
exchange on the implications of developments on the
ground for the work planned under the flash appeal.

Security concerns have not stopped our efforts to

meet Iraq's humanitarian needs, working in many cases
with and through the United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in areas where the
United Kingdom has experience and, we hope,
something to bring. Our overall objective is to provide
support where there is greatest need. To take that
agenda forward, we are establishing a presence on the
ground of staff with humanitarian and development
expertise as quickly as possible. We are starting to
build that presence up in Basra, but we also have staff
working with the agencies in Baghdad.

Coordination is obviously vital and, if anything,
will get more important as more donors and actors
arrive on the scene. Much of the assistance is being
coordinated in Kuwait at the Humanitarian Operations
Centre, but that is continuing only until July. It is a
United Nations lead, and we welcome the opportunity
to continue our discussions, here and subsequently, on
how the Humanitarian Coordinator, and indeed the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, will
help us and tackle the issues of coordination involved.
We hope and expect that we will need to factor in the
NGOs, as well as agencies.

Looking beyond the immediate humanitarian
need, the United Kingdom will work to help Iraq reach
its full potential to secure a stable future where the
needs of the whole population are met equitably and
sustainably. Over the next six months, we believe that
means focusing on a number of points: first, reducing
dependence on emergency assistance; secondly,
creating transparent economic governance and
legislative structures; thirdly, ensuring the full
participation of the Iraqi people, including - and this
point has come up a number of times in our discussions
today - women, in defining their own governance
structures; fourthly, ensuring the delivery of essential
public services; and, finally, addressing the wider
regional implications of the recent conflict. The United
Kingdom contribution to all of this will need to fit in
with the international framework that is going to be
agreed upon with and by the Iraqi people.

If I may just pick up one issue of key concern to
the United Kingdom and others - the participation of
women in the new Iraq - we welcome what we have
heard from the agencies about what they are doing to
promote the inclusion of women in and through their
work. We believe that the right decisions in this area
can only accelerate Iraq's acquisition of the capacity to
manage its own affairs successfully. We recall lessons
that have been learned from other situations, which
show the continuing importance of the protection of
civilians in the post-conflict reconstruction phase.
Following the adoption of this morning's resolution,
we would welcome the opportunity today, and
subsequently, to discuss plans for the protection of
civilians, as we go forward.

Finally, just briefly to touch on media reports of
the discovery of further mass graves, the security of
evidence that may be linked to war crimes or crimes
against humanity is a priority for the commanders on
the ground, although I think that we have to recognize
that it is one among a number of priorities. We have a
team of nine forensic experts from the United Kingdom
who departed for Baghdad yesterday. They will be
there to investigate the mass graves and will make
recommendations for further United Kingdom
assistance on this subject.

In conclusion, let me just reassure all here that
the United Kingdom humanitarian community, both
within Government and outside, will continue to place
the highest priority on Iraq and will contribute strongly
to the upcoming appeals and other calls for assistance.

