Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
it appreciation to the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for initiating this debate and for sharing a
substantive concept paper (S/20l6/867, annex). We
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and for
his briefing, and appreciate the presence of Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO); Mr. Rashid
Alimov, Secretary-General of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization; and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair
of the Executive Committee of Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).

While we are aligned with the statement on behalf
of the CSTO, we also wish to add a few points in our
national capacity.

No country can be effective in pursuing its
national agenda without engaging with others. That
is particularly obvious in the case of countries with
modest capacities. The regional and subregional
levels of cooperation provide an effective platform
for pursuing specific common objectives, including
common security goals. The United Nations remains a
critical forum for interregional engagement.

As a member of numerous regional organizations,
CSTO and CIS among them, Armenia benefits strongly
from the institutional strength and effectiveness of the
regional and subregional landscape of cooperation,
including in the fields of political dialogue, security,
human rights, democratic transformation and the
strengthening of the rule of law, trade and economy,
culture and youth. As a member of CSTO, Armenia will
continue to deliver on its commitment to forging stronger
cooperation with the United Nations and to contributing
to international peace and United Nations peacekeeping
capacities.As a troop-contributing country for over 12
years, Armenia has gathered considerable national
experience in its multiple engagements in peacekeeping
operations in various parts of the world. Lately, Armenia
has gained valuable experience in a United Nations-led
operation in Lebanon.

Armenia has been investing its experience in
strengthening its preparedness for peacekeeping within
CSTO. In that context, we welcome the expanding
cooperation of the United Nations with CSTO,
including between their respective secretariats. During
our presidency of CSTO over the past year, we have
attached priority to the expansion of such cooperation
between CSTO and the United Nations.

In our national context, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts on the basis of the norms and principles of
international law, without exception, are of specific
significance given the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the internationally supported format of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Minsk Group co-chairmanship. This format
is by far the most effective for our particular case on
several accounts, not least due to its capacity to sustain
focus on a compromise solution to defuse tensions and
prevent escalation. Armenia welcomes the unwavering
and continued support of the United Nations system
and the Secretary-General for the established format of
negotiations and for the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs.

In April, Azerbaijan unleashed a military
aggression against Nagorno Karabakh, thereby
violating the trilateral agreements of 1994 and 1995 on a
ceasefire, signed by Azerbaijan, Nagorno Karabakh and
Armenia. The ceasefire agreements do not have time
limitations; however, Azerbaijan undertook efforts,
including within the United Nations, to challenge the
validity of the agreements. From the very beginning of
the Azerbaijani aggression, the civilian infrastructure
and civilian population - including children and the
elderly - were intentional targets of indiscriminate
violence. Among the earliest civilian victims were a
l2-year-old boy and a 92-year-old woman, who were
brutally tortured, mutilated and killed. Three captive
soldiers of the Nagorno Karabakh defence forces were
beheaded by Azerbaijan armed forces in the style of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. This barbarity
was subsequently celebrated in the towns and Villages
of Azerbaijan and publicized on its social networks.

It is imperative to preclude dangerous attempts to
seek a military solution to the issue. The implementation
of the confidence-building measures proposed by the
OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs, including the proposals
agreed at the Vienna and Saint Petersburg summits by
the Presidents earlier this year, will certainly serve that
purpose. It is critical for the international community to
urge Azerbaijan to strictly commit to the 1994 and 1995
trilateral agreements. Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh
have accepted and remain wholly committed to the
early implementation of the latest proposals. To date,
Azerbaijan continues to reject the implementation of the
agreed proposals. We reiterate our firm position that a
clear and unequivocal commitment to the ceasefire and
confidence-building measures on the part of the parties
concerned is the only way to create an environment
conducive to the peace process.

In conclusion, Armenia believes in the viability
and efficiency of both the United Nations and regional
arrangements and mechanisms in enhancing trust,
confidence-building and dialogue among nations.
Regional and subregional organizations have an essential
role to play. They often have a better understanding of
local circumstances, tailored approaches and effective
tools, as well their own resources and financing.
Cooperation and dialogue among States from the
subregional to the regional and global levels have been
and remain the modus operandi for the sustainability of
peace, security and cooperation.

