Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and Executive
Director Yury Fedotov for their presentations. As this
is the first time that Special Representative Haysom
has briefed the Council since his appointment, I would
like to extend him a warm welcome. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.

Today, Afghanistan stands on the threshold of the
transformation decade, looking towards a self-reliant
and sustainable future. We have seen some positive
signals, including the aspirations of the Afghan people
who cast their votes in the elections, defying the threat
of terrorism in the first-ever democratic transfer of
power in Afghanistan's history.

Still, there are numerous challenges ahead. Afghan-
led efforts, supported by international assistance,
are essential to bringing about a more peaceful and
prosperous country. In that vein, we recognize the
firm determination of the newly launched Afghan
Government to improve governance, democratic
institutions and the rule of law. In particular, we
recognize its recent reform agenda, namely, realizing
self-reliance, commitment to reforms and renewed
partnership, as a comprehensive framework in which
to tackle the challenges facing Afghanistan. We ask
the Afghan Government to make strenuous efforts to
implement this reform agenda. While we stress the
importance of the inclusiveness and representativeness
of the new National Unity Government, the formation
of its Cabinet should be expedited.

With regard to the security situation, we are deeply
concerned about ongoing violent terrorist activity by
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups. We
condemn in the strongest terms the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including those committed with
improvised explosive devices. Given the assumption
by the Afghan National Security Forces of full security
responsibility at the end of this year, continuous
international support to strengthen its capabilities is
critical in the struggle against such terrorist activities.
In that regard, we appreciate the sustained support
of NATO and contributing partners to Afghanistan
beyond 2014, including through a Resolute Support
Mission to train, advise and assist Afghan forces. We
also welcome the Council's adoption of resolution 2189
(2014) in that connection.

Afghanistan's illicit economy, which depends
mainly on increasing opium cultivation and production,
is another source of concern. As indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/876), opium
production, which accounts for roughly four per cent
of the country's gross domestic product, is linked to
insecurity, as 89 per cent of opium cultivation was
concentrated in the most insecure provinces. Noting
the strong connection between drug trafficking and
terrorist activities carried out by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other extremist groups, strengthened and resolute
efforts by the Afghan Government, supported by
international and regional partners, are essential to
fight this scourge.

The London Conference on Afghanistan, held early
in December, which my Foreign Minister attended,
served as an important opportunity to reaffirm the
international community's commitments to support
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade. The
Republic of Korea has played its part in the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan through its provincial
reconstruction team in Karwan from July 2010 to June
2014 and its financial contribution of $500 million over
the past five years. We will continue to honour our
commitment by disbursing $100 million up to 2016 for
the socioeconomic development of Afghanistan, and
$100 million through a separate multilateral basket for
the Afghan National Security Forces from 2015 to 2016.

The stability of Afghanistan is in the shared
interests of the international community. We support
the stability and development of Afghanistan based on
a National Unity Government characterized by genuine
partnerships and inclusiveness. We look forward to
the key role played by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the sustained commitment
of the international community for this purpose.

