Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are fully confident that, under your able leadership and
vast experience, the work of the Council will be led to
a successful conclusion. Allow me also to extend my
delegation's appreciation to you for convening this
urgent meeting to consider the continuing grave
situation in Palestine.

Indonesia deeply regrets that the situation in the
occupied territories has continued to deteriorate
following repeated Israeli aggression, incursions and
the accompanying widespread arrests, assassinations
and destruction. We are particularly concerned at the
recent attack and reoccupation of the headquarters of
the President of the Palestinian Authority in the city of
Ramallah, which began on 19 September 2002. Indeed,
the policy of the use of military might not only
endangers the personal safety and security of President
Arafat; it could also ignite further violence and hence
threaten the very future of the peace process. We
therefore once again urge Israel to comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions calling on it to
immediately withdraw from Palestinian towns and
cities and to stop its aggression. In that regard,
Indonesia strongly demands an immediate end to the
siege of Ramallah.

My delegation is also concerned that the
reoccupation of Palestinian cities and the continuing
policies of tightened closures, curfews and severe
restrictions on the freedom of movement of persons
and goods by Israel have further compounded the dire
humanitarian crisis, which, as noted in the report of the
Personal Humanitarian Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Catherine Bertini, might spiral out of
control within months. All those acts, which violate the
most basic provisions of international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, must be terminated. Unless
there is a reversal, the current situation will lead only
to further distrust, misery and, probably, even more
violence.

It is the responsibility of the international
community, and especially the Security Council, to
continue the search for the road to peace in the Middle
East. To that end, my Government reiterates that the
prospect of peace rests on full implementation of all
relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
recognition of the principle of land for peace, which
would lead to the realization of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure and
internationally recognized boundaries.

Needless to say, the situation before the
Palestinian people and the Security Council is very
serious, and we call on the Council to take appropriate
and urgent action to avert further deterioration.

