Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European

 

Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and
Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.

As the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) comes to an end, the European Union
would like to put on record its satisfaction and appreciation
at the important role played by the mission, supported by
the Contact Group of guarantor States and international
organizations, in assisting the parties in the implementation
of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace
and National Accord in TaJikistan.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Tajikistan and welcome his positive assessment
of the role played by the United Nations. In particular, we
take note of his analysis of the factors that contributed to
the overall success of the mission, namely the early
engagement of the United Nations, the sustained political
support of the Security Council, cooperation with other
organizations, effective crisis management and, above all,
the clear will of the parties to end the conflict and pursue
a political solution. These are important lessons for the
United Nations, which are applicable beyond Tajikistan.

A key factor in the peace process in Tajikistan has
been the reintegration of the opposition into the political
life of Tajikistan: a sine qua non for national reconciliation
and the strengthening of the democratic process. This is
why the European Union was particularly disturbed by the
undemocratic events and procedures that took place in
connection with the presidential elections in November
1999 and by the seriously flawed recent parliamentary
elections. The ultimate success of the peace process will
depend on national reconciliation and a functioning
democratic society based on the rule of law. The European
Union strongly supports the peace process in Tajikistan and
links the future development of contractual relations
between the European Union and Tajikistan to it.

In the context of the need for the continued support of
the international community in the post-conflict phase in
Tajikistan to sustain and advance the peace process, the
European Union looks forward to the proposals of the
Secretary-General with regard to the possible establishment
there of a United Nations office charged with addressing
institutional, social and economic development in an
integrated manner in order to consolidate peace and
promote democracy. The European Union stresses, in this
regard, the importance of a human rights component.

The European Union would also like to emphasize
its appreciation for the contribution of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to the
peace process in Tajikistan. After the withdrawal of
UNMOT the OSCE mission will remain on the ground
and continue to assist Tajikistan on its path towards
democracy.

The European Union joins the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council in paying tribute to
the men and women who served in UNMOT and thanking
them very sincerely for their selfless efforts, which in
certain cases involved paying the ultimate price: their
lives.

