Mr. Mamabolo: The question from the
representative of the United Kingdom was on the
response of the formed police units to the incident in
Kalma. I want to start by saying that we have three
formed police units stationed in Kalma. The units are
from Pakistan and are supported by Bangladesh and
Burkina Faso. We must first understand the nature of
the conflict. It was really mostly between supporters
of Abdul Wahid and those that are perceived not to be
supporting Abdul Wahid. Upon receiving information,
we immediately arrived there and gave first aid to the
injured, transferred the six injured to a hospital and
collected the bodies. We engaged with the community
leaders and made sure to create a buffer zone between
the groups that were fighting. Then began negotiations
by way of mediating between the community leaders of
the two groups to defuse the situation.

The other question, put forth by the representative
of South Africa, was on whether we are proposing a
revised timetable for the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I wish to say that we are acting in
accordance with resolution 2429 (2018), the term of
which ends in June 2019. Resolution 2429 (2018) is
intended to follow the exit strategy of UNAMID, which
says that by June 2020 UNAMID should be out of
Darfur. If we look at June 2019, we are just a couple
of months from that final destination and our plans
have already been made. We are therefore acting in
accordance with the decisions that have been taken and
agreed upon by the Security Council in terms of our
exit strategy.

The Security Council also took a decision that
we should have a strategic review to inform the new
mandate that is to follow, beginning July 2019 until June
2020. The Security Council will have the opportunity
in the near future to review that report. Experts did
come, but the strategic assessment team came before
we had what we are now experiencing in terms of
disturbances, which have created quite a lot of concern.
In my statement, I indicated that we cannot pretend that
nothing has happened on the ground, and we are also
concerned about that.

The fact is that we have actually given two weeks
for the handover of the camps that were meant to be
handed over, some of which we would have handed over
already by now. We decided that with the dissolution of
the State structure that it was not possible to go ahead
with the handover of those sectors, and that perhaps we
ought to give a period of two weeks to see what happens.
We have in the meantime engaged with the authorities
and we will have a meeting so as to understand who
our interlocutors from the Government side will be so
that we can continue. We have been informed that as of
tomorrow, it will be possible to have this meeting with
a view, hopefully, to being able to comply with the June
2019 time line of resolution 2429 (2018).
In terms of going forward from July, that decision
will fall to the Security Council to make when it
analyses the report ofthe strategic assessment, which I
am sure it will have soon. I am sure that the assessment
will take everything into account, including the current

situation that we are witnessing in the Sudan.

