Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Zerrougui for her very
clear briefing. I would also like to thank the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) for all
the important work it does in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I further thank the Ambassador of Kuwait
for her briefing. Sanctions remain an important tool
that the Council has at its disposal to address threats
to international peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would particularly like to thank Ms. Bihamba
for her really clear and incisive briefing to the Council
and in particular for the very brave work that her
organization does on the ground to support and advocate
for women. I thought she made some really interesting
and clear recommendations at the end of her speech,
and I would like to try to respond to each of those five
recommendations in what I say today.

First, she spoke about the need for the Council to ask
the Government to respect human rights. We strongly
agree with her and we share the concerns that she has
expressed and that Special Representative Zerrougui
has expressed about human rights violations and abuses
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In particular with regard to the increase in sexual
exploitation and abuse, we call for all those allegations
to be swiftly investigated and for those responsible for
them to be brought swiftly to justice.

The Secretary-General also made a recommendation
about the need for all parties to respect the 31 December
2016 political agreement and the rule of law. Again,
we strongly agree with that. We welcome the limited

progress so far and the steps taken by the Government
towards organizing the elections, especially when
it comes to voter registration. At the same time, we
continue to be very concerned over the lack of progress
in the implementation of the confidence-building
measures in the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
We call on all parties to remain committed to the
agreement, including by respecting fundamental rights
and the electoral timeline, not just with words but also
with actions.

In two of the recommendations, the Secretary-
General calls on us, as the Council, to do more to
promote women's participation in politics and to
materially support the organizations that do so. Again,
we very much agree with those. As the Council, we all
made clear when we adopted resolution 1325 (2000)
that women needed to be encouraged to meaningfully
participate in all stages of the peace process, and that
youth also needed to be engaged. We are therefore very
concerned to hear of the increase in sexual violence.
I am concerned by the points raised about the impact
of the electoral law on women's participation and also
by the point made by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui about the shortage of
women candidates that have so far been declared. We
are very concerned by all ofthat, and we all need to work
together to do more to encourage women's participation.

Finally, the Secretary-General makes some very
specific points about the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We take those
concerns very seriously. I am not able to give a detailed
response to each of them right now, but we will
certainly take away those points and reflect on them.
We welcome the important role that MONUSCO is
playing in helping to prepare for the elections so far;
however, as with other speakers, we note that challenges
remain and we continue to call for cooperation between
the Independent National Electoral Commission
and MONUSCO as we prepare for those elections.
I thank the Secretary-General for those five very
clear recommendations.

In conclusion, we believe that it is vital that the
Council remain closely engaged on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the coming months in the
run-up to the elections. Like Ethiopia, we support plans
for a Council visit later this year. We must continue to
urge all parties to abide by the Constitution, to respect
the 31 December agreement and to take concrete steps
on the ground to create an environment for free and
fair elections.

