Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Egyptian presidency for organizing today's meeting
and Assistant Secretary- General Zerihoun for his
thorough briefing.

For more than 50 years now, the prohibitions and
restrictions imposed by the Security Council have been
recognized as the most powerful non-military response
to threats to global peace and security that we have.
We share the view that sanctions continue to be an
important tool for countering terrorism, preventing
conflicts, consolidating peace agreements, protecting
civilians and curbing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Furthermore, the current practice
of introducing more precise and targeted sanctions is
aimed at striking a balance between the desired result
and any possible unintended or adverse socioeconomic
and humanitarian consequences in specific States or
third States. Significant progress has also been made
in designing and monitoring the implementation of
sanctions regimes since April 2000, when the Council's
Informal Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions
was first established. Another successful step has been
the establishment of expert panels to assist the relevant
Security Council Committees, while the introduction
of an entirely new institution - the Office of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities - is a
notable leap forward in ensuring that sanctions meet
human rights standards.

The processes of designing, implementing,
evaluating and following up sanctions, as well as of the
relevant Committees" working methods, monitoring
and enforcement, are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. At the same time, we have to recognize
that the Council's sustained attention is needed not
only for developments in the design of sanctions and
calibration of their nature and scope, but also for the
issue of enhancing their effectiveness and efficiency.
That clearly depends largely on Member States' prompt,
comprehensive implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We see two major challenges in making United
Nations sanctions more efficient. The first - and
here we echo the comments of the delegation of the
United Kingdom - is a lack of political will, which
prevents the Council from responding promptly and
decisively to grave violations of international law. The
second is outright obstruction or evasion of existing
sanctions. While the lack of political will and abuses
of the right to the veto should be the subject of a
separate debate, I would like to recall that paragraph
5 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations
states, among other things, that Member States shall
refrain from giving assistance to any State against
which the United Nations is taking preventive or
enforcement action. In that respect, Security Council
should explore ways to further strengthen the roles of
the respective Committees in identifying possible cases
of non-compliance and determining the appropriate
course of action with regard to those who violate the
relevant international obligations.

Outreach activities, including awareness-raising
and dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations, as well as the effective means of
enforcing sanctions, are seen as important elements in
curbing, eliminating and further preventing sanctions'
evasion. At the same time, assistance to States in
implementing United Nations sanctions is an area in
which, in our view, more can and should be done to
increase the effect of decisions made by the Council.

Let me also stress in that connection the important
role played by various international organizations in
implementing sanction regimes to respond to breaches
of peace and other grave violations of international
law. The use of additional measures and their own
specific instruments for better targeting international
wrongdoing is an essential part of the international
toolbox in that area. The efforts of the European Union
should be seen as an example ofa consistent and coherent
sanctions policy firmly rooted in international law.

Ukraine is among those countries that fully
recognize the importance of undertaking continuous
efforts, including periodic reviews, to further improve
the proper design, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up of sanctions regimes and to increase the
effectiveness of targeted sanctions. To that end,
we are in favour of further endeavours, including
relevant reports of the Secretary-General, aimed at the
independent review of cross-cutting issues and trends
in the application of sanctions and the best practices
and challenges relating to their implementation, as well
as preparing recommendations, including with regard
to practical options to better support Member States'
capacities in that area.

I should like to conclude by citing Jan Eliasson:

"[S]anctions can work - when they are designed
and implemented well and when they enjoy the
support of Member States on and outside the
Security Council." (DSG/SM/77 7)

