Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the members of the Human Security Network,
a cross-regional network composed of Austria, Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer State, and my own country, Slovenia.

I should like to start by thanking Uruguay for
convening this important debate today. I would also
like to express our appreciation to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, Ms. Beerli and Mr. Ugarte for their
comprehensive briefings.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is of
the utmost importance to the members of the Human
Security Network. Resolution 2286 (2016), which was
adopted one year ago, specifically recognized the
particular challenges faced by humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties and by medical personnel.
It was encouraging to see the wide support for the
resolution, which reaffirms, inter alia, the need for all
parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as applicable, and to facilitate the
activities of humanitarian organizations, which adhere
to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, including medical assistance.

We continue to note with great concern that,
according to the latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/414), attacks on medical personnel and on
humanitarian personnel engaged in performing medical
duties, as well as on medical facilities and patients,
continue at an alarming rate. The Human Security
Network strongly condemns all violence, attacks and
threats against wounded and sick humanitarian workers
engaged in medical duties, as well as against medical and
health personnel and facilities, and deplores the long-
term consequences of such attacks for the population
and health-care systems of the countries concerned.
We therefore encourage the parties and mediators to
consider including provisions on the protection of
medical personnel and facilities in the drafting ofpeace
agreements, including in the definition or principles of
ceasefire and in security and monitoring provisions,
where relevant.

The Secretary General's report provides yet another
sobering testimony of grave situations civilians face in
a number of conflict-affected countries. All of those
situations need to be urgently and effectively addressed,
according to the Human Security Network. Focus must
be placed on enhancing protection on the ground. We
see that armed conflicts are increasingly waged in
urban areas. Therefore we must ensure that the civilian
population is adequately protected. However, many
parties have not only shown a blatant disregard for the
principles of distinction, proportionality and necessity
in the conduct of hostility, but have deliberately
targeted civilian infrastructure. We therefore share the

Secretary-General's concern regarding the harm caused
by the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in populated areas and support his call for further
measures to address that issue.

The Human Security Network advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to security. That
includes a focus not only on the protection of civilians
once a conflict situation occurs, but also on conflict
prevention in a broader sense. We therefore share the
Secretary-General's view that, in the long term, the
best way to protect civilians is to address the root
causes of conflicts, build sustainable peace, promote
human rights and rule of law, strengthen governance
and democratic institutions and invest in inclusive and
sustainable development.

Ensuring respect by all parties to a conflict for
international humanitarian and human rights law is
the first necessary step to enhance the protection of
civilians. States must comply with their obligation to
allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded access to
humanitarian relieffor civilians in need and the freedom
of movement of humanitarian personnel. All parties to
every armed conflict bear the responsibility to allow
and facilitate access for the delivery of such assistance.

In addition to enhancing compliance with
international law and strengthening national protection
capacities, we recognize the major role of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the majority of
which are mandated with protection-related tasks,
in the protection of civilians, including in the area of
prevention. In that regard, the Human Security Network
underlines the importance of clear and achievable
mandates with sufficient resources and capabilities to
fulfil the protection mandate.

Accountability is a key element in the protection
of civilians. States must comply with their obligations
under international law to hold accountable
perpetrators of crime committed against civilians.
The Human Security Network stresses the usefulness
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
in investigating and substantiating alleged violations
of international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We also
underscore the crucial role of international courts and
tribunals in ensuring accountability. When States are
unwilling or unable to bring perpetrators to justice,
a referral to the International Criminal Court is a
complementary means to avoid impunity and restore
dignity to survivors of atrocities, their families and
communities. We reiterate the importance of States'
cooperation in that regard.

