Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First,
let me thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Zannier for
their briefings.

The State of Kuwait believes that all States have
the right to adopt an official State language through
their Constitutions. That is one of the most important
elements supporting the existence and identity of the
State. In that regard, the use of languages in Ukraine is
provided for by its Constitution and regulated by law.
Furthermore, article 10 of the Constitution provides
that the official language of the State of Ukraine is
Ukrainian. The State guarantees the development and
use of the Ukrainian language in all aspects of social
life throughout Ukrainian territory. despite the fact
that many provisions of the law entered into force on
16 July 2019.

Since the law provides for a transitional period of
six months to 10 years for the implementation of some
of its provisions. Both the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have provided advice to the Ukrainian authorities on
language issues to ensure a balanced legislation that
unite the diverse Ukrainian society. We hope that the
relevant parties will implement those provisions and
recommendation, which are likely to ease tensions.

On another level, we call on the two sides to show
restraint and undertake all the measures necessary to
de-escalate the situation, diffuse military tension in
the Sea of Azov and commit to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also urge them to
demonstrate the necessary political will to re-commit
to the full implementation of the Minsk agreements
in order to end the conflict and preserve peace and
security in the region. We renew the call for dialogue
as the best peaceful means to resolve disputes and
conflicts no matter how diverse they might be, based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Therefore, we also renew our appeal
to the parties to engage seriously and in good faith in
that dialogue to maintain the security and stability of
the region and pursue a comprehensive and balanced
solution to the issue through dialogue, as provided for
in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, we call for enhanced dialogue between
both parties and at all levels to lend greater momentum
to the settlement of the dispute.

Moreover, we observe with concern the ongoing
unstable situation in eastern Ukraine, now in its fifth
year. The situation has had grave humanitarian and
economic consequences for the daily lives ofthe people
and for the infrastructure. More than 3.5 million out of
a total of 5.2 million people need urgent humanitarian
assistance, in addition to the 1.5 million internally
displaced persons. We therefore urge both parties not
to take any escalatory measures or steps that would
fuel the conflict or obstruct the progress made in the
implementation of Minsk agreements, which represent
the only agreed framework for a settlement of the
dispute within its regional scope.

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
the unity and sovereignty of Ukraine, as well as its
territorial integrity inside its internationally recognized
borders. We call for non-intervention in its internal
affairs and express the hope that all the relevant parties
will work to implement resolution 2202 (2015) and the
Minsk peace agreements, including a full commitment
to its package of measures.

