Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this important meeting to consider the
situation in brotherly Somalia.

We join in the welcome extended by preceding
speakers to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim. We support the statement to
be made by the Permanent Representative of Jordan in
his capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group this
month. That statement will demonstrate the support of
Arab Governments for the Transitional National
Government of Somalia, as stressed by the Arab
Foreign Ministers meeting two days ago in Cairo.

The ongoing situation in Somalia has certainly
not enjoyed any intervention by the Security Council,
which would impose a major security, political,
economic and humanitarian responsibility on us. We
must discharge our mission as members of the Security
Council, which is to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security.

During our debate on the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Somalia, we can assert that
the report covers the various economic, political and
security dimensions of the crisis there. The picture
painted in the report is indeed a bleak one. From a
security perspective, Somalia remains one of the most
dangerous areas in which the United Nations is
involved and active. Yet, the report does not
recommend the sending ofa mission to Somalia.

With respect to peace-building in Somalia, we
support the Secretary-General's assertion of the
importance of ensuring the security of United Nations
personnel. At the same time, we must find some
explanation of why the situation in Somalia has
deteriorated so that we may remedy it. We feel that the
report does not stress this aspect, but such an approach
would help us to find a way to break the vicious cycle
in that country.

We could use the successful lessons learned by
United Nations missions in other African countries
where civil wars and conflicts had been waged.
However, in extremely dangerous security situations,
the United Nations has in some cases been able to send
peace-building missions that have made positive
contributions to ending warfare and building peace in
those countries.

A question therefore arises: Why not do the same
in Somalia? Why do we not send a peace mission
there? The Secretary-General's recommendations in his
report are not, we feel, really adequate for addressing
the situation in Somalia. There is an imperative need to
formulate specific recommendations that would enable
our Organization to provide greater assistance,
including in the demobilization of militia members and
the training of police personnel, as proposed by the
Security Council in its presidential statement of 31
October 2001. This is vitally important if we are to
improve the security situation in Somalia. It would also
enable the Transitional National Government to make
use of the humanitarian resources available to it in the
army and police.

There is also an imperative need for a
comprehensive approach to dealing with the situation
in Somalia, one that will support peace-building and
security, which are keys to development in the country.
Sending a United Nations mission must not be held
hostage to the wishes of a few warlords who are taking
advantage of the current situation and imposing such
great suffering on the people of Somalia. I assume that
this is now what we in the Security Council wish to see
happen.

The Arta peace process, about which the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia spoke during our private
meeting this morning, is a historic opportunity for the
Transitional National Government. The international
community has agreed that the process provided the
best chance to establish lasting peace in Somalia.
However, the Government inherited a war-torn country
that truly needs material resources in order to rebuild
its infrastructure.

One key to success for the Transitional National
Government is to acquire adequate material resources
to address this situation. In that context, we would
emphasize the following points, which we would like
to see reflected in the presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of our meeting or shortly thereafter.

First, the Council would support the Transitional
National Government's efforts to complete the process
of national reconciliation, and would strongly condemn
the warlords, who continue to hamper all peace efforts
and are an obstacle on the road to national
reconciliation - a road that would lead Somalia from
the phase of conflict to that of peace-building.

Secondly, the Council would reaffirm the
principles of the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Somalia and of non-intervention in its
internal affairs, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. This point was not mentioned in the
latest report of the Secretary-General.

Thirdly, the Council would consider setting up a
monitoring and verification mechanism that would
facilitate the work of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), would
ensure strict compliance with the arms embargo
imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter, and would
study any violations of the embargo. Ambassador
Tafrov, Chairman of the sanctions Committee, and the
other Committee members have stressed that the
Committee must work effectively, and we welcome that
sentiment.

Fourthly, a Committee of Friends of Somalia is
envisaged in the report, and we welcome that idea. We
believe that setting up such a Committee should take
into account the need to include international and
regional organizations and States involved in the
Somalia conflict, so that its work can be positive and
constructive and can lead to national reconciliation.
Conflicts among regional, national and international
initiatives would thus be avoided.

Finally, the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular must participate
in a serious process to build peace in Somalia and to
put an end to the conflict in that country, where chaos
and war have prevailed for so many years. That is the
only way to lift Somalia out of the vicious circle
resulting from the country's lack of security and the
fact that it has been largely ignored for the last decade.
Such a process would send the right message to the
Somali people, to subregional and regional
organizations and also to donors. It would help
strengthen the ongoing process of national
reconciliation and thereby help support the efforts of
the Transitional National Government. The League of
Arab States also supports those efforts.

We look forward to the national reconciliation
conference to be held at Nairobi in late April. We hope
that it will be a qualitative turning point that will lead
Somalia and the Transitional National Government,
with the cooperation of neighbouring States, back to
peace. Cooperation between Somalia and its
neighbours would then ensure peace in Somalia and in
neighbouring countries, while respecting the unity and
territorial integrity of the country and its people.

This morning, we heard a bitter complaint from
Somalia over the crisis concerning the Al-Barakaat
bank. I think we must try to find a solution to that
problem, because that is the only bank in Somalia -
the lungs of the economy, so to speak - that could
improve the financial situation in the country. Thus we
must find a solution, especially in the light of the
statement by the Somali Minister for Foreign Affairs
that the brotherly Somali people are a peace-loving
people. I think the question of a solution should be
studied carefully and wisely, to ensure life, well-being
and development for the Somali people. We must
provide assistance, particularly taking into account the
natural disaster of the drought in Somalia and
neighbouring countries.

