Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the current
situation in Kosovo. We thank Mr. Ivica Dacic', Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, for his presence here today and for his briefing.
Likewise, we welcome the briefing made by Mr. Hashim
Thaci.

We welcome the resumption of dialogue at the
highest level between Pristina and Belgrade, which
opens a new space for achieving a more constructive
political interaction. We recognize that the European
Union has been instrumental in this dynamic, helping
to mediate the achievement of an agreement on the
integration of judiciary structures in Kosovo. We
encourage the European Union to continue to exercise
its role as mediator. We urge the parties to develop a
constructive dialogue with the aim of contributing to
stability in the region.

The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has encouraged the authorities
of both sides to work together on issues of common
interest such as illegal migration. While the actions of
Kosovo to stop the smuggling of migrants have made
progress through specific policies, we encourage the
authorities in Pristina to deepen their efforts to fight
criminal groups.

The law on the prohibition of joining armed
conflicts abroad is an important step to address this
phenomenon. Chile appreciates the measures taken
in Kosovo and calls on political and religious leaders
to continue working to combat violent extremism and
terrorism.

Finding solutions to existing conflicts with local
Governments is an issue that contributes to increasing
tensions. It is therefore necessary to create conditions
for Kosovar and Serbian political actors to reach
agreement. We are also concerned about the unresolved
issues regarding property rights, especially those
affecting the non-majority Kosovo Serb population.
We are concerned about cases of illegal reoccupation
of territories which are creating an impediment to the
progress of voluntary returns and intercommunity
relations in Kosovo. Chile appreciates the efforts made
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in that regard.

We highlight the work of UNMIK, especially
with respect to the judiciary, and with specific actions
related to human rights, such as gender equality and
the recognition of people who disappeared during the
conflict in Kosovo. In particular, we note with interest
the study conducted on participation, the role and
position of women in central institutions and political
parties, within the framework of the Kosovo action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Measures intended to increase the representation
of women in decision-making responds to the
mainstreaming and rights-based approach embodied in
the text of the resolution.

It has been amply demonstrated that justice is
important for strengthening peace and for the national
reconciliation process. We highlight the work of
EULEX in transition matters and in consolidating the
rule of law.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of
resolution 1244 (1999) as a guiding instrument to be
applied in the Kosovo region to promote peace and the
stability of its communities.

