The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.

I would like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments.
I would also like to thank him for his tireless efforts
on behalf of the transition in Yemen. I assure him of
Morocco's full and continued support for his efforts to
convince the different parties in Yemen to participate
fully in the comprehensive National Dialogue to be held
in the near future and to find a way out of the complex
sensitivities with the south, particularly in the light
of the grave differences between the parties. I also
commend the achievement, timeliness and success of
the Secretary-General's recent visit to Yemen.

That brotherly country, with the determination
of its people, has been able to avoid war and chaos
beginning with the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the implementation of the plan on which
Yemenis have agreed, in order to create a new situation
in their country - a situation of democracy, liberty and
stability.

Against that backdrop, we applaud His Excellency
President Mansour for his firm commitment to
supporting political dialogue and to promoting
political transition in Yemen, as well as to reforming
the security sector with a view towards realizing the
aspirations of Yemenis toward a peaceful transition and
comprehensive reform in preparation for the holding of
the National Dialogue Conference.

The establishment by the preparatory committee for
the National Dialogue in Yemen of the assigned seats to
the parties that will contribute to the conference augurs
well for all the parties and is an extremely important step
in the right direction. We look forward with optimism
to the beginning of the comprehensive National
Nialogue. We also hope that the latest achievement will
be followed by a declaration on the part of those who
have so far hesitated, particularly among adherents of
Al-Hiraak and among the Houthis, to the effect that
they will participate in the National Dialogue.

We call upon all civil society stakeholders to
take part in that important undertaking, which is the
backbone of the political transition in Yemen, so as
to avoid undermining the political settlement reached
in the particularly delicate transitional phase. The
Government of National Unity should expeditiously set
out a plan for the achievement of transitional justice
and reconciliation in order to foster the environment
necessary to overcome the obstacles at this stage and
to prepare and mobilize for the extremely important
National Dialogue.

We would like to express our serious concern
with regard to the challenges still facing Yemen,
particularly in View of the continued attacks against
officials and Government targets, along with fuel
sources and electrical grids. Those attacks and the
continued violence and tension in some areas, together
with separatist tendencies and the threat of Al-Qaida,
represent extremely great dangers that must be faced.
We therefore call on the international community
to provide further support to Yemen with a view to
establishing peace and stability, which in turn will
support regional stability as well.

The political and economic situation in Yemen
has led to grave social consequences, such as the
spread of poverty and malnutrition among children.
International statistics provide us with extremely
alarming information in that regard. We therefore
call upon the international community in general and
donors in particular to make additional efforts to assist
Yemen and its people to meet the increasing challenges
that face its new leadership.

The changes we have witnessed in Yemen
demonstrate the qualitative improvement and the
sincere effort to establish and protect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Yemen. We look forward
to the completion of all preparations necessary for
launching the National Dialogue Conference, which
is an extremely important opportunity for Yemen
to introduce constitutional reforms and to achieve
democracy and the aspirations of its people for
prosperity, peace and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

