Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I support
the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to thank the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Mexico for taking the initiative to convene
the Security Council to address the issue of Children
and armed conflict. We welcome the Council's sending
of an unmistakable message to parties who continue to
violate the rights of children in armed conflict. If
13
parties to a conflict refuse to take the path of dialogue
and do not implement action plans in spite of the
repeated appeals of the Security Council to do so, we
should not hesitate when considering targeted and
strong sanctions against them.

The mechanism set up in the draft presidential
statement to be adopted today aims at greater
integration of the protection of children in armed
conflict into the work of the sanctions committees. In
this respect, we invite Ms. Coomaraswamy to begin
direct dialogue with the committee experts without
delay.

In the absence of a sanctions committee or when
it would take too long to establish one, the Security
Council can act directly, when necessary, through a
resolution adopted under Chapter VII. In that respect,
the responsiveness of our Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict should be improved. Beyond
implementing sanctions, we agree with the analysis and
recommendations developed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2010/181) to put an end to the heinous
acts referred to therein and to ensure that their
perpetrators are brought to justice. In this respect, we
welcome the actions of the International Criminal
Court, among which the current war crimes trial of
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo is a prime example.

Since its creation five years ago, the Working
Group has focused on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and has achieved results contributing to the
release of tens of thousands of children. However, we
remain in the implementation phase of resolution 1882
(2009), which added rape and other sexual violence, as
well as killing and maiming contrary to international
law, to the criteria for listing parties to conflict on the
Secretary-General's naming-and-shaming list. In our
view, this will require making more resources available
to the Council's monitoring and reporting mechanism
and to the implementation of action plans. It will also
require taking better into account the cross-border
dimension of some conflicts, including but not
exclusively in Africa.

Finally, we believe that it would be desirable to
give increased attention to attacks against educational
facilities, which are increasing throughout the world,
with a View to expanding the criteria for adding parties
to conflict to the Secretary-General's naming-and-
shaming list. We would like to see specific
14
recommendations on this issue in the next report of the
Secretary-General.

The work of our Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict will be marked by some important
developments in the coming months. First, we will
need to resolve the recurring question of its
administrative support. Today, that job is wholly
dependent on the goodwill of the Mexican Mission. We
hope to see proposals from the Secretary-General on
this issue in the coming weeks in order to relieve our
Mexican friends of that duty. Next, the Working Group
will have to undertake a country visit. We would be
pleased for such a mission to take place by the end of
the year.

Finally, the action plans will have to be
implemented in the field. To that end, France will
co-organize with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and its partners in the Steering Committee the
third Ministerial Follow-up Forum to the Paris
Commitments and Paris Principles on 27 September. It
will focus on the financial commitment of the
international community to ensure, inter alia, that
children who are victims of violations benefit from
care and adequate reintegration programmes.

I wish to conclude by affirming that France
supports without reservation the campaign launched by
the Secretary-General aimed at the universal
ratification within two years of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We call on
all States, as you have done, Madam Minister, that
have not yet ratified this instrument to do so as soon as
possible.

