The ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic is presenting challenges in many places around the globe. It clearly shows the need for our continued coordination to tackle climate change, including climate-related security risks. Human insecurity almost never has a single cause but comes from different factors. Climate change is an important factor: it increases instability and existing tensions and poses a real threat to international peace and security. These risks are present. Estonia is not at the centre of climate change disasters. Still, we see the negative effects to our biodiversity, particularly in the agriculture and forestry sectors. In many places around the world, however, the effects go much further. It is clear that the pressure that climate change poses is growing globally. That is why we must take immediate action. The scale of climate-related security risks is underestimated. It is known that climate change intensifies important drivers of conflict and fragility and challenges the stability of States and societies. It is therefore crucial for the Security Council to take a systematic approach to addressing climate-related security risks. First, it is important to improve the United Nations capacity to minimize security risks from climate change. For example, appointing a Special Representative for climate and security would help improve coordination among relevant United Nation entities. Secondly, we need reliable and accurate information and data to better understand the conflict drivers and the implications for stability. We need to improve the collection, monitoring and analysis of the data. Systematic reporting by the Secretary-General to the Security Council on climate-related security risks should be part of such an approach. As it brings about competition over natural resources and energy, it is our key goal to mitigate climate change. We need to invest in green and sustainable technologies. Estonia is moving towards the development of hydrogen and other renewable-energy technologies and innovative solutions. These green solutions are an important part of a stable and peaceful security environment. We invite all countries to cooperate and share best practices with Estonia and other international partners on this matter. Finally, addressing the threats of climate change should be an important part of the Council's work. We need to focus on prevention tools and strategies instead of dealing with the consequences later. It is our common responsibility to minimize climate-related security risks and prevent conflicts. Without relevant action taken by the international community, and particularly by the Security Council, climate change will mean more fragility, less peace and less security.
