Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the Pakistan delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your skilful steering of the Council's work
during this month. Let me also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for his briefing and update on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, which is one of the most pressing and long-
standing issues on the agenda of the Security Council
and the United Nations.

The statements that we have heard in this debate
reaffirm the fundamental interest of the international
community in a comprehensive resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict leading to a just and lasting settlement
of the core issue of Palestine. With regard to the latter,
there is a clear sense that the current state of affairs
remains untenable. The situation of the Palestinian
people remains intolerable. Their legitimate aspirations
for freedom and dignity and an independent and
sovereign State of their own can no longer be held
back. While we have to address the immediate human
rights, social and economic and humanitarian concerns
and needs of the oppressed and besieged Palestinian
people in the occupied territories, we must also create
the conditions for an early resumption of negotiations
and also avoid the risk of renewed conflict and
bloodshed, which have so often affected lives for many
generations.
While little optimism is offered by the political
developments in the region and the continuing grave
situation on the ground, the international consensus
and the call for peace are growing stronger in the new
global political scenario. The priority accorded to this
issue by the United States Administration - particularly
the commitment of President Obama to personally
pursue a peaceful resolution of the conflict and his call
on all sides to live up to their obligations - has been
welcomed by all.

I think there is full recognition of the fact that a
just settlement of the Palestinian question is central to
ending the cycle of suspicion and discord that has
undermined peace and security in the Middle East and
has also strained the relations between neighbours in
this land. The question is how to convert this
international consensus into credible action that will
bring to fruition this arduous search for peace. What
we need is a transformative shift - not only in the
political process, but also in the situation on the
ground, since they remain interdependent.

There is no option but to return to the negotiating
table. The futility of the use of disproportionate force
and unilateral action is beyond doubt. Efforts to create
new facts on the ground that prejudice the outcome of
negotiations should not be recognized; nor should they
be acceptable to the international community. We
should also learn from the half-hearted attempts,
unfulfilled promises and aborted peace processes that
we have so often witnessed in the past. Greater
political will is required to bring the parties together
and help them engage in a sustained negotiation
process - in good faith and without preconditions -
aimed at achieving, within a reasonable time frame, a
comprehensive agreement on all permanent status
issues.

But any progress will be difficult without the full
implementation by the parties of their respective
obligations in support of the peace process. We believe
that the fulfilment of commitments by the parties is in
their own interest and that it should be perceived not as
a sign of weakness, but as a measure of strength and
confidence in the peace efforts.

In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a crucial role in supporting the
efforts for renewed negotiations and their early
successful conclusion. I believe that this is an ideal
opportunity for the Council to ensure respect for and
the implementation of its resolutions and to restore its

own relevance, credibility and legitimacy by giving a
serious push to the resolution of this issue. If there is to
be a comprehensive peace in the region, it is also
essential to make parallel progress on the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon fronts through the conclusion of
peace agreements, particularly those under the Road
Map.

Regrettably, we are now witnessing the contrary.
Some of the essential confidence-building measures are
nowhere in sight. The construction of the illegal
separation wall continues unabated. The suffocating
complex of roadblocks and permits remains in place,
disrupting and adding misery to the everyday lives of
the Palestinian people. Thousands of Palestinians,
including women and children, remain incarcerated in
Israeli prisons. The inhumane blockade continues in
the Gaza Strip, where the people are still struggling to
come to terms with the destruction and tremendous
human suffering recently inflicted as a result of
aggression, for which, unfortunately, there is no
accountability. Israel continues with impunity its
illegal settlement activities in the West Bank, including
in and around East Jerusalem. That is not acceptable.

Given the serious implications of all this for the
peace process, the international community is right in
calling on Israel to freeze all settlement activity,
including natural growth, to dismantle outposts erected
since March 2001 and to refrain from provocative
actions in and around East Jerusalem, including home
demolitions and evictions. Obliging Israel to comply
with its commitments remains a real test of the
international community's seriousness and
commitment vis-a-vis equitable solution.

The root cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
occupation of Arab lands. In its recent statement, the
Quartet rightly underscored that the only viable
solution to this conflict is one that ends the occupation.
That is the ultimate objective that has eluded us here in
the Security Council so far, but it should not be
allowed to escape us any longer. The framework for
peace is there in all the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); in
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace; in the Road Map; and in the Arab
Peace Initiative. All are available to us. The
international consensus and requirement for peace are
also very clearly there on our part. We must all act now
to achieve what has been awaiting us and what,
inarguably, is in the interest of our world and, above
all, in the interest of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Pakistan's full
support for that objective and our strong commitment
to the realization of an independent, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967
borders.

