Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (8/2008/354) and for what he has told us with
regard to the future of the United Nations presence in
Kosovo. I also welcome Mr. Tadie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Sejdiu, President of the
Republic of Kosovo, both of whom we listened to with
great attention.

We are meeting today soon after Kosovo, on
15 June, ended a process that had begun in 1999, with
the entry into force of its constitution and 41 major
laws. We welcome the entry into force of these texts,
which will provide the new State with a legal
framework that is in conformity with European
standards and values and which offers a protective
framework to all communities living in Kosovo,
including the Serb community.

The independence of Kosovo, which came about
last 17 February, is the fruit of a long process. France,
followed by the great majority of its partners in the
European Union, immediately recognized the new
10
State of Kosovo. We are aware of the diverse reactions
that we have seen since the independence of Kosovo on
the part of the international community. However, there
is a new reality here that must be taken into account by
everyone.

Apart from questions of principle with regard to
status, an objective assessment shows that over the four
months since independence the pessimistic scenarios
predicted by some have not come to pass. On the
contrary, what we see is a security situation that is
generally calm and institutions that are working in a
satisfactory manner within a democratic framework.

This positive development of the situation has
been made possible by the international civil and
military presence through its efforts to build Kosovo's
institutions - over the past nine years to be sure -
and through its stabilizing action on the ground during
the crucial period that has just passed.

But what has been achieved is still fragile. The
future of Kosovo and the region faces numerous
uncertainties. In this new environment, it is essential to
maintain an international presence, which will
contribute to building a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. In that regard, the Secretary-General has
shouldered his responsibilities as entrusted to him by
resolution 1244 (1999). He has acted in a spirit of
transparency and dialogue while ensuring that he
consulted all the stakeholders concerned at an early
stage, first and foremost Pristina and Belgrade. I would
especially like to thank him for the care he has taken to
come here today personally to inform the Security
Council about his plans for reconfiguration.

In his approach, the Secretary-General has
demonstrated an irreproachable concern for
impartiality as regards the mandate conferred upon him
by the Security Council. The priority goals he has
set - maintaining stability and security and preserving
the work done by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past nine years - are beyond question.

With regard to implementing the reconfiguration
of UNMIK that he has set out, the Secretary-General
should be able to count on the assistance of the entire
international community. I would like to assure him of
the full support of France. Like all other members of
the Security Council, we are determined to do
everything within our power to ensure that the era that
is dawning for the people of Kosovo will contribute to
08-39202
the irreversible return of peace and stability in the
entire Western Balkans.

UNMIK should therefore continue its mission in
a new context, taking into account the necessary
operational changes that must be made in order for it to
best carry out the functions entrusted to it. It can count
on the full cooperation of the European Union in that
effort, as has just been confirmed by the European
Council. The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo), which is currently being
deployed, is in particular prepared to take on an
increased operational role within the framework
defined by the Secretary-General, in full conformity
with international law and in the context of resolution
1244 (1999).

However, as beneficial as its influence may be,
the international presence can accomplish nothing
without the will of the Serb and Kosovar peoples to
resolve their differences through dialogue and to
preserve the possibility of a common future without
recourse to violence. We are pleased to see that both
the Albanian and Serb populations of Kosovo have not
followed extremists on either side, with the vast
majority continuing their commitment to a peaceful
resolution of the differences between the communities.

Kosovo's population and authorities have shown
a responsible attitude that will contribute to gradually
enabling Kosovo to assume its place in the
international community. Their commitment to the rule
of law, their keenness to build a multi-ethnic State that
respects minorities, their desire to foster friendly links
with their neighbours and their pro-European
commitment are all strong commitments that should of
course be fully implemented. We very much appreciate
the commitment of the President of Kosovo, as
reiterated before the Council today by Mr. Sejdiu, to
continue to cooperate closely with the United Nations
to that end.

In the face of unfortunate developments, the Serb
people could have given in to national passions and
turned in on themselves. To the contrary, they have
shown that they posses the necessary courage and
clear-sightedness by twice, on 3 February and 11 May
2008, manifesting their clear support for democratic
and pro-European forces.

In that regard, allow me once again to welcome
the ongoing commitment of President Tadie, which has
been reiterated numerous times before the Security
Council, to link his country's future to a process of
integration into the European Union. In our view, it is
certain that Serbia will become a member of the
European Union. It is their calling and our hope.

The signing, on 29 April 2008, of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement was the first
step on the road towards Europe. We continue to
believe that Serbia's path towards the European Union,
including candidate status, can be speeded up. France,
which will assume the presidency of the European
Union on 1 July 2008, intends to add significant
momentum to that process by offering Serbia clear
prospects.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
European Union is fully aware of its responsibilities as
it supports resolving the issue of Kosovo and helping
Kosovo to overcome the obstacles in the way of stable
and prosperous future for all the Western Balkans. It is
in that spirit that we have deployed EULEX. It is in
that spirit too that, in the months to come, we shall try
to make progress in building a common future for
Serbs and Kosovars in the context of the European
Union.

