Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): Allow me to express
our warm congratulations and appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for having taken the initiative of organizing
today's open debate on the important issues of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in the context of peacekeeping. My delegation
welcomes today's meeting as another step forward towards
more transparency in the Council's proceedings and also as
a timely effort to build on the previous debate of the
Council on post-conflict peace-building, held last
December.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
essential in breaking the cycle of violence and in building
lasting peace in conflict areas. We believe that these three
elements should be addressed in their entirety and as an
integral part of a continuum of peacekeeping and post-
conflict peace-building activities. Let me highlight the
following points to which my Government attaches
particular importance.

First of all, our recent experience shows that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration cannot
succeed without genuine political cooperation among all the
actors involved, including peacekeepers, international
mediators and parties to the conflict. Disarmament efforts
made by the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM) in 1993 and by the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) in 1996 respectively, are cases in
point. In our view, opposite results in these two examples
were mainly due to differing levels of political commitment
on the part of warring parties. My delegation therefore
considers that any final political settlement to a conflict
should include an agreement on specific measures of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and that
peacekeepers who carry out such measures should be
equipped with the explicit mandate of the Security
Council, supported by adequate resources. In this regard,
we welcome Security Council resolutions 1208 (1998)
and 1209 (1998) adopted last year on African refugee and
arms flow problems. These resolutions reflect the
importance the Security Council attaches to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures in its work. We
hope that the Security Council will continue to pay great
attention to this issue.

Secondly, my delegation believes that appropriate
incentives should be devised to encourage ex-combatants
to disarm and demobilize voluntarily. The nature and type
of the incentive system should vary depending upon
different contexts of conflict situations. Priority should be
given to helping disarmed ex-combatants to help
themselves in the long term through vocational training
and job creation. The international community should also
provide affected communities with the necessary financial
and technical assistance. With this in mind, my
Government contributed $250,000 to programmes for the
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
Angola, when we recently served on the Security Council.
We also support a more active involvement of
international financial institutions in these activities.

In this connection, the international community
should pay more attention to the disturbing situation, as
witnessed in the Great Lakes region of Africa, where
increasing banditry and criminality are being perpetrated
by armed ex-combatants. Many former combatants,
including child soldiers, whom the Secretary-General has
called armies of the losers, are still roaming the area and
often threaten the security and civilian character of
refugee camps in the region. The Security Council should
urgently address this particular problem, as such a
situation poses a potential threat to regional peace and
stability.

Thirdly, my delegation notes with appreciation the
significant achievements in this area made since 1997 by
our colleagues in the group of interested States on
practical disarmament measures. We welcome the
guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and
disarmament recently adopted by the Disarmament
Commission. These guidelines, we hope, will be
extensively applied as a framework for the effective
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities.

 

My delegation steadfastly holds the view that a
regional or subregional approach should be explored to
stem the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
In this connection, we commend the efforts made
respectively by the European Union, through the recent
adoption of its joint action, and by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) through the
declaration of a moratorium on the importation, exportation
and manufacture of light weapons in West Africa. We hope
that similar initiatives can be taken in other regions as well.

Before concluding, my delegation notes with
satisfaction two successful projects in this field conducted
with the assistance of members of the group of interested
States. A workshop held in Guatemala City last November
is one case in point, where the experiences of Guatemala,
El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Colombia in
weapons collection and integration of former combatants
were discussed. We hope that the lessons learned from the
experiences of those countries will be fully shared with
other countries affected by civil strife. Another case in
point is the pilot weapons collection project in the Albanian
district of Gramsh launched last January. The innovative
idea of providing development assistance as a reward for
the voluntary surrender of weapons and ammunition from
the local population deserves further study.

Today's open debate provides us with a valuable
opportunity to increase common awareness of this
important issue. We heard today a number of constructive
suggestions made by both members and non-members of
the Security Council. We hope that they will help the
Council and the United Nations system as a whole to better
address this important issue and to take further action as
necessary.

