Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): I am particularly
delighted and honoured to see you, Sir, preside over
this Security Council meeting. Allow me, therefore, to
pay tribute to you and to Singapore, Thailand's close
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
partner, for guiding the work of the Council this month.

The convening of this meeting could not have
been more timely. With the independence celebrations
in East Timor today, Thailand joins the world
community in welcoming the Democratic Republic of
East Timor as the newest member of the family of
nations. We wish once again to congratulate the people
of East Timor and their first President for their show of
resolve in fulfilling their aspirations.

This momentous event also marks the
culmination of concerted efforts among members of the
international community, the United Nations and the
people and the leadership of East Timor themselves. In
the light of this United Nations success story, I wish to
pay special tribute to the Secretary-General and to the
outstanding leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello in
steering the work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in East
Timor. No less could be said of the tireless efforts and
the determination of all UNTAET personnel, which
were evident in the seamless transition of
responsibilities to the leadership and national
institutions of East Timor. As for Thailand, we take
pride in the role of Thai military personnel as part of
the United Nations Mission in East Timor from the
very beginning - since the inception of the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET), some
two and a half years ago.

It is heartening to learn of the recent successful
donors conference whereby Governments and aid
agencies pledged more than $360 million to support
East Timor's economic development over the next
three years. That commendable gesture should be
complemented by the accelerated disbursement of
commitments. It is also essential that financial
discipline be strictly maintained, with priority placed
on funding East Timor's National Development Plan.
These are challenges that remain in post-independence
East Timor, and they require the support and the
continued engagement of the international community
and the United Nations before the country can become
self-sustaining in its political, economic and cultural
development.

We also welcome the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1410 (2002), establishing a
successor mission to UNTAET - the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) - and
stand ready to offer our cooperation to the Mission.
The maintenance of law and order, especially the
development of the East Timor Police Service, is
undoubtedly a main priority. Equally important
however, is the coordinating role that UNMISET must
play in consolidating the various assistance
programmes with other United Nations specialized
agencies, donor countries and international financial
institutions in order to create an enabling environment
whereby East Timor, over time, can participate in the
regional and the global economy on an equal footing.

I was pleased to hear what the Secretary-General
said in Dili yesterday. "The United Nations will stay",
he said, adding, "Your friends around the world will
continue to help". Heeding the Secretary-General's
statement that the international community must ensure
that the investment it has made in East Timor does not
go to waste, Thailand, for its part, will continue to
render support through its contribution of personnel in
UNMISET and the provision of appropriate technical
assistance on a bilateral basis or through tripartite
arrangements. Bearing that in mind, Thailand will lend
its full support to UNMISET, which has a distinct role
in preparing East Timor for the responsibilities and
obligations of statehood.

It remains for me to announce that Thailand today
established diplomatic relations with East Timor, which
will be followed by the exchange of diplomatic
representatives in due course. We welcome East
Timor's decision to seek observer status in the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We also eagerly await the day when we welcome East
Timor as a member of the United Nations.

