Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First of all, let me
join my colleagues in thanking both Mr. Petritsch and
Mr. Klein for their presentations. I am truly sorry that I
missed Mr. Klein's presentation. I had the good fortune
of listening to him speak at a seminar in Washington
DC. a few weeks ago where he was really sparkling,
and I am sure that he was equally sparkling here.

Before we get into substance, I would like to raise
a small point of procedure. I was wondering whether
we could try, just as we are trying to do in the informal
consultations, to have an understanding that, when we
are to have briefings on various subjects, it would be
helpful if the briefer could circulate a fact sheet, giving
us the main factual points, and then perhaps the
briefing could concentrate on the qualitative aspects,
instead of the quantitative aspects of the briefing.

Members may recall that I suggested this view
last week in the informal consultations. Since our time
is unfortunately the most precious commodity we have,
we can then concentrate on the big-picture issues and
not necessarily on the small details. But perhaps, since
the Council is going to convene the informal working
group on procedures, we can deal with that too.
The question that came to my mind as I was
listening to Mr. Petritsch was: In what direction exactly
are we going? Here I noted the remark made by
Ambassador Kolby. He obviously understood the
briefing better than I did. He said that the progress is
incremental and not fundamental. I think the questions
we perhaps should ask ourselves are: Why is the
progress incremental and not fundamental, and are we
going to have a situation where every six months or
every three months, when we come back to this issue,
we will continue to see incremental progress only. If
that is the case, what are the underlying causes for the
slow incremental process of change?

As I was thinking of the question, I happened to
be reading the transcript of what Mr. Petritsch said
when he addressed the Council in March this year. I
want to read just one paragraph of what he said:

"When it comes to the issue of ownership, it
was very helpful when the representative of
China pointed out that there is a certain tendency
towards dependency. Early on, I called this the
'dependency syndrome', which we must be aware
of: the local authorities depend too much on the
international community. That was the reason
why I put forward the concept of ownership,
which is basically building awareness. This is a
process; it will not happen overnight. Indeed, it is
not happening overnight. But the new
Government has, I believe, moved decisively
closer to embracing my idea of ownership."
(S/PV4303, page 26)

This is a verbatim transcript of what he said.

If that is the case, if the ownership is indeed
being taken over by the participants in the peace
process, can we then expect to see a faster pace of
change, faster progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so
that Ambassador Kolby will not have to say that our
progress is incremental, not fundamental?

Also, the advantage of speaking late is that most
of the key points have been covered by our colleagues
here. We endorse them. I just have three additional
questions. I apologize, since I was not here all the time,
if some of my colleagues have already posed them.

The first question concerns the state of slow
progress of economic reforms. I understand that the
World Bank has assessed that the growth rate of the
Bosnian economy will decline if the country fails to
implement economic reforms and attract foreign
investment, and indeed, to quote our favourite in-house
think tank, the International Crisis Group - ICG, it
has warned that Bosnia and Herzegovina must press on
with its transition to a market economy and urgently
create a business-friendly environment to attract more
foreign investors. The ICG also criticized the
international community for being unbalanced in its
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina by focusing on
institution-building and not doing enough in the
necessary microeconomic reforms. Here I wonder if
Mr. Petritsch has any comments on this question.

The second question relates to the issue of
refugee return. Refugee return is, of course, in some
ways related to the overall process. It is, in some ways,
a litmus test of how everything is going. I gather that,
based on the number of refugee returns so far, this
year's total returns will be more than last year's. This
is a positive development. But there also continue to be
problems. I am not sure whether other colleagues have
raised this question, but if Mr. Petritsch could comment
that might also be helpful.

The third and final question, which is in a sense
the big question concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina, is
about the overall trend with regard to multi-ethnic
harmony, and that ultimately, of course, is the
determinant of how Bosnia and Herzegovina will
evolve. It has been reported that many Bosnian
Muslims welcomed the extradition of Slobodan
Milosevic to The Hague. They saw that as a positive
development. But we gather that they will not be fully
satisfied until the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan
Karadzic', and his military commander, Ratko Mladie,
are also handed over to The Hague. I am not sure what
is happening on that front.

On the other hand, I gather that it has been
reported that the Bosnian Serb Ministry of the Interior
has filed criminal charges against nearly 3,000
Muslims and Croats suspected of committing war
crimes against Serbs during the 1992-1995 war. But the
Ministry of the Interior brought no charges against any
Bosnian Serbs. So the question is: What impact are
these developments a Milosevic's extradition and the
charges against the Muslims and Croats - having on
the society and what impact are they having in terms of
multi-ethnic relations, because we all acknowledge that
it is the multi-ethnic dimension that will determine the
final political evolution.

In conclusion, I must say that I join our
colleagues in welcoming the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving closer to integrating itself into
Europe. It is joining the Council of Europe, and we
actually are very confident that as Bosnia and
Herzegovina moves closer to Europe, through a process
of osmosis the positive values that the Council sees in
the rest of Europe will hopefully seep into Bosnia and
Herzegovina and change the nature of the multi-ethnic
fabric that we see in the society there.

