Mr. Annabi: First, I think there were one or two
questions that I missed last time I took the floor. One
related to the efforts made to try to encourage members
of the diaspora to come back. Efforts are being made.
Consideration is being given by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timor Transitional Administration to
perhaps encourage that return by providing subsidies to
those who might be interested in returning, at least for
the short term. One of the problems, of course, is that
the level of salaries that members of the diaspora get is
way above what they would get in East Timor. As the
Council knows, the current salary scale in East Timor
has seven levels, with monthly salaries going from $85
at the first level to $361 at the seventh. That is what
has been deemed, at least for the time being, as
reasonable and sustainable in the current conditions of
the economy of East Timor. So consideration is being
given to the possibility of encouraging members of the
diaspora to return and to contribute to the Transitional
Administration by giving them subsidies - at least for
the short term. But in the long run it will be a difficult
problem, as we have seen in other situations, in
Cambodia and elsewhere.

There was also a question - I think from our
colleague from Colombia on behalf of Brazil - which
related to the kind of assistance that may be required
for the preparation of the elections. Of course, the
participation of international personnel will be financed
by the assessed budget. But there is a request for $3.5
million to finance a United Nations Development
Programme project which is intended to help support
voter education, capacity-building and the work of the
national monitors. Incidentally, the organization of the
whole electoral process is being approached very much
from the capacity-building angle, so that, hopefully, in
the process of the elections, an East Timorese capacity
will be developed so that they can run future elections.
They will be involved and trained as much as possible
so that that capacity is developed.

Can the elections be postponed until all the
refugees are back? I am afraid the answer is no. That is
not the wish of the Timorese, and the electoral
regulation adopted with their support foresees that the
elections will be held on 30 August, unless there are
such delays that it becomes technically impossible by
that date to hold elections that are acceptable by
international standards. But otherwise, they will take
place, hopefully by 30 August.

With regard to the exit strategy after that,
hopefully the Constituent Assembly will meet by 15
December and, hopefully, within 90 days it will agree
on a constitution that brings us to 15 December, which
means that previous talk about a possible independence
date by the end of this year is somewhat overtaken by
these practical considerations. I think our colleagues on
the ground and their Timorese counterparts are looking
more and more at a date for independence that would
be in the first quarter of next year. After that,
obviously, as Ambassador Greenstock has stressed -
and we fully share that assessment - there will be a
need for considerable assistance if we are not to
jeopardize the considerable investment that has been
made by the international community to create a
sustainable Timorese administration.

I wish to make a clarification on a point made by
Ambassador Mahbubani. Mr. Ramos-Horta is not the
Chairman of the National Council. He has been
appointed by Sergio Vieira de Mello as a member of
the National Council to replace Xanana Gusmao. The
election of the Chairman belongs to the National
Council and that election is expected to take place
either this week or next.

The economic situation and the level of
unemployment obviously remain a concern. I think that
the level of unemployment is still around 80 per cent.
The economic situation is compounded to some extent
by the fact that a lot of people have left the rural areas
and districts to gather in Dili or in other cities, which
exacerbates the difficulties. East Timor is traditionally
very much a rural territory and the Asian Development
Bank, with the support of Mari Alkatari, the Minister
for Economic Affairs in the Cabinet, has a project to
encourage return to the rural areas by farmers so that
they can take up farming activities again.

The World Bank is also pursuing a number of
projects. The level of actual disbursement by the World
Bank has reached $30 million and a number of other
projects, which I do not have at my fingertips right
now, are coming on-stream. Efforts will continue to be
made, but this is going to be a challenge in the medium
and long term. Let us remember that everything was
destroyed and we are starting from an extremely weak
base. Efforts by the international community to provide
economic and financial assistance to East Timor will
need to continue well beyond independence, even if
there are prospects after 2004 for revenues from the
resources in the Timor Gap.

Since I am on the Timor Gap, I wish to confirm
that negotiations are indeed taking place right now.
Once we have a report on the outcome of those
discussions, we will share it with the Security Council.

On the planning for post-independence, as I
indicated, a working group has been established by
Sergio Vieira de Mello on the ground that is looking in
great detail, with the participation of other United
Nations agencies and the financial institutions, at the
level of assistance that will be required to the
administration after independence. Our colleagues in
the military and police component are also looking at
what will be required as part of this exercise on the
ground. We here, as I said, are looking at the
establishment of an integrated mission task force. We
need to identify the right people for that and we will
devise a system to enable our team here and the team
that is working on the ground to interact. In fact,
Sergio Vieira de Mello has requested us to try and send
some planners or some of the members of that task
force so that they can provide assistance to the work
that is taking place on the ground.

The detailed planning can take place only on the
ground, but what we see as an important role for the
integrated task force here is the discussion of what we
might call the "macro picture" - in other words, who
will do what after independence and to what extent the
other agencies of the system and the international
financial institutions can pick up some of the activities,
even if some of them are already telling us that, when it
comes to providing the actual line managers who
would continue to be required in the Timorese
administration, they may have difficulties in that area,
since they rely on voluntary contributions that, for
some, are not forthcoming, at least at this point.

