Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Following the
adoption of resolution 2042 (2012), a week ago, South
Africa welcomes the acceptance by the Syrian
Government of the advance team of the observer
mission and its rapid deployment on the ground. We are
pleased to note from the letter of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/238) that, despite some challenges, the advance
team has enjoyed freedom of movement and has not
observed major military concentrations or conflict.

We welcome the news that the advance team has
been able to visit key hotspots of the conflict, including
Homs, and that it has observed calm and an end to
major hostilities. The deployment of the advance team
has already proved to be a calming influence, as
Violence has decreased with its presence. The marked
decrease in violence should now be sustained. We
emphasize that there is an urgent need for the violence
to cease and for all parties to comply with all aspects of
the six-point proposal put forward by Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan.
In view of the Secretary-General's statement that
a supervision mission will be important to sustain peace
and a meaningful political process in the country, we
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012) by the Council today, thereby providing for the
expeditious deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We urge all
sides to help assure UNSMIS's effective operation by
facilitating its work and guaranteeing the safety of its
personnel. Its deployment will be important for
ensuring that Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan's six-
point plan is implemented; it will also play a crucial
role in efforts towards the goal of ensuring that all sides
commit to a peaceful dialogue, designed to promote an
all-inclusive negotiation process leading to a political
outcome that responds to the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.

Finally, it is equally important that all members of
the international community give this resolution and the
Annan plan the chance to succeed, and that they uphold
and respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, as well as the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

