Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States voted in favour of resolution 2460 (2019) today
to extend the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for six months, and we
would like to thank the co-penholders, Germany and
Indonesia, for their diligent efforts.

Let us be very clear about our very strong support
for UNAMA. The United States fully supports the
Mission's role in Afghanistan's peace process, electoral
reforms and coordination of international assistance.
We reiterate our steadfast commitment to advancing the
prospects for peace in Afghanistan. That is reflected
through our intense diplomatic engagement, led by our
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Zalmay Khalilzad, to build momentum towards
intra-Afghan dialogue to end the long- standing conflict.
However, we are deeply disappointed that the Council
was not able to come to a consensus on a resolution
renewing the Mission's mandate for a full year. China
held the resolution hostage and insisted on making it
about Chinese national political priorities rather than
the people of Afghanistan. As a result, the Council had
no choice but to accept a short-term technical rollover.

When the Council considers important issues of
international peace and security, such as the situation
in Afghanistan, it cannot allow the national initiatives
of one Member State to derail negotiations. In this
case, the issue was China's demand that the resolution
highlight its Belt and Road Initiative despite its
tenuous ties to Afghanistan and known problems with
corruption, debt distress, environmental damage and a
lack of transparency. We look forward to working with
our fellow Council members in the coming months
on a more complete resolution that would extend
the Mission for a longer period, which I believe the
entire Council agrees that UNAMA and the people of
Afghanistan deserve.

We hope that in subsequent negotiations China
will focus on how best to advance peace and security
in Afghanistan rather than using Security Council
resolutions as a platform for inappropriately promoting
self-serving initiatives.
