Mr. Therriault: I thank all members for their
expressed understanding of the important role of
the United Nations Police and for their respective
contributions either as police-contributing countries or
as donors in support of the efforts that we are effecting
in the field.

(spoke in French)

With regard to cooperation between the Haitian
National Police and the United Nations Police
(UNPOL), I must reassure Council members that the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
has evolved in a framework of assistance in which
UNPOL is present in the 10 departments of Haiti and
co-located with the headquarters of each department.
Thus, in undertaking more targeted recruiting of senior
officers of each contributing country, we are able to
provide support in such a way as to maximize trust
and support, to the extent that we have been able to
transfer our assistance to Haitian mentors who will help
to develop the police to that level. This is taking place
in the context of the cadre support programme.

With respect to professionalization and the
transition, I can say that even before the earthquake in
Haiti, the Haitian National Police were at a very high
level of preparedness. After the earthquake, which
did not undermine their spirit or their willingness
to learn, we were able to pursue their development.
Today, following the completion of two five-year
development plans and the high-level review of those
plans, we are confident that, in the light of the 2017-
2021 development plan and the vision for the future,
the Haitian National Police is ready for the transition,
even though it will continue to need a certain amount
of support, as do a number of police forces throughout
the world that benefit from bilateral assistance and the
help of other national police organizations in support of
their ongoing development.

One remarkable milestone was reaching the
threshold of 10 per cent women in the ranks of the
Haitian National Police. With the recruitment we have
undertaken for the coming promotion exercise, which
should begin before the end ofthe year, we will reach the
11 per cent mark of women within the Haitian National
Police by this time next year. We are therefore riding a
rising curve, and I am confident that we will achieve
the goals we have set for ourselves with respect to the
integration of women in the Haitian National Police.
The most outstsanding achievement is the fact that
we have developed a general inspection system for the
Haitian National Police, which will ultimately help to
ensure that a measure of control remains after we leave.
This example of UNPOL assistance to the Haitian
National Police has been taken up by the judiciary.
Perhaps the best example of the influence we have had
is that the judiciary is now considering a long-term
development plan for the judicial system and a robust
general inspection mechanism within the judiciary so
as to ensure the accountability of the system and those
who come before it. That, to me, is of great importance,
as is the legacy we will leave to the country's transition.

To conclude, I invite the donors and the troop-
contributing countries to continue to help and support
the Haitian National Police as they transition to a new
form of assistance that will ultimately no longer involve
a United Nations peace mission.

