Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for their
statements. I also align myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

I congratulate the Afghan authorities on assuming
the responsibility for security in the country on 18 June.
That was an important step forward and demonstrated
that Afghanistan is on the path to reassuming full
sovereignty. The Afghan National Security Forces are
now able independently to defend the entire Afghan
population against attacks by armed terrorist groups.
The international coalition will now play only a support
role in those efforts.

Only a genuine, inclusive inter-Afghan political
process will guarantee the emergence of a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan. France stands ready to support
that process, as it has in the past, including through
using levers such as the sanctions regime of the Security
Council. The dialogue must be led by Afghans, in
line with principles they themselves have defined and
endorsed by the international community in Bonn on
5 December 2011, and by the Security Council. These
principles include renouncing violence, breaking ties
with international terrorism, and upholding the Afghan
Constitution, particularly in terms of women's rights.

In that context, my delegation has taken note of the
public announcement recently made concerning the
official opening of an office representing the Taliban,
in Doha. We hope that the office will contribute to
establishing inter-Afghan political dialogue, which
would promote progress in establishing peace in the
country.

Nevertheless, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l3/350) notes the worrisome increase in civilian
victims, particularly children, which is obviously
unacceptable. Attacks on humanitarian workers,
including from the International Committee of the
Red Cross, have also increased. The report also recalls
that the Taliban has been responsible for the majority
of civilian casualties, which demonstrates that group's
lack of concern for human life.

The friendship between France and Afghanistan is
deeply rooted in a shared past, as we celebrated last
year 90 years of diplomatic ties. Since our armed forces
withdrew from Afghanistan late last year, a new step
forward has been taken in our bilateral relations, based
on strengthened civilian and military cooperation
under the framework of our friendship and cooperation
treaty dealing with the allied forces and the civilians.
Our aid will reach nearly €300 million in 2012-2016,
representing a 50 per cent increase in our assistance
envelope, in order to assist the country in moving from
a war economy to one of peace.

The international community, having been offered
a series of guarantees, has committed to continuing
its support to Afghanistan during the transformation
decade. The presidential elections of 5 April 2014 and
the legislative elections of 2015 will demonstrate, in that
context, a decisive step forward in Afghan democracy
and long-term support for Afghanistan, in line with the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

We call on the Afghan authorities to convene
credible, inclusive and transparent elections and to
accelerate the adoption of an appropriate legislative
framework to define dynamic anti-corruption measures,
and to guarantee the independence of the Independent
Election Commission. Like the Secretary-General, we
call on the authorities to swiftly adopt structural and
electoral legislation and to appoint a consensus-based
individual to head the Commission.

Next year will see the end of the international
community's military commitment, which took the
form of a combat mission created in response to the
attack on the United States of 11 September 2001. We
hope that the year will also be one ofpolitical transition
for Afghanistan and strengthened democracy.

