Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ambassador Osorio for today's briefing and for
his leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

As the Panel of Experts' recent report to the
Committee makes clear, Iran continues to violate the
Council's sanctions, both as a nuclear and conventional
weapons proliferator. The Iranians themselves say as
much. Earlier this month, the head of Iran's Atomic
Energy Organization announced Iran's intention to
increase its capacity to produce 20 per cent enriched
uranium at Qom. This directly contravenes six Security
Council resolutions requiring Iran to suspend
enrichment immediately, and it illustrates the fact that
Iran's illegal enrichment programme is completely
incompatible with its claims to be pursuing a peaceful
programme.

Iran's test of three medium-range ballistic
missiles since October and its launch of the Rassad-l
satellite using ballistic-missile technology are further
clear violations of resolution 1929 (2010).

The June report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) highlighted once again the
failure of Iran to provide the agency with the necessary
access to locations, equipment, documents and
individuals, or to answer questions about its
procurement of nuclear-related items and the possible
military dimensions of the Iranian programme. It
makes clear, as have successive reports of the IAEA,
that Iran has not suspended its enrichment activity and
that the agency is unable to confirm that all nuclear
material is being used for peaceful activities. In short,
the IAEA concluded that Iran has once again failed to
comply with its obligations both to the Agency and to
the Council.

Against that backdrop, the renewal of the
mandate of the 1737 Committee's Panel of Experts was
essential. The Panel plays a key role in promoting the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). We offer
them our strong support and full cooperation in the
11-38541

year ahead. We encourage the Panel to continue
actively investigating Violations and engaging the
wider United Nations membership to promote the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010).

We welcome the Panel's efforts to raise
awareness of the steps that all Member States are
required to take to implement the sanctions and to
foster better collaboration between States. We welcome
the Committee's recent discussions of the Panel of
Experts' report. In particular, we welcome the
agreement that implementation assistance notices will
be drawn up and considered by the Committee in
response to the five main areas of recommendation in
the Panel's report. These will be of great benefit in
raising awareness among Member States of their
responsibilities and of the actions they can take to
prevent further violations.

The Committee should also take forward the
Panel's recommendations by designating those
individuals and entities involved in reported violations.
We look forward to discussing these notices and further
designations in the Committee.

We regret that the Panel's final report has not yet
been published. In refusing publication, some members
of the Council are denying the wider United Nations
membership access to this valuable assessment, which
could assist with the full implementation of sanctions.
The Committee should agree to release the report as a
matter of urgency.

At our last meeting to discuss a 90-day report
(see S/PV.6502), we raised the issue of the interdiction
of Iranian rockets sent to the Taliban in Afghanistan,
another clear violation of Security Council resolutions.
We remain gravely concerned that the Iranian
Government is directly engaged in providing arms to
the insurgency in Afghanistan. We look forward to
receiving the Panel's report on this violation shortly.

We remain committed to engaging with Iran to
address the Council's concerns, but it is clear that Iran
continues to proliferate and continues to pursue a
nuclear-weapons programme. Iran has given us no
good reason to believe that it is willing to engage in
meaningful negotiations on its nuclear programme. For
the dual-track strategy to succeed, rigorous
implementation by States of the measures contained in
resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council's previous
resolutions is essential. We should keep these measures
3
under review to ensure that they remain effective and
up to date.

