Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2015/735). My colleague, Martin
Kobler, hasjust addressed the Council. On this occasion,
as he is about to leave his post as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to express my
utmost appreciation for his contribution to peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. I also express my gratitude for
the support he has given me in carrying out my mission
and his support for MONUSCO.
Since the report submitted to the Security Council
in March (S/2015/173), there has been some progress
in the implementation of the Framework Agreement,
but it remains marked by challenges that have hindered
our efforts to achieve its objectives. The persistence of
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the violence they have perpetrated against
our populations remain one of the greatest challenges to
peace and security in the region. These negative forces
perpetuate tension and foster a climate of distrust in the
region. Undoubtedly, for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is imperative that they be neutralized within
the framework of its efforts aimed at consolidating
State authority throughout the country and ensuring the
safety and security of its citizens and their property.
Their neutralization is also a regional imperative
in order to achieve peace and security in this region
in transition, to eliminate a source of suspicion and
distrust, and to create a more favourable environment
for cooperation, development and regional integration.

In this regard, I would like to commend once again
the operations carried out by the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) against
the armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). However, these
operations would benefit from being strengthened by the
full support of MONUSCO and its Force Intervention
Brigade, in accordance with the relevant decisions of
the Security Council. I take this opportunity, as was
done by the regional oversight mechanism during its
meeting of 29 September, held in New York, to call for
the resumption of joint operations between FARDC
and MONUSCO against all armed groups operating in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in
particular, the FDLR.

The decisive military action against the FDLR
must also be accompanied by determined efforts to
accelerate the repatriation of ex-FDLR combatants who
are in the transit camps in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. During my visit in July to Bahuma transit
camp in Kisangani in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I encouraged the ex-FDLR combatants and their
dependents to accept their repatriation to Rwanda, with
the support of the United Nations and other regional
actors. I also visited the Mutobo demobilization and
reintegration centre in Rwanda where I was able to
see that the structure is ready to accommodate the
ex-FDLR combatants and their dependants.

The issue of repatriation also concerns the former
fighters of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), several
hundred of whom are still in Uganda and Rwanda.
My Office and MONUSCO have encouraged and
neem associated with several initiatives led by the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and aimed at facilitating
the repatriation of former M-23 combatants and
implementation of the provisions of the Nairobi
Declarations, in cooperation with Uganda and Rwanda.
They have not been successful, because the former
M-23 leaders have continued raise concerns about
security and other political issues in order to oppose
repatriation. It is urgent that M-23 ex-combatants be
repatriated to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and all the provisions of the Declarations implemented
in good faith. For my part, I will continue, in
collaboration with the ICGLR and MONUSCO, and in
concert with the group of Special Envoys, to support
current efforts to complete the process and encourage
decisive actions aimed at countering all the negative
forces in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region.

In that context, I would like to commend the
meeting between the Ministers of Defence of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda held
on 23 and 24 September, based on which they agreed
to develop practical ways to eradicate the FDLR and
speed up the repatriation of former M-23 combatants
cantoned in Rwanda and former FDLR combatants
cantoned in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is an important step forward in relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
We should encourage States in the region to initiate
direct contacts and discuss their respective concerns in
order to reduce sources of suspicion and tension and
gradually build mutual trust.

In that spirit, I welcome the arrest of Jamil Mukulu
in Tanzania in April and his subsequent extradition to
Uganda. I also welcome the fact that on 28 September,
after four years of proceedings, FDLR leaders Ignace
Murwanashyaka and Straton Musoni were convicted in
Germany of crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo between 2008 and 2009. I take this opportunity
to encourage States of the region to prosecute the
perpetrators of war crimes and strengthen theirjudicial
cooperation in combating impunity, in accordance with
the relevant ICGLR protocols, whose implementation
we support.

The other major challenge in the region relates to the
electoral process and the risks of tension and political
crises that can result from it. We are still dealing with
the problem of the disputed elections in Burundi,
which were accompanied by serious disturbances
marked by violence and violations of human rights.
We encourage all the parties involved to engage in
inclusive dialogue mediated under the auspices of the
East African Community, which the United Nations
is fully committed to supporting, together with the
African Union and other regional and international
partners. Like many of our partners who are anxious
to preserve this country's stability and democratic
achievements, we call for this inclusive dialogue to be
resumed as soon as possible. We also sincerely hope
that the situation in Burundi can be resolved as quickly
as possible and will not further affect relations between
the States of the region.

In View of the fact that several States of the
region are preparing to hold presidential elections in
2016 and 2017, now is the time to urge all the parties
involved to exercise restraint, emphasize respect for
their constitutional documents and ensure that they use
legal instruments and inclusive dialogue to settle all
election-related issues in the region. We urge them to
do everything possible to consolidate their democratic
gains and maintain stability in their countries and their
region, whose peoples aspire legitimately to peace and
economic and social progress.

During the reporting period, we continued to pay
close attention to the underlying causes of instability
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region, including the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which continues to be a factor in regional
conflicts. My Office has also been working with other
institutions to promote an integrated regional approach
that will enable us to better manage the flow of refugees
and displaced persons and come up with sustainable
solutions to humanitarian crises.

Conscious of the key role that women will have
to play in transforming the region and promoting the
objectives of the Framework Agreement, my Office
continues to support development projects designed to
benefit women in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda within the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions. Those efforts also fall into the
framework of a platform for women that we have
established to work within the ICGLR's institutional
mechanism and women's forum. My Office is also
supporting ICGLR initiatives for young people and
civil society and ensuring that those processes include
a contribution by those groups to the implementation of
the Framework Agreement's objectives and follow-up.

On the economic front, we are preparing for a
conference on private sector investment in the Great
Lakes region, scheduled for 24 and 25 February 2016
in Kinshasa. This exciting and absorbing task has been
entrusted to our Office and the ICGLR secretariat,
together with the host country. We have obtained
the support of other United Nations institutions and
structures, along with that of multilateral and bilateral
partners and representatives of the private sector, to
help us create the right conditions for the conference.

Lastly, regarding the implementation process of
the Framework Agreement, in collaboration with the
African Union we have proposed a plan for reforming
the Agreement's governance mechanism, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and its Technical Support
Committee, designed to strengthen the signatory States'
ownership. The proposals were considered and adopted
at a ministerial retreat held in Nairobi on 10 July and
subsequently endorsed at the sixth High-level Meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held here in
New York on 29 September.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, I note that since its signing in
February 2013, there can be no doubt that the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement has
contributed significantly to stabilizing the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including in
neutralizing the M-23, thanks to the joint operation
of the FARDC and MONUSCO's Force Intervention
Brigade. It would appear, however, that the momentum
sparked by the combined impact of the Framework
Agreement and Security Council resolution 2098 (2013)
is fading. The lack ofprogress in neutralizing the FDLR
and implementing the Nairobi Declarations is probably
one of the reasons for the diminishing interest in the
Framework Agreement process. The challenges related
to the electoral processes in several countries in the
region may also have helped to divert attention from the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework process.

The proposals for reforming and reactivating the
Framework's governance structures that were recently
endorsed by the Regional Oversight Mechanism have
the potential to renew interest in the process. I take
this opportunity to appeal to all the stakeholders
concerned to fully assume their various roles and to
the signatory countries to show greater political will
in implementing the commitments they have made. In
the weeks and months ahead, I will engage with the
signatory countries and guarantors of the Framework
to explore ways and means to increase the momentum
needed to implement this instrument for peace, security
and. cooperation in the region.

