Mr. Tsuji (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important open debate. I am grateful for
the informative briefings by Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo as well as Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani of
EcoPeace Middle East.
Japan continues to support a two-State solution,
where the State of Israel and a future State of
Palestine live side by side in peace. Japan's position
remains unchanged.

We are concerned about the current impasse in the
political process. While there is no easy way towards
Middle East peace, it is important to resume direct
dialogue among the parties to advance the peace
process. In that regard, the continued engagement
by the United States is important, and we hope that
its peace plan, which will be released in the not-too-
distant future, will serve as a constructive basis for
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine.

The conflict should be resolved through
confidence-building and negotiations. We strongly
condemn violence and terrorism against innocent
citizens. The Government of Japan once again urges
the Government of Israel to fully freeze its settlement
activities, including the construction plan approved
by Israel this month, which undermine the viability
of a two-State solution. Unilateral attempts to change
the status quo by force or coercion are not acceptable.
Japan does not recognize the annexation of the Golan
Heights by Israel. That position remains unchanged.
We attach importance to the rule of law. The issue
of unilateral attempts to change the status quo by
force or coercion should be properly addressed by the
international community.

Japan continues to contribute to creating an
environment conducive to the realization of peace by
fostering confidence-building measures among the
parties through unique efforts such as the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity initiative and its flagship project,
the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. We highly appreciate
Israel's continued support for those initiatives.

Let me finish by reiterating Japan's continued
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The Agency is crucial not only for humanitarian
purposes but also for stability in the region. That was
reaffirmed at the ministerial meeting on UNRWA
that I attended earlier this month. This year we have
already contributed approximately $32 million to the
Agency. Japan has also been making a significant effort
to expand UNRWA's donor base by boosting Asian
nations' involvement, including through the framework
of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development. The next
meeting of the Conference at the senior officials level
will be held in the West Bank this summer.

