Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation greatly appreciates the Rwandan
initiative to convene today's open debate. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I have
also listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of the European Union and the African
Union (AU).

United Nations peacekeeping operations, having
been an important tool of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security for
over six decades, have significantly contributed to the
settlement of conflicts and disputes and restoration and
building of peace. In recent years, the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations such as the
AU have increasingly strengthened their cooperation in
peacekeeping under the guidance of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and have yielded positive,
recognizable results in peacekeeping operations in the
Sudan, Darfur, Somalia, Mali, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan. That cooperation is an
important development in terms of international
collective security mechanisms in today's world.
It is also one of the increasingly effective means for
defusing conflicts and maintaining peace and stability
in Africa and in the world at large.

At the same time, we should also recognize that
various kinds of security threats and challenges in
Africa are intertwined and that its security situation is
still very weak. The peacekeeping efforts of regional
organizations, such as the AU, are constrained by their
human, material and financial resources. The United
Nations should further strengthen its cooperation with
regional organizations, such as the AU, in the strategic
planning and deployment of peacekeeping operations
and in their communications and coordination so as to
effectively support African regional organizations in
their efforts to maintain regional peace and security.

I should like to emphasize the following four points.
First, the United Nations and regional organizations
like the AU should be guided by the Charter of the
United Nations in strengthening their peacekeeping
cooperation. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, while the AU and other regional organizations
can also play an active role in using their good offices
to mediate conflicts and in peacekeeping deployment.
The Security Council-mandated peacekeeping
operations deployed by regional organizations should
fully reflect the principles and purposes of the Charter.
Their enforcement actions should abide strictly by their
Security Council mandates and adhere to the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations should strengthen their coordination
so as to fully utilize their respective advantages and
thereby create synergy. Many African issues are very
complicated and require comprehensive solutions.
Regional organizations like the AU, which was
established in Africa and is led by Africans, have unique
regional, historical and cultural advantages in conflict
mediation and peacekeeping. The United Nations and
regional organizations like the AU should explore ways
of building various kinds of practical coordination
and cooperation mechanisms on the basis of equal
treatment and complementarity so as to strengthen
coordination and cooperation in strategic planning,
deployment, logistics management and support for
peacekeeping operations. The efficiency and outcomes
of peacekeeping operations can thereby be raised.

Thirdly, the strengthening of capacity-building in
peacekeeping should be a priority area for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the AU. The United Nations and the international
community should actively respond to the legitimate
demands of regional organizations, such as the AU,
and provide more support to African regional and
subregional organizations in training peacekeepers,
building mechanisms, logistical assistance and resource
management. We should also explore practical modes
of financial and technical cooperation so that we can
play a significant role in mobilizing the international
community in support of AU capacity-building.

Fourthly, we should constantly summarize
our experience and lessons learned and respond
appropriately to the challenges encountered in
peacekeeping transitions from regional organizations
to the United Nations. Since last year, the peacekeeping
operations in Mali and the Central African Republic
have transitioned to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Many challenges have emerged in the
transitioning of operations, communications with
troop-contributing countries, and logistical support. We
hope that the United Nations will heed the opinions and
proposals of regional organizations, such as the AU, on
matters related to transition and respond positively to
Africa's concerns so as to create enabling conditions for
the smooth transition of peacekeeping operations from
African regional organizations to the United Nations.

China highly commends and supports regional
organizations, such as the AU, in their efforts to
play an important role in African peace and security
affairs. China has always made an active contribution
through concrete action in the maintenance of peace
and stability in Africa. China has vigorously supported
and actively participated in peacekeeping operations in
Africa. From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Liberia, from Mali to the Sudan, close to 2,000 Chinese
peacekeepers are involved in seven peacekeeping
operations in Africa.

During his visit to Africa last year, Chinese
President Xi J inping put forward the concept of sincerity,
honesty, kindness and integrity in the development
of our relationship with Africa. In May, Li Keqiang,
Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic
of China, visited AU headquarters, where both parties
signed a joint statement on the further strengthening
of friendly cooperation in peace and security matters.
China attaches great importance to its relationship with
Africa and will actively support regional organizations,
such as the AU, in their efforts to maintain peace and
stability in Africa. China will follow up in depth its
China-Africa Cooperative Partnership for Peace and
Security in an effort to help the continent build its
peacekeeping capacities.

Alongside the international community, China
will play a constructive role in strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the AU, in peacekeeping and in
jointly promoting peace and development in Africa.

