The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Egypt, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, South Africa, Spain,
Tunisia, Turkey and Ukraine, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the decision taken at the
4474th meeting, I invite the representative of Israel to
take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacob
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the decision taken at the 4474th meeting, I invite
the representative of Yemen to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Cappagli (Argentina), Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh),

Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Valdes (Chile), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Sharma
(India), Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic ofIran),
Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq), Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan),

Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain),
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia), Mr. Cengizer (Turkey) and
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
21 February 2002 from the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the decision taken at the
4474th meeting, I invite the Charge d'affaires, a.i., of
the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to take a
seat at the Council table.

This meeting is convened in accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations. In that connection, I wish to recall that,
in my statement as President of the Security Council at
the 4474th meeting held on 21 February 2002, I

S/PVA478

 

indicated that members of the Council would shortly
hold a debate on the basis of the Secretary-General's
statement and propose new initiatives.
In light of the long list of speakers before the
Council, I would appeal to all the speakers to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to make efficient use of the Council's time. I am sure
that I can count on your understanding and
cooperation.

I shall now give the floor to the Charge d'affaires
of the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine.


