Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
with thanking the President for scheduling today's
debate. I would also like to thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/350), and
Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing. At the outset, I wish to
express appreciation to Mr. Kubis for the good work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), lest I get gavelled out by the time I get to
that part of my remarks. In the light of the President's
instructions, we will circulate our statement but I will
still read a few extracts from it.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile, as demonstrated by a number of high-profile
terrorist attacks over the last two months. We condemn
those attacks in the strongest possible terms and convey
our condolences to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan. The sharp increase in the variety,
spread and intensity of attacks by the Taliban and their
backers shows that the Afghan national security forces
continue to require substantial assistance from the
international community in addressing the security and
terrorist challenges faced by Afghanistan. Concerted
action is needed to isolate and root out the syndicate
of terrorism, which includes elements of the Taliban,
Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups. It is therefore important that the
transition plan be based on the ground situation rather
than a predetermined time frame.

The efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan should remain focused on security,
development, governance and regional and international
cooperation, all ofwhich is in alignment with the overall
objectives of the Afghan Government. Those efforts
alone will enable the Afghan Government to eventually
assume full responsibility for and take charge of
Afghanistan's destiny without outside interference.

We welcome the fact that the third ministerial
conference of the Istanbul Process, held in Almaty in
April 2013, renewed the international community's
commitment to those objectives. India was represented
by our External Affairs Minister, Mr. Salman Khurshid,
who endorsed India's support for the implementation
plans. India also fully supports the Heart of Asia
process, which offers an invaluable opportunity to
develop a joint approach on issues of mutual concern
through its pillar of political consultations. The process
also offers us the opportunity to fulfil the promise of
regional cooperation that was identified at Istanbul,
Kabul and Delhi and which was further elaborated
in the deliberations on the implementation plan of
the trade, commerce and investment opportunities
confidence-building measure that India is leading.

Afghanistan's stability and economic development
greatly depend on its neighbours and the region as a
whole. We must expand, rather than hinder, trade,
transit and transport ties, including overland transit
and trade. That is the best way of bringing the regional
dimension into play in a positive manner. Growing
economic interdependence will also help in weaning
disaffected youth away from insurgency and militancy
and in creating a zone of shared prosperity in the
region. We support the wishes of the Government of
Afghanistan to take the lead in that direction.

The holding of presidential and provincial council
elections, currently scheduled for 5 April 2014, will
be an important step forward in strengthening the
democratic framework in Afghanistan. It is also
important that the ongoing transition remain Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned. It must also be multifaceted,
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans and lead to the strengthening of
the Afghan State and its institutions.

In conclusion, let me state that in the arduous
journey towards lasting peace, prosperity and stability
in Afghanistan, the Afghan Government needs the long-
term commitment of the international community to

confront the challenges that lie ahead. As a historically
close and friendly neighbour, India will continue to
stand by Afghanistan through the ongoing transitions.

