Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam, for having
organized today's debate on a novel and stimulating
subject. This is a first insofar as the topic is concerned
and because you have taken the initiative, for the first
time in the history of the Council, to ask the
representatives of two eminent non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to participate in our
deliberations.

I should like to begin by taking this opportunity
to pay a well-deserved tribute to the global non-
governmental organizations, which have become the
essential interlocutors of Governments, and to all
NGOs - large and small, global and local, from the
North and the South - that are now indispensable
protagonists of human progress. I wish to pay a
particular tribute to French NGOs, the "French
doctors" and many others in all areas. My country, as
statist in its traditions as it is, is aware of the acclaim
NGOs bring to France throughout the modern world.

Fortunately, our Council has informal working
arrangements with the major NGOS represented in New
York. I believe that such relations are productive and
useful for three reasons.

First, many NGOs are engaged in the field and
therefore have first-hand information and are
sometimes the sole or the last presence in certain
situations. This was the case, for example, in Liberia,
certain parts of Cote d'Ivoire and Uganda.

Secondly, given their information sources on the
ground, NGOs can play a valuable role in providing
early warning. That was just recently the case in
Darfur, where, together with the voice of our
Secretary-General, it was Medecins sans Frontieres and
other NGOS that sounded the first alarm.

Thirdly, the legitimacy that accrues to NGOs
from the involvement in the field in such areas as
human rights violations, refugees and child soldiers
sometimes allows them to assume the task of
awakening consciences, which is of great importance
in the contemporary world.

Is it possible or desirable for working relations
between the Security Council and the NGOs
represented in New York to be further extended? We
can certainly make better use of the practice of holding
Arria-formula meetings, preparing for them more
assiduously and more frequently including
representatives of local NGOs or of civil society. We
believe, however, that we must avoid making such
meetings more formalized, which would prove to be
more cumbersome than beneficial.

Today's debate is also an opportunity to consider
together the topic of the role of civil society and its
representatives in post-conflict situations. We have
heard the statements made earlier by the Secretary-
General of CARE International and by Ian Martin. We
believe that the conclusion to be reached is that, in a
post-conflict period, the intervention of external
protagonists and the imposition of external models are
not sufficient. For instance, Ian Martin very clearly
explained how delicate balances must be sought with
respect to justice in the transitional period and the rule
of law. This is not primarily a technical problem or an
exclusively political problem; it is a social problem as
well. We must rely on actors who can make progress:
local civil society actors. The same can be said in the
humanitarian sphere if lasting solutions are to be
found; in the economic area if we are to find ways to
ensure genuine recovery; and so on.

On that basis, is it possible to define a strategy of
alliance between the United Nations and civil society
actors in peace-building? My delegation feels that such
is the course we must adopt. We must move forward
cautiously, yet begin to think about this. I say
"cautiously", first, because we must respect the
initiative and independence of civil society
organizations themselves; secondly, because one must
in this regard prioritize the case-by-case approach and
it is thus difficult to establish general rules; and thirdly,
because the Security Council is merely one actor
among others in the United Nations in this realm. It is
clear, for instance, that the Economic and Social
Council can provide an especially useful forum in this
regard. On that very topic, we await with interest the
result of its forthcoming discussion of the transition
between the post-conflict humanitarian and
development phases.

Within the parameters of the precautions I have
cited, I believe that some thought can be given to
certain elements of strategy. This can be done most
specifically. I shall not refer to all of the proposals put
forward by delegations. If members wish to see ours,
they are available in the written text of my statement.
These proposals can be clustered under certain
headings representing potential elements of an alliance
strategy between the United Nations and civil society
actors.

The first element of this strategy would be to
identify more specifically the points at which peace-
building must necessarily mobilize civil society, for
example, as concerns the role of private enterprise in
reintegrating ex-combatants, or civic campaigns to
prepare for elections.
Secondly, we must strengthen communication in
both directions, between representatives of civil
society and United Nations authorities in the field. As
regards the Security Council, this can be done within
peacekeeping operations. Here I agree with what
Mr. Caillaux said. One might even envisage one day a
cross-cutting resolution that would develop such
communication in our peacekeeping operations.

The third strategic element is for representatives
of civil society to associate themselves earlier on with
the policies that have been laid down by the United
Nations. For example, representatives of the economic
circles of the country involved might attend donor
conferences.

The fourth element of strategy would be to
involve civil society more closely in implementing
United Nations reconstruction efforts. Here, also, you
will find in my paper specific practical steps that could
be taken to develop existing efforts through, for
example, increased local recruitment by peacekeeping
operations or the development of linguistic capabilities
of persons participating in those operations.

I would like to add one last proposal, because it
seems to me that this subject presents a problem that
must be dealt with. Frequently in post-conflict
situations, the weakness of civil society - and indeed
sometimes its collapse - is a handicap in and of itself
to peace-building. Our strategies must probably be
adapted to the degree of maturity, vitality and structure
of the civil society in question. In this regard, it seems
to me that it might be useful, at least on an
experimental basis and in a limited number of cases at
the beginning, to have reports assessing civil society in
some countries. I think that we could proceed by
analogy with what economists do in their reports on
human development. In line with today's debate, such
reports on the development of civil society should not
be prepared by Governments or by institutions.
However, they could be the outcome of collaboration
between major global non-governmental organizations
that have experience in this area, as well as
organizations from local civil society. Such work, to
ensure its objectivity, might also use scientific
methodology of an academic nature, such as the
interesting work by Professor Helmut Anheier, of the
Center for Civil Society of the University of Southern
California, in conjunction with the London School of
Economics. While Professor Anheier's work is
somewhat different, since he is dealing with global
civil society, it nonetheless forms a basis that could be
used for more specific reports on civil society in
certain countries.

My last thought illustrates our deep-rooted
conviction on the entirety of this subject. Just as the
concept of human development has made an essential
contribution to economic thinking, and just as today we
can no longer think of peacekeeping operations without
including the protection of civil populations, we can no
longer conceive of peace-building in post-conflict
situations without having a full knowledge of civil
society and without trying to build dialogue or
coordinate with organizations that express the diversity
and vitality of civil society at the local level. I think
that therein lies the importance of this debate that the
presidency of the Philippines has had the fortunate
initiative of organizing today.

