Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Like others,
Mr. President, the Senegalese delegation would like
to thank you for organizing today's monthly briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and in particular for producing
the concept note that has helped us to focus our
discussion this morning. I would also like to thank
today's briefers * Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States; and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
member of The Elders - and to acknowledge the
participation of Mr. Michael Doran of the Hudson
Institute. The information they have given us sheds
light on the enormous challenges that, sadly, are still
to be overcome if we are to put the Middle East peace
process back on track.

Seventy years after the General Assembly's
adoption of resolution 181 (II) and 50 years after the
occupation of the Palestinian territories began, we are
dealing with two entities in the Middle East. On the one
hand we have a democratic and prosperous Israeli State,
as the resolution envisaged, and on the other the people
ofPalestine, who are still seeking the fulfilment oftheir
legitimate aspirations for an independent and viable
State. Because the tensions have been exacerbated by the
lack oftangible progress in the political process and the
reality on the ground, we should recall Mr. Mladenov's
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
to the effect that the international community, and the
Security Council first and foremost, has no alternative
but to redouble its perseverance and creativity on the
issue if we are to achieve a two-State solution. What
is at stake is not only ensuring international peace and
security but also enabling the forces of moderation to
triumph in a context where extremism and terrorism are
in the ascendant. We believe that an Israeli-Arab peace
could be a powerful antidote to the plague of violent
extremism and terrorism that is devastating the region
and spilling over well beyond it. I would therefore like
to reiterate our call to the parties to work resolutely
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
to reverse the negative trends on the ground that are
threatening the possibility of a two-State solution.
That is why there must be an end to the occupation
and incitements to hatred and violence, wherever they
originate, whoever are their perpetrators and whatever
their motives. In that regard, we welcome the efforts of
Israeli and Palestinian civil society aimed at building
greater understanding between their peoples at a grass-
roots level, with a view to using innovative ideas to
contribute to the only valid solution, which is a two-
State solution.

With regard to the explosive and intolerable
situation in Gaza, including the persistent electricity
problem, which affects 2 million people, half of them
children, we urge the Palestinian political stakeholders
to work to find a definitive solution with the help
of the parties concerned. In an area that is already
dealing with extraordinarily difficult humanitarian
and socioeconomic issues, a lasting settlement of
Gaza's infrastructure problems of water, sanitation and
electricity must be achieved. We reiterate our support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
is continuing its vital work, particularly in the areas
of education and health, for more than 5 million
Palestinian refugees. We also call on the international
community to urgently provide sufficient, predictable
and ongoing financing to UNRWA.

The diplomatic initiatives undertaken by several
countries - such as France, Egypt, Jordan and the
Russian Federation - have now been joined by the
efforts currently being made by the United States.

In Senegal's opinion, the reaffirmation of the Arab
Peace Initiative at the most recent Summit of the League
of Arab States was a considerable step forward. Senegal
strongly encourages and supports all such initiatives.

Along the same lines, the forum marking 50 years
of occupation that the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People is planning
to organize in New York from 29 and 30 June is part of
the efforts to achieve greater understanding among the
parties and a peaceful negotiated political solution to
this dispute.

In conclusion, I call on the international community,
in particular the Security Council, to redouble its efforts
with a view to returning to the spirit of the partition
plan so that, like the Israelis, the Palestinians will also
have a viable and sovereign State, on the basis of the
1967 borders.

