Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): 1, too, want to thank
High Representative Petritsch for his informative
briefing.

My country commends the High Representative
and his Office for a good job done over the period
under review. We note that, with the assistance and
involvement of the Office of the High Representative,
there have been a large number of encouraging
achievements during the last six months, in almost all
areas of the implementation of the civilian aspects of
the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords.

First of all, we welcome the progress made in the
building of common institutions, in particular the re-
establishment in June of the Council of Ministers and
the subsequent establishment of three new ministries,
as well as the adoption of a number of important
decisions and laws by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, Parliamentary Assembly and Constitutional
Court.

At the same time, like others, we remain
concerned about the High Representative's
observations that many important decisions related to
common institutions continue to require the constant
application of pressure from the international
community. It is very unfortunate that the lack of
commitment among politicians - and specifically the
lack of proper dialogue among the three members of
the Presidency- continues to block effective
decision-making.

In this regard, my delegation encourages the High
Representative to pursue further his resolute stance on
this subject. We welcome his decision of 29 September
to impose a single national passport in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, following the failure of the Parliament to
adopt the necessary legislation. We also wish every
success to the Office of the High Representative and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in their joint efforts to assist in the holding of
the general, parliamentary elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 11 November.
It is regrettable that the recent months have
witnessed a period of deterioration of the political
situation in the Republika Srpska. This situation
required frequent interventions by the Office of the
High Representative to ensure the functioning of that
entity's Parliament and Government. It is our hope that
the new political environment created by the recent
presidential elections in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will be conducive to the stabilization of the
political situation in the Republika Srpska and bring
closer solutions to many other problems in regard to
relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

My delegation took note with satisfaction of the
information in the report that the situation in the city of
Mostar has considerably improved in recent months
and that the implementation of the Brcko District is
proceeding well.

As far as the economic situation is concerned, we
share the conclusions of the Peace Implementation
Council meeting in Brussels about the central role of
economic reform in the strategy of the international
community for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, we
fully support the ongoing efforts to pursue this strategy
by creating a single economic space, enabling private
sector growth and fostering privatization.

We are encouraged with the reports indicating
that the number of minority returns registered up until
last August is more than double the number of returns
during the same period last year. This positive
tendency testifies to the steady progress being made by
the international community in the normalization of
life in Bosnia and in stimulating minority returns. In
view of these inspiring figures, the international
community should redouble its efforts to ensure
security for returnees and to ensure that they have
equal rights as citizens.

In this regard, it is also of particular importance
to make the property laws effective and to promote
comprehensive judiciary reform and the establishment
of human rights institutions. My delegation applauds
all steps being taken by the High Representative to
these ends.

Finally, Ukraine maintains that the role of the
High Representative and his Office in leading the
international efforts aimed at restoring peace and
stability in Bosnia and in the entire Balkans remains
vital. Therefore, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the activities of the High Representative.
We wish him and all his staff every success.
