Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to commend the excellent
manner and wisdom with which you, Sir, are leading
the work of the Security Council.

The Security Council is meeting today to consider
Israel's settler policies and construction of the
separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territories,
which threaten regional and international peace and
security and hinder the establishment of a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Israel is
building an electrified, electronically monitored
separation wall - a system that is more than 500
kilometres long, averages 60 metres wide and is as
high as eight metres in some places - under the
pretext of the security situation. This is one further link
in Israel's chain of systematically devouring,
confiscating and annexing Palestinian territories.

The danger in all this is that the expansionist wall
does not follow the Green Line that has separated
Israel and the Palestinian territories since 1967, but
cuts deep into Palestinian territories, annexing -
according to a World Bank study - approximately 12
per cent of the West Bank. Other studies assess the area
at 23.4 per cent of the West Bank. The erection of this
wall near the western borders of the West Bank is just
the beginning. Another wall will go up in the East to
encompass the Jordan Valley area, constituting 21.9 per
cent of the West Bank. This means that Israel's plans
currently include the annexation of 45.3 per cent of the
West Bank.
The economic repercussions of the construction
of the wall include the almost total destruction of the
Palestinian economy; the isolation of the Palestinian
people in encircled islands; the blockade of 210,000
Palestinians within the Green Line; and the creation of
a new generation of refugees and of further suffering
for the Palestinian people. The real purpose of the wall
is expansion, the establishment of new settlements and
the entrenchment of 230,000 Israeli settlers on
Palestinian territory.

The building of this Israeli expansionist wall
within Palestinian territory is a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and international humanitarian law, and a perpetuation
of the Israeli Government's immoral actions. Israel
may build walls on its own territory, but has no right to
build them inside Palestinian territory. That is simply
unacceptable.

The ongoing construction of the wall is a direct
threat to the future establishment of an independent
Palestinian entity and to the vision of a Palestinian
State living side by side with Israel. It also destroys
any hope for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. There is a consensus within the international
community, including in the declared positions of the
members of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, that the wall obstructs and undermines the
peace process and that it should be dismantled
immediately.

Despite all the international protestations against
and objections to the construction of the wall, Israel
pursues its policies of occupation and the building of
settlements by force in Arab territories. This
expansionist wall is a bypass road that extends towards
Arab villages and cities and is intended to strangle and
eradicate the Palestinian people politically,
economically and socially and to transform the rest of
the Palestinian territories into a non-viable Palestinian
ghetto. This will simply increase poverty and despair.

The essence of the Israeli-Arab conflict is the
ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Israel's
attempt to divert attention by placing the conflict in the
context of the fight against terrorism is naive,
ridiculous, futile and will fool no one. Israeli
occupation is the problem. Israel's current military
option of imposing the logic of force on the Arab-
Israeli conflict has proven the futility of its policy and
has led only to further deterioration and to more death
and destruction. The pursuit of that policy, including
the opening of new fronts, will push the region to the
very brink of war, with all its perilous consequences
for international peace and security.

We call on the Security Council today to take a
firm stand by compelling Israel to dismantle the wall,
end its policies of occupation, renounce the military
option and resume negotiations, which alone can lead
to the establishment of a just and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East, in conformity with the resolutions
of international legitimacy, the Arab peace initiative
and the principle of land for peace.

