Costa Rica endorses the statement made by Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland, on behalf of the Accountability, Transparency and Coherence group and the statement made by Ambassador Milenko Skoknic Tapia, Permanent Representative of Chile, on behalf of the Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions. In my national capacity, I congratulate Estonia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of May. We welcome the convening of this debate and the contributions of Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, and Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report. In discussing the working methods of the Security Council, it is important to recognize the progress made since the first note 507 (S/2006/507). Japan made great strides in 2016 and 2017, during its chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, by updating the note and developing the Working Methods Handbook. More recently, in 2019, the Security Council adopted eight of the nine presidential notes proposed during Kuwait's term as Working Group Chair. China and the Dominican Republic also deserve recognition for having adopted agile working methods during the current novel coronavirus crisis, which have allowed the Security Council to continue its work with minimal disruption. However, Costa Rica regrets that internal divisions persist and that it has not been possible to adopt a resolution on a global ceasefire, in line with the appeal by the Secretary-General, or one recognizing coronavirus disease as a threat to international peace and security. With regard to ensuring the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of the Security Council, I would highlight two issues addressed in the notes adopted under the Kuwaiti Working Group chairmanship. First, the annual report of the Security Council must be submitted to the General Assembly pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. The note on this topic includes useful elements, such as holding the Council to deadlines to ensure that the report is duly prepared and submitted to the General Assembly in a timely manner, as well as establishing a cycle of one calendar year - which, however, went unmet in 2019. There being no clear indication as to the applicable deadlines for the internal discussion and presentation of the report for that period, Costa Rica trusts that it will indeed be duly presented to the membership before 21 June. Nor were considerations of content closely tied to transparency and accountability addressed as Member States wish them to be. Accountability involves much more than submitting insipid reports that list activities, without analysing or explaining them, on the major events affecting international peace and security in the period under review. Accountability means objectively and transparently reporting on and outlining achievements, challenges, lessons learned and the road ahead. This is what the Member States expect, as established in General Assembly resolutions on reports of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly. In this regard, Costa Rica calls on the Security Council to act on the comments States make during the presentation of the report. While action was taken in this regard under Sam Kutesa's presidency of the General Assembly, on 4 December 2014, no response was ever received from the Security Council. This must be a two-way relationship. Basic respect for the authority of the General Assembly would see the Security Council suspend its meetings for the whole duration of the General Assembly's consideration of the report, and the principal representatives in attendance at those meetings of the Assembly. The second topic, which has also undergone major changes but can still be improved, is that of the penholders. Costa Rica urges further effort to implement informal practices to facilitate greater participation by all members, permanent and non-permanent, in this important work of the Security Council. The current list of penholders reflects the fact that most topics are still assigned to permanent members. If the Council is to be truly inclusive, its members must have equal scope to initiate and preside over the drafting of resolutions, presidential statements and press statements, and such practice must be incorporated into the Council's working methods. Such practices are exactly what is needed to make the Council more agile, since they will allow for initiatives ensuring that the Council takes timely action for the maintenance of international peace and security. The possibility of one or more members being able to intervene from the outset in the negotiation and drafting of a product, as Kuwait proposed during its chairmanship of the Informal Working Group, would improve not only participation but also effectiveness and efficiency in the working methods of the Security Council. It is important that countries with knowledge and experience of a particular topic, or which chair a subsidiary body, be able to make their contributions. Co-penholdership, consultations and information-sharing would improve decision-making and make for a democratic Security Council. In this regard, I would like to recall the note by the President of the Security Council of 14 April 2014 (S/2014/268) and the need for its provisions to be implemented, and to stress the need for measures to ensure that such consultations are open to all States Members of the United Nations, especially interested States, as established in that note. In conclusion, the Security Council must be tireless, consistent and persistent in its application of new practices that improve transparency and inclusivity - this is the focus of the two issues discussed. Such practices should improve its interaction and dialogue with non-Council member States and with the General Assembly, since, as established in the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council when acting - and when failing to do so - represents the entire membership. The Council, as established in the most recent update of note 507 in 2017 (S/2017/507), should step up its efforts to raise awareness among Member States and other organizations of the decisions of and other relevant information from the Council's subsidiary bodies.
