Mr. Deloire (spoke in French): Not everyone
knows the name of Raad Mohammed al-Azzawi. In the
autumn of 2014, that 36-year father was kidnapped in
Samarra, a town in the province of Salahedine in Iraq,
a few kilometres from the city of Tikrit. He worked as a
cameraman for a television channel. While he was held
hostage, the jihadist Islamic State group threatened
to behead him because he refused to cooperate. Raad
Mohammed al-Azzawi was murdered in public in
Samarra on 10 October 2014, alongside his brother and
two other civilians. This heinous murder has received
less coverage than others, but each time the blood
flows, be it that of James Foley, Kenji Goto or another
journalist, it is the same horror.

Raad Mohammed al-Azzawi was one of
66 journalists killed last year in the exercise or on
account of their duties. Another 25 have died since the
beginning of the year, including five in the Sudan, two
in Iraq, two in Yemen, two in Ukraine and one in Syria.
Beyond the human tragedy for the victims and their
families - tragedies that repulse the heart - there are
additional risks for those who suffer horrors, sometimes
in private, without witnesses. Let us not forget that
these are stories that have led to the establishment of
such legal protections as the Geneva Conventions.

On behalf of Reporters Without Borders, an
organization that champions and promotes press
freedom, I thank the Security Council for meeting
today on the essential topic of the protection of
journalists. I welcome the excellent work carried out by
the Lithuanian presidency. This is a historic day for the
protection of journalists and, we hope, for the freedom
of the press as a whole.

The draft text on which the Council will vote and, I
hope, adopt refers to the right to freedom of expression
as provided for by article 19 ofthe Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It is, I believe, a historic moment
in which the Security Council shall for the first time
link the right to freedom of expression to the need to
protect journalists, even if that may a priori obvious. It
is not a matter of protecting a corporation, much less of
guaranteeing the privileges for a category of civilians,
as if all the civilians were not of equal dignity. This is
about defending a right ofall - the freedom ofthe press,
"the freedom that allows you to verify the existence
of all the other freedoms", in the words of the famous
Burmese journalist Win Tin, who spent 19 years of his
life in detention. The statement that the work of free,
independent and impartial media constitutes one of the
essential foundations of a democratic society, and can
therefore contribute to the protection of civilians also
deserves to be welcomed.

As Council members know, resolution 1738 (2006)
was, unfortunately, not enough to solve the problem of
the insecurity ofj ournalists. No matter how outstanding
it may be, it is not certain that a new resolution will
suffice, either. It is clear that the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council are
working assiduously to protect journalists by deepening
international law and adopting the Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
But in 10 years, more than 700 journalists have been
killed in the line of duty or because of their work. Each
time, we have tried to avoid reality. How many crimes
against journalists must there be before United Nations
resolutions are finally implemented?

Reporters Without Borders asks the the Council
to establish an effective monitoring mechanism on
implementation. We ask that the post of Special
Representative ofthe Secretary-General on the protection
ofjournalists be established, with the responsibility for
ensuring follow-up and monitoring paper of compliance
by Member States with the obligations imposed by
resolution 1738 (2006) and an eventual new resolution.
The mandate could be established along the lines of that
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The setting up of
such a mechanism will have the advantage of putting in
place a permanent structure at the heart of the United
Nations system.

Appointed and mandated by the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative would have the task of
collecting all the relevant information, in particular
within the United Nations system, concerning violations
against the safety and security ofjournalists in armed
conflicts. The office would serve as an early-warning
mechanism for the Secretary-General and, through
him, for the Security Council. He would liaise with
the United Nations system on activities for preventing
attacks against journalists in armed conflicts and strive
to enhance the United Nations capacity to analyse and
manage all information relating to such crimes. And
he would undertake investigations, in a complementary
role, in situations in which no investigation was
opened by the Member State in which occurred an act
of violence against a journalist, a media professional
or associated personnel. The eventual possibility of
individual referrals to the Special Representative by
professional and amateur journalists victims of abuse
could be considered.

As the Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, today
more than 90 per cent of crimes against journalists
remain forever unpunished and even go unprosecuted.
Such a degree of impunity serves as encouragement to
those who commit crimes againstjournalists.

Reporters Without Borders expresses its satisfaction
at the inclusion of the draft resolution that will be voted
on today of an obligation to report on the safety of
journalists in the context of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the United Nations can also expedite
genuine investigations. For example - unfortunately, a
tragic one - on 29 April 2015, the Libyan Government
in Tobruk announced the murder of seven journalists,
including four Libyans, two Tunisians and an Egyptian,
who had disappeared at the end of 2014. According to
the official announcement, that information was based
on statements by suspects recently arrested by the
authorities. Reporters Without Borders believes that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Libya should establish an independent investigation to
shed light on the murder of those journalists.

We are very pleased that the new draft resolution
mentions the role of the International Criminal Court
in the prosecution and trial of the perpetrators of
war crimes. As said here during an Arria Formula
meeting by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda, attacks against
journalists not only constitute a grave breach of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocol 1,
but fall under war crimes under article 8 of the Rome
Statute, which established the Court. She also said that
the Court would not hesitate to investigate crimes in
the context of its current investigations. For Reporters
Without Borders, that gives hope for a decline in
impunity.

But elsewhere? In Syria and Iraq, in the area under
the control of the Islamic State, an information black
hole has formed. In the same way that in the physical
world light does not escape black holes, journalists
are no longer able to report on reports or to deliver
information in those areas. The conflict in Syria began
in 2011, and then spread to Iraq in the summer of 2014.
It has caused the deaths of more than 210,000 civilians.
Kidnapped, murdered and beheaded - journalists in
Syria and Iraq are deliberately targeted and attacked by
various parties to the conflict.

According to statistics compiled by Reporters
Without Borders, in Syria alone over the past four
years, at least 45 journalists were killed in the course or
because of carrying doing theirjobs. Since the summer
of 2014 at least threejournalists have been killed, 15 of
them since the beginning of the 2013. A large number
have been victims of kidnapping, arbitrary detention
and hostage-taking.

As Syria and Iraq are not States parties to Rome
Statute, it is urgent that the Security Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
refer to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court the situations in Syria and Iraq where war crimes
have been committed against journalists. Member
States of the Security Council must show consistency
when it comes to its resolutions on protecting journalists
and launch a concrete process aimed at bringing
perpetrators of crimes against journalists to justice at
the international level.

The draft resolution that the Council is preparing
to adopt deals with journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel. In a welcome act, it mentions
freedom of information online and offline. But it
should explicitly extend the scope to all journalists
worthy of the name. Journalism cannot be defined by
a contractual relationship with a big media company.
It has to do with a social function of collecting
information methodically in accordance with the rules
of honesty and independence. Whehter ones performs
that function professionally or not is not important.

The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, adopted under
the auspices of UNESCO in 2012, recognizes that
the protection of journalists should not be limited to
those officially recognized as such but also benefit
other people, including community media workers and
citizen journalists and others who use new media to
reach their audiences.

Technology opens up spaces of freedom, for
information and for expression in general; but there can
be manipulation just as much as probity. Unfortunately,
we are entering a new era of propaganda where
completely new ways of controlling information - and
therefore of controlling thoughts - are being put in
place. We are entering a period of information wars.

Thanks to new technologies, terrorist groups, like
all enemies of factual truths, can directly distribute
their content around the world. Everything gets through:
the barbarian propaganda film disguised as reportage,
including sometimes journalists taken hostage, with a
gun to their head, as well as truncated reality dressed
up as a description of actuality.

Humankind and society need a trusted third party
that makes collective and individual choices based on
the unrestricted pursuit of objective truth, in the words
of UNESCO's Constitution. Of course, that assertion
cannot be accepted without an understanding that
this truth can take different shapes and sometimes
contradictory results, as no one is the holder of truth.
But if the search for the facts is conducted on the basis
of that dictum and is not sponsored by interested parties
and avoids seeing things through the prism of culture as
much as possible - that is journalism.

We are witnessing a sort of globalization of
threats. Responsibility for massacres such as the one
carried out at the offices of Charlie Hebdo are claimed,
rightly or wrongly, from thousands of kilometres away.
Murderous ideologies and propaganda machines are
aimed against all those who report on dangerous reality,
so as to intimidate into silencejournalists and all those
who embody and are living the freedom of expression,
even on the other end of the world. That is the case in
times of war, but it is also the case in peacetime.

That the Security Council is about to adopt a draft
resolution on the protection of journalists in areas
of armed conflict is a positive sign. But let us not
forget that most journalists killed during or because
of carrying out their duties are in countries said to
be at peace in which persons in the pay of regimes,
women and men of power, mafia linchpins and so on
are perpetrating the worst abuses. We should not forget
that half of the world's population has no access to
free information, much less the right thereto, or are
deprived of independent information because those who
embody the freedom ofinformation and persecuted and
prevented from doing their work.

One day the Security Council will have to take that
into account. One day the Council will have to assign
obligations to States above and beyond situations of
armed conflict. The Nobel Peace Price laureate in
economics Amartya Sen has defined development as a
process of expansion of substantial individual liberties.
The freedom of information is one of the freedoms that
favours the capabilities of an individual, in the sense of
his mastery of the health system, the education system
and the public debate - in a way, the sense of control
over his life. If we want development not to be just
about increasing wealth, but about improving all social,
economic and political possibilities for individuals,
then the freedom of information is a prerequisite.
Accordingly, the protection of journalism depends
upon this last condition.

As I speak here before the members of the Council,
more than 150 professional journalists and 170
non-professional journalists are in prison worldwide
as a means to prevent them from pursuing their
investigative work and reporting. They too must be
protected. As long as they are behind bars, millions if
not hundreds of millions of people are deprived of the
fruits of their investigative reporting.

It is the responsibility of the representatives of
States to strike the balance between individuals and
nations Accordingly, journalism's role is to depict
the world as it is constituted by common aspirations
and divergent interests. In giving a voice to everyone
and portraying different angles, journalism gives us
the ability to understand the other. Without that, no
peace, worthy of the name, is possible, and it is the
responsibility of Member States to establish this peace.

