Mr. Levitte (France)(spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate on a subject that is not at all theoretical.
What is at stake is the success of actions carried out
under the authority of the Security Council.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for attending this meeting today, in View ofthc decisive
role that he brings to the Security Council.

Sweden will shortly make a statement on behalf
of the European Union, to which the French delegation
fully subscribes. I should like to comment on some
points that are of particular interest to us.

The change in the nature of conflicts - for the
most part these are now internal, even though many
have a trans-border dimension - has compelled the
United Nations to be concerned with peace-building.
This task is indispensable if the gains from the re-
establishment of peace are to be preserved.

The organic link between re-establishing peace
and building peace has surfaced over the past few years
in several ways. It can be in the inclusion of peace-
building elements in the mandate of an operation in
which the principal objective was peacekeeping, as in
the case of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic. It can arise because the mandate of
the peacekeeping operation was more ambitious and
included from the beginning an important component
for restoring public authority and rebuilding social and
economic infrastructures - for instance, in the case of
the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium in Croatia, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor. Lastly, it can be because offices or missions for
peace-building programmes follow up on a
peacekeeping operation, as is the case in Liberia, the
Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and
Tajikistan.

The problems of peace-building fall into two
categories, our View: institutional and financial. Let us
consider first the institutional problems. Peacekeeping
operations are authorized by the Security Council, and
they include elements of peace-building. But the
Security Council is not competent to be the "project
manager". On the other hand, the Council must ensure
that there is no gap in continuity and that the
investment of a peacekeeping operation is not wasted.

In addition, the multiplicity of actors involved in
peace-building - the United Nations Secretariat,
United Nations funds and programmes, international
financial institutions and regional organizations -
results in a variety of priorities and criteria defined and
implemented by each of them. This very diversity
complicates the task of formulating a peace-building
strategy in a given country and of carrying out
programmes built into these strategies.

Finally, in the country concerned, the natural
interlocutor with the international community - with
which peace-building strategies should be worked
out - should in the first instance be the Government
that has emerged from the peace agreement and often
from subsequently organized elections. Yet in practice
such authorities often lack the minimum of expertise
and the requisite material and financial resources. In
addition, their legitimacy and authority may be
challenged by rebel groups that have remained outside
the peace agreement or by parties to the agreement who
violate their commitments - the case of UNITA in
Angola and the RUF in Sierra Leone. In extreme cases
such as East Timor and Kosovo the authorities simply
do not exist or no longer exist, and the first task of the
international community is to establish these
authorities in a democratic way. The weakness of the
local authorities often complicates the task of the
international community in peace-building.

There are also financial problems. Peacekeeping
actions in operations decided upon by the Security
Council are financed by assessed mandatory
contributions. Most of the peace-building operations,
however, rely on voluntary contributions. It is
contradictory to recognize the crucial nature of peace-
building operations and not to ensure the steady and
predictable financing that is required.

Because so many actors are involved in peace-
building programmes and the means of financing differ,
obtaining financial resources can be a rather slow and
very unequal process. The slowness of financial
institutions in disbursing money is often the crux of the
problem that prevents a smooth transition from actions
by peacekeeping operations to the intervention of
organizations involved in peace-building. This slow
pace also conflicts with the sense of urgency often
perceived on the ground, namely that international
intervention must quickly produce tangible
improvements in the daily lives of populations, who
will otherwise start turning against those operations.

The solution to these two problems should be to
assess what is required for peace-building as far in
advance as possible; to formulate strategies that will
ensure the full participation, from the outset, of the
relevant agencies, funds, programmes and banks that
are involved in peace-building; and to speed up the
pace of disbursement.

I will offer just two examples to better illustrate
the difficulties confronting us. The first example is the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, commonly referred to as DDR. In a
statement by its President on 23 March 2000, the
Security Council noted that

"the mandates of peacekeeping missions
increasingly include oversight of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration as one of their
functions"

because the task has proved to be one of the key
aspects of peacekeeping. But the Council also
underlined

"the necessity of a clear definition of tasks and
division of responsibilities among all actors
involved in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, including United Nations
agencies and programmes". (S/PRST/2000/lO)

The reintegration aspects of DDR are a perfect
illustration of the difficulty of satisfactorily linking
peacekeeping, peace-building and development
assistance. There can in fact be no real demobilization,
much less lasting demobilization, unless those who
have been demobilized find a Viable alternative to the
status and life of the soldier. That means they have to
be offered alternatives that fall broadly into two
categories.

The first category is either integration into a
reorganized, democratic and apolitical army, requiring
in most cases the implementation of a programme to
restructure the armed forces such as has been started in
the Central African Republic, or something that is even
more ambitious: the reconstitution of those forces,
which is what is taking place in Sierra Leone now with
the decisive support of our United Kingdom friends.
Achieving these goals requires bilateral or multilateral
programmes, often on a fairly large scale and extended
in time. The second category is socio-professional
integration into non-military areas, which requires
action to provide job training and reconstruction
programmes to relaunch economic activity. Here,
peace-building borders on development assistance in
its broadest sense.

The second example is the reconstruction or
consolidation of a reliable and impartial police force
and judiciary. Peacekeeping operations play a key role
in the phase following the signing of a peace
agreement, but their purpose is not to continue
indefinitely as the sole guarantee of public order. That
is something that has to be founded on reliable and
impartial local capabilities. So it becomes necessary to
reform, reorganize and train police forces and courts.
That has been part of the mandate of many operations
and in some cases has been central to them, as for
example in Haiti and in Bosnia. But often, it is a long-
term undertaking exceeding the duration and resources
ofa peacekeeping operation. That is why it is essential,
in association with the relevant agencies, to devise a
long-term strategy to ensure stable, predictable funding
for programmes of action and a gradual takeover of
actions by the peacekeeping operation, as, for example,
what was done in Eastern Slavonia or in Haiti.

It is clear that the Security Council plays a Vital
role in the satisfactory coordination of and transition
between the tasks for which it has primary
responsibility - re-establishing and maintaining
peace - and those which bring into play a great many
different actors: peace-building. Allow me to put
forward a few practical proposals as to what we could
do in this regard.

First, we would advocate early consultation
between the Security Council and agencies responsible
for peace-building. We believe it is essential for the
main agencies involved in peace-building to be
consulted as soon as possible at the start of the
peacekeeping phase. Naturally, this would be done
chiefly by the Secretary-General. The report
(S/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi made that
quite clear. But it might also be necessary for the
Council to contact those agencies directly, for example
by inviting their heads to take part in the Council's
deliberations, as was done when representatives of the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund were invited
to take part in the Council's recent debates on Guinea-
Bissau, the Central African Republic and East Timor.
The main point is that this process of consultation
should take place sufficiently early so that there is time

to work out a peace-building strategy and to obtain the
necessary resources.

The second idea is to establish a long-term
contract between the international community and the
authorities of a State emerging from conflict. Insofar as
such authorities have the minimum requisite legitimacy
and administrative resources, they should pledge to
implement programmes, with the assistance of the
international community, to rebuild political, economic
and social infrastructures. The investment of the
international community makes sense only if there is a
corresponding real desire on the part of local actors for
a fresh start. Such a contract could, for example, take
the form of an exchange of letters between the
Secretary-General and the head of State or Government
of the State concerned, as has been the case with the
Central African Republic. Mention of this could appear
in the Security Council resolution authorizing the
peacekeeping operation.
The third idea is to formulate peace-building
strategies and obtain stable, predictable financing. The
focus of early consultations between the Security
Council and all the agencies involved in peace-
building, and of the Secretary-General's coordination
efforts, should be, with due respect for their respective
powers and their decision-making autonomy, the
formulation of peace-building strategies that: clearly
define the responsibilities of each actor; ensure
satisfactory cooperation among the various bodies;
establish a timetable for the implementation of
programmes; ensure, as far as possible, predictable
financing, especially for missions relying on voluntary
contributions; and provide for a transition between the
peacekeeping and peace-building phases and a bridge
between peacekeeping operations and peace-building
programmes under the best conditions possible and
within reasonable time frames.

Ideally, the division of roles and financing should
be clearly defined at the time the Security Council
establishes the peacekeeping operation and could even
appear in an annex to the resolution. I stress this point
because I feel it is fundamental. One can imagine the
Council's holding consultations in parallel with
potential troop contributors. Thus, from the very
outset, the Security Council would establish a double
partnership with the troop-contributing countries and
with all the financial institutions - the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and others -
entrusted with carrying out the Council's decisions. We
feel that this point, too, is fundamental.

The fourth idea concerns strengthening the
coordinating role of the Secretary-General and of his
representative in situ. The point has been raised several
times, specifically in the Brahimi report, that the
Secretary-General has to play a greater role in
coordination when strategies are being drafted and
peace-building programmes implemented. The
coordinating role should be assigned to the Secretary-
General's representative in situ, when there is one.

The fifth and last idea concerns regular briefings
for the Council. The Council should be kept regularly
informed - as is already the case, for example, with
the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau - of
progress made and difficulties encountered in peace-
building, since any failure or reversal in this domain
would thrust peace and security concerns to the fore
once again, starting with the Security Council's direct
intervention.

These are a few ideas that we hope may be
discussed in greater detail with all the Security Council
members when we come to consider the practical
effects of this debate. Forgive me for having spoken at
such length, but we feel very strongly about this issue,
which we consider to be critical.

