Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2170 (2014), adopted today, on the basis of its consistent
position on the need for an uncompromising fight
against terrorism and for united efforts to that end.
We have repeatedly called on the Security Council to
condemn the terrorists running rampant in Syria and
Iraq.

Today, terrorism is rapidly becoming an
independent political factor in the Middle East. In
such circumstances, there is no place for ad hoc
approaches and for dividing terrorists into good and
bad. In February of this year, the Russian delegation
proposed the adoption of a draft presidential statement
condemning the terrorists in Syria. Unfortunately, it
was not supported by certain members of the Council.
In July, on Russia's initiative, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14 on countering
the use by terrorists of revenue from Syrian and Iraqi
oil.

We hope that the resolution adopted today will be a
significant step in the common fight against terrorism
and will affirm the support of the international
community for the Governments of the Republic of
Iraq and of the Syrian Arab Republic in their efforts
to counter the scourge. Although the resolution has
been adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, it cannot be seen as approval of the use
of military action.

At the same time, we must note some aspects that
complicated the task of negotiating such an important
document. We are concerned about the departure from
the procedure established by the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, for
the inclusion of new names on the sanctions list. Such
a step undermines the credibility of a key subsidiary
body of the Council and leads to the weakening of the
established procedures operating effectively within
its framework that enable States to take balanced and
informed decisions. We agree that the fact of inclusion
on the list of the names of abhorrent sponsors of
terrorism deserves to be made widely known. However,
we believe that it is counterproductive to waive the
rules that govern the work of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council.

It was only in a spirit of compromise, given the
disastrous situation in the region due to the Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Islamic State terrorist organizations, that
we agreed with the use in the resolution of certain terms,
such as atrocities and abuses, that are not enshrined
in international legal instruments and that distort the
scope of international humanitarian and human rights
law. We are fundamentally opposed to their use in
future Security Council resolutions.

