Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): My delegation
welcomes this interactive debate on the prevention of
conflict and promotion of durable peace in Africa, and it
is our fervent hope that a programme of action will
emerge from today's exercise.

The causes of conflict in Africa are known to
members of the Council. In the past, the Security Council
has proposed measures that, when put in place, could
preclude the occurrence of conflicts on the African
continent. This notwithstanding, my delegation would like
to zero in on the following issues raised by the President.
I shall be very brief, because most of the issues have
already been covered by previous speakers.

First, on improving cooperation and coordination
between the Security Council and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), the OAU should, on a regular basis
and whenever necessary, send documentation through the
Secretariat for the Council's consideration. Such
documentation could cover early warning systems of
possible hot spots in Africa and recommend what action
needs to be taken in order to avert the possible
resumption of conflict. In areas already in conflict, the
Security Council, in collaboration with the Organization
of African Unity, should expeditiously work towards a
quick resolution of the conflict.

Secondly, let me turn to the question of meeting the
needs for African peacekeeping more effectively. Because
more than 50 per cent of the Security Council's agenda is
absorbed by African issues, mostly conflicts, the Security
Council should think about setting aside some kind of a
fund for purposes of conflict prevention and
peacekeeping. We say this because much of the reasoning
behind a delay in deploying forces is funding-related. A
United Nations force should be in place for rapid
deployment, and the force should also be armed with the
appropriate mandate and the concomitant power and
logistical support.

Thirdly, let me touch on the question of additional
instruments necessary to effect peacekeeping and the
promotion of durable peace. These have already been
fully enunciated by previous speakers, such as the need to

 

have the political will in the Council to effect resolutions,
and such as being fair in terms of the way African issues
are treated in comparison to other areas of conflict.

All in all, what I am trying to say here, at the risk of
repeating myself, is that there must be that political will,
and that Council members must cease highlighting national
interests at the expense of international peace and security.
We believe that the instruments are already at hand within
the Council. It is up to the Council to have the necessary
will and the necessary guts to cease doing this and make
sure that peace and tranquillity prevail in Africa.

