Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As
always, we appreciate his team's hard work to fairly
address these complicated issues. I also want to thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing.

I am sure that there will be further discussions
today of our Monday announcement regarding Israeli
settlements in the West Bank. Ambassador Craft has
already addressed this issue in writing, and I want to
briefly take it up again today on her behalf.

It is the position of the United States that the
establishment of Israeli civilian settlements in the West
Bank is not per se inconsistent with international law.
We believe that this complex political problem can
be resolved only through direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis. I would like to be
clear on our decision. The United States Government
is expressing no view on the particular legal status of
any individual settlement, nor are we addressing or
prejudging the ultimate status of the West Bank. That
is for Israelis and Palestinians to decide.

The relevant question today then is, what real
obstacles are preventing the Palestinians and the
Israelis from sitting down to work towards peace?
On that matter, we must note that the recent barrage
of rocket fire from Gaza into Israel represents a far
greater barrier to peace. Just for a moment, I want each
person in this Chamber to imagine what it would be like
to live each day knowing that a siren could go off at any
time, alerting them and their family that they have 15
seconds to reach a bomb shelter. Would anyone on the
Council tolerate such an existence? Would they accept
blame and criticism for the violence directed against
them? Would they feel confident that there was a clear
path to peace while these attacks persist? Of course not.
And yet this is often what Israel is expected to endure.

In just the past week, reports indicate that 450
rockets were fired into Israel by the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad. What is especially notable is that these attacks
threaten the lives ofIsraelis and Palestinians alike. This
Iranian-funded terrorist organization has repeatedly
attempted to undermine progress towards peace. It has
intentionally attempted to disrupt periods of calm and
ceasefire between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Both
sides are affected by these terrorist actions. Schools in
Israel and the Gaza Strip are closed, businesses have
shut down and families are seeking shelter. There
could hardly be a more significant or more self-evident
barrier to peace.

The United States remains committed to the cause
of peace, and Monday's announcement does not alter
this fact. We continue to believe that discussion between
the parties is the path to finding a solution that works
for both sides and promotes and protects the welfare of
Palestinians and Israelis alike.

But just as we are committed to the cause ofpeace,
we are committed to Israel and its fair treatment at
the United Nations. As Ambassador Craft has made
abundantly clear and asked me to convey again today,
the United States has always supported Israel in the
past; we support Israel today; and we will support
Israel moving forward. We will not stand idly by when
the international community unfairly criticizes Israel,
especially when it fails to also condemn those who seek
Israel's physical destruction and even deny its right
to exist.

Ifthe Council is truly committed to peace, we must
be clear-eyed in evaluating what the real obstacles are
to its attainment. Rocket fire that threatens the safety
of Israelis and Palestinians on a daily basis is such
an obstacle.

