Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would very much like to thank Mr. Alexander
Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, Ambassador Schoulgin
Nyoni, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Mr. Chid Liberty for their valuable briefings.

Approximately 15 years have passed since the
Council established the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) pursuant to resolution 1509 (2003),
in order to support and rebuild a nation devastated by
two civil wars that had persisted for 14 years, resulting
in thousands of victims and ruined infrastructure
and requiring the deployment of more than 180,000
peacekeeping troops.

We are here today to discuss UNMIL's successful
withdrawal. We rarely discuss an item on the Council's
agenda with a positive conclusion, but this is a moment
that we hope will be repeated in the future with many
peacekeeping missions. Liberia today is a perfect
example of local, regional and international engagement
working together to build a State capable of sustaining
itself. We applaud UNMIL's efforts, with the support
of international partners. to rebuild and promote the
country's security sector and achieve stability in
Liberia. The international community must continue to
support Liberia after the Mission's withdrawal through
the United Nations country team and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel. We also welcome
the moral and sustained support provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund of the Peacebuilding Commission
in its efforts on behalf of Liberia's development.

The role of the United Nations country team
will increase in importance following the Mission's
withdrawal, particularly in the light of the difficult
economic situation facing Liberia today. We
therefore call for continued support from the United
Nations country team, as well as the United Nations
Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Commission and international partners to implement
various development projects aimed at achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, as Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed indicated during her visit
to Liberia this past month. The Liberian people will
face challenges following the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission. However, we are certain that they are
ready to overcome them. We urge Special Representative
Mohammed Ibn Chambas to provide the necessary
good offices and support of the United Nations Office
for West Africa to the Liberian Government during the
next stage so as to meet the Government's needs with
regard to developing the infrastructure and a system
of governance.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey my

gratitude to UNMIL and the Mission's staff, particularly
those who sacrificed their lives to ensure security and
stability in Liberia. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Special Envoy Farid Zarif and his predecessors for
their tireless efforts in achieving the progress that
we are witnessing today in Liberia so as to become a
success story in Africa. I would be remiss ifI failed
to commend the work of the Economic Community of
West African States to achieve stability and support
the work of the United Nations in Liberia, especially
in the context of the presidential elections in December
2017. The elections demonstrated the determination
of the authorities in Liberia and their independence in
holding credible, transparent and successful elections.
We appreciate the role played by political stakeholders
in Liberia in turning to the national justice system for
the settlement of electoral disputes.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Liberia on achieving a
successful outcome. That would not have been possible
without their determination. I convey my gratitude
also to the recently elected President of Liberia, His
Excellency Mr. George Weah, for assuming his new
office. We welcome all his efforts and initiatives to
achieve a number of goals, including improving the
economic situation, promoting investments and fighting
corruption, as well as encouraging good governance,
national reconciliation and ,lastly implementing, the
Sustainable Development Goals.

In conclusion, it seems fitting for me to quote from
