Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is almost one year since the Security Council
took a decision that began the implementation of the Peace
Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today, we note
with satisfaction the significant progress that has been
achieved along this road. The primary achievement is,
unquestionably, the preservation of peace. This has made it
possible to ensure the holding of elections and to begin
building joint institutions of power. We are grateful to the
High Representative, to the staff members of the
international organizations, and to the soldiers and officers
of the multinational Implementation Force, which includes
a Russian brigade, for their contribution to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

Today, in response to the request of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security Council has given its
approval to the continuation of international efforts to
consolidate the peace process on the basis of the principles
laid down in the decisions taken at the Paris and London
Conferences. It is clear that primary responsibility for the
successful development of the peace process lies with the
Bosnians themselves, and also with their elected organs of
power, to whom there must be a gradual transfer of full and
complete responsibility for the situation in the country.
Their level of cooperation in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement will largely determine the degree of
involvement of the international community in the process
of reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the confirmation, by the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, of its commitment to the
establishment of a Bosnian State, based on the principles of
democracy, and consisting of two Entities: the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska. It is
important to ensure the rapid establishment of all remaining
joint institutions in accordance with the constitution.

The United Nations Security Council, in the draft
resolution before it today, clearly sets out as priorities the
civilian aspects of the settlement at the present stage. The
role of the High Representative has been strengthened. On
the agenda is the holding of municipal elections under the
aegis of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), further assistance in ensuring human
rights, and a solution to problems related to the return of
refugees, which must be orderly and must be carried out
under safe conditions.

The greatest attention is being focused on lowering
the level of armaments on the basis of the relevant
agreements, and making progress in the process of
regional control of armaments.

The experience of the first year of international
efforts in support of the Peace Agreement is convincing
testimony to the fact that success is possible only on the
basis of an impartial approach. Everything must be equal:
the support for the recovery of various regions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and, if necessary, the punishment,
including the refusal of economic assistance or the
adoption of other measures, for failure to carry out
obligations assumed under the Peace Agreement.

The draft resolution before us clearly lays down the
principle of equal treatment of the parties. This also
applies to the issue of cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which, as the draft
resolution emphasizes, is to carry out its responsibilities
for dispensing justice impartially. The Tribunal should not
be used as a political instrument.
In our view, success in this incipient stage of the
Bosnian settlement and in the work of the Stabilization
Force is guaranteed by the fact that their key parameters,
including measures of influence, are supported by all
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and by the leadership of Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, as reflected in the Security Council
resolution.

We hope that the unanimous adoption of this draft
resolution will symbolize the need for sustained
coordinated efforts by the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, all
participants in the settlement and the interested parties
themselves to move the peace process forward to the
point of no return.

