Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to express to you
personally and to all the other members of the Council
our thanks for your prompt response to the request
submitted by the Arab Group for holding this
emergency meeting to discuss the tragic and
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

For more than a month now, the Council has been
meeting almost constantly to consider the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab territories. In fact, the
Council has adopted several resolutions calling on
Israel to institute a ceasefire and to withdraw without
delay its forces from the Palestinian territories that they
have reoccupied.

Regrettably, however, Israel has to date failed to
comply with those resolutions or to respond to those
calls. Quite the opposite - according to what we are
learning from the media and from reports about the
activities of the Israeli army, it has wrought additional
destruction and stepped up its military campaign
against Palestinian territories and towns. Nor has Israel
responded to the repeated calls of international
humanitarian organizations to allow them to bury the
dead or help the wounded. That is the situation today,
and that is Israel's response to the Council's
resolutions.

Faced with such a situation, we wonder, as the
entire world does, about the next step the Council must
take and whether it will continue to monitor the
situation and endeavour every now and then to adopt a
resolution that condemns and deplores. In accordance
with its responsibilities under the Charter, the Council
must shoulder those responsibilities and deal firmly
and seriously with a State that has totally ignored
Security Council resolutions and that is acting as if it
were above the law.

We fully appreciate the political and moral
responsibility borne by the Council, and we consider
that every member of the Council will be responsible to
history itself, bearing in mind the mandate with which
the Council has been entrusted by the States Members
of the United Nations: to act on their behalf to maintain
international peace and security. This requires that the
Council adopt practical measures to make Israel
comply with the resolutions of international legitimacy.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is indeed tragic. This has been recognized by
the United Nations through its specialized agencies
operating in the field. Consequently, we call upon the
co-sponsors of the peace process and upon the Security
Council to counter the State terrorism being carried out
by the Israeli occupation forces, which have defied all
appeals, demands and resolutions of the Security
Council, and to put an end to the liquidation of the
Palestinian people. In that regard, we remind the
Security Council that it is important for it to shoulder
its responsibility and approve the immediate dispatch
of an international mission to investigate the crimes
committed by the Israeli army, which certainly should
be considered to be genocide and crimes against
humanity, crimes which Israel is strenuously trying to
cover up.

What is happening today in Jenin, Bethlehem,
Tulkarem and Nablus closely resembles what took
place in the so-called safe havens in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, such as Goradze, Srebrenica, Tuzla and
other areas that were victimized by a group that had no
respect whatsoever for international legitimacy, a group
that believed only in murder and oppression as a means
of settling conflicts. We call on the Council to adopt
the measures necessary to avert humanitarian
catastrophes in other areas.

Our delegation expresses its amazement that
some circles are calling upon the besieged Palestinian
President, who is within range of Israeli tanks and
cannons, to put an end to so-called terrorist acts and to
call the Palestinians to a ceasefire. Indeed, this raises
questions. Are those who are making such calls not
Israelis? Such notions will undoubtedly provide Israel
with additional pretexts to pursue its criminal acts
against the Palestinian people and its blatant violation
of international norms and agreements.

Without going into further detail concerning the
very serious situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which our delegation has covered in
previous meetings, I would like, in conclusion, to
express our appreciation and support for the Secretary-
General's proposal concerning the immediate dispatch
of a multinational force to the occupied territories to
stop further deterioration, to monitor a ceasefire and to
guarantee Israel's withdrawal from all the occupied
territories, which would lead to the establishment of a
climate favourable to the resumption of negotiations.
At the same time, we stress the need for the Council to
adopt a resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter, as
it has done in other situations with which it dealt in a
serious manner.

