I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her valuable briefing and for her Office's thirty-second report, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). I also salute her tireless efforts throughout her tenure to combat impunity for the most serious crimes. Tunisia welcomes recent developments during the reporting period, which have been conducive to peace, justice, reconstruction and national reconciliation in our sister country, the Sudan. In that regard, we commend the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, signed between the Sudanese parties on 3 October, which constitutes a comprehensive post-conflict road map, particularly in the areas of combating impunity, addressing past violations, preventing future recurrences and establishing a smooth and peaceful transition in an environment of political and social harmony. We are optimistic about efforts to bring about justice for victims in Darfur and a comprehensive reconciliation among the Sudanese people in the light of the arrangements provided for in the Juba peace agreement and based on the various domestic, national and international justice mechanisms, including the transitional justice process, with the support of the international community and the Security Council. We welcome the steps taken to establish a new relationship of cooperation and complementarity between the International Criminal Court and the Sudanese authorities, based on constructive engagement and mutual respect in order to achieve the common objectives of ensuring accountability for the terrible crimes in Darfur, preventing their recurrence and ensuring the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005). We expect that relationship to take into account the requirements and context of the transitional stage by providing the Sudanese authorities with the time and resources needed to deal effectively with the alleged atrocities, thereby translating the Rome Statute's principles of cooperation and complementarity into a genuine and objective reality. Tunisia expresses its satisfaction with the stated commitment of the Sudanese authorities to ensuring accountability and the rule of law, as reflected during the Prosecutor's visit to Sudan from 17 to 20 October - the first of its kind - and at her meetings with senior Sudanese officials. We hope those discussions lead to productive follow-ups that will enable the Court's investigators to travel throughout Sudanese territory with adequate safety and security precautions in support of ongoing investigations and prosecutions, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and will ensure evidence-based accountability and access to witnesses and the affected local communities. We welcome the draft memorandum of understanding planned between the parties for that purpose. Tunisia stresses that the best way to promote accountability in Darfur is by promoting dialogue and enabling national processes premised on both the primacy of domestic jurisdiction and the need for international justice. We look forward to further advancing dialogue between the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court and the Sudanese authorities to explore the possibilities and options available under the Rome Statute with a view to burden-sharing, harmonizing efforts and building the capacities of Sudanese judicial agencies. In that regard, we welcome the agreement by the Sudanese parties to establish a special court to address the terrible crimes in Darfur and the gross violations of international human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated since 2002. We also welcome the role of the African Union in supporting the smooth implementation of measures for that special court. We stress that optimism about the prospects for the imminent transitional stage in the Sudan should not mask the enormity of the challenges, which require that the international community redouble its efforts. The Sudanese authorities need assistance during this sensitive period, especially in the area of capacity-building and genuine Sudanese ownership of the transitional stage so that peace and justice can be mutually reinforcing and the foundations of democracy can be laid.
