Mrs. Albright (United States of America): For four
years, we have assembled in this Chamber to condemn
violence, penalize aggression, authorize humanitarian relief
and urge an end to the killing in former Yugoslavia.

While much of our work has borne fruit, often our
resolutions and statements have promised much but
accomplished little. On many of those occasions I have sat
in this Chamber in anguish as I looked over at the
representative of Bosnia, whose country was the victim of
such brutal aggression. For often the Council's message to
the people of Bosnia was a tragic one: We cannot defend
you and we will not let you defend yourselves.

Today, our message is a new one. Today, I am happy
to say to the representative of Bosnia: We can talk about
what we have done and will do to make peace in your
country. We have helped Bosnia to negotiate a peace
agreement, we are authorizing a powerful military force to
implement that peace, and we will enable Bosnia to ensure
that peace when we leave.

The Agreement forged in Dayton and signed yesterday
in Paris is a historic achievement. It is the product partly of
diplomatic skill, partly of courage and sacrifice and partly
of simple exhaustion with the war. Our task now, and our
responsibility, is to transform the Agreement's vision of a
united and democratic Bosnia into an enduring reality.

This resolution authorizes the Member States to
establish a multinational force, under unified command and
control, to implement aspects of the Peace Agreement. It
notes that the deployment of this force, called IFOR, was
requested by the signatories. It calls upon all Members,
including those in the region, to cooperate with that force,

 

and it recognizes the right of that force to take all
necessary measures to defend itself from attack or threat
of attack.

My Government welcomes the decision of more than
two dozen countries to contribute troops to the Bosnia
peace implementation force. Let me express my
Government's pleasure that the Russian Federation will
participate in this path-breaking operation. We recognize
as well the vital contribution being made by Belgium and
others who we hope will help implement the Peace
Agreement in Eastern Slavonia.

The decision to send troops to Bosnia was difficult
for my Government, as it was for others. The men and
women of our armed forces are our most precious
resource. Even when the mission is to save lives, we must
always bear in mind the lives we put at risk and the
worry we will cause to families whose loved ones are so
far away from home.

The forces we send will be well equipped, well
trained and well endowed with courage and skill. We
hope and expect that they will be able to accomplish their
mission in approximately one year. But we are deeply
conscious of the sacrifices already made there by troops
serving under the command of the United Nations. We
are mindful of the terrible carnage inflicted during the
war, and we are aware of - but not deterred by - the
dissatisfaction with which some in Bosnia have responded
to the Peace Agreement.

So we remind ourselves that the Agreement is
important not because it was easy to achieve, but because
it was so hard, because the wounds it seeks to bind are so
deep, and because the violence it is designed to end was
so intolerable.
As President Clinton said yesterday in Paris, the
mission of the Implementation Force is to allow the
Bosnian people to emerge from a nightmare of fear into
a new day of security, under terms that the parties
themselves have approved. IFOR's purpose is to make
peace work, not to fight a war or to occupy a hostile
country. It will treat all Bosnians with respect, and it will
deal with contentious issues fairly and in accordance with
its mandate.

But let no one doubt that if there are those in Bosnia
foolish enough to attack or threaten these forces, they will
regret doing so. That is a promise, and that promise will

 

be kept whether the forces that are attacked are American
or any other nationality.

The resolution we have adopted recognizes that the
parties shall cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The resolution further
recognizes that IFOR has the authority to take actions,
including the use of necessary force, to ensure compliance
with Annex l-A of the Peace Agreement. This is a
welcome supplement to the duties and authorities stemming
from resolution 827 (1993).

Let me emphasize that Annex 1-A of the Dayton
Agreement obligates the parties to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal. The North Atlantic Council can now
underscore this obligation by explicitly authorizing IFOR to
transfer indicted persons it comes across to the Tribunal
and to detain such persons for that purpose.

My Government again stresses the importance of
every country's obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal
and to comply with its orders. Unless they comply with
their obligations, the parties to the conflict cannot expect to
reap the benefits of peace, ensure the permanent easing of
economic sanctions or hope to rejoin fully the community
of civilized nations, including as a Member of the United
Nations. Let me recall here today the important statement
in the document approved at the London Conference, which
underlined the relationship between the parties' fulfilment
of their obligations in this area and the readiness of the
international community to commit financial resources for
reconstruction. It is a simple proposition, but a critical one.
The benefits of economic and financial assistance should
not go to those who thwart the will of this Council's
requirement to cooperate with the war crimes Tribunal.

The resolution before us also stresses the importance
of implementing the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. The success of this effort will be just as
important as the success of IFOR. For if the civilian
challenges are not met, IFOR's military success will
quickly fade, and Bosnia's hopes for peace will remain
unfulfilled.

As the United States made clear during the Peace
Implementation Conference in London last weekend, we
will cooperate fully with the new High Representative,
Mr. Carl Bildt, in ensuring a well-coordinated and
multifaceted effort on the civilian side.

Special attention must be given to holding democratic
elections, ensuring respect for human rights, planning for

 

the safe return of refugees and displaced persons, creating
a professional police force and initiating a comprehensive
programme of economic reconstruction. As the Secretary-
General's report illustrates, United Nations agencies will
be deeply involved in many of these activities.

Over the past four years, a great deal has been said
in this Council about the killing and destruction in
Bosnia. The disparity between those words and the awful
reality devalued language itself as a means for conveying
truth. For as we listened, we also saw the shattered bodies
of little children, the anguished faces of grandparents
forced from their homes, the tears of young women
brutalized and raped and the grisly evidence of newly
upturned earth.

In the light of that painful history, let me share with
this Council part of a letter written to President Clinton
by a young girl whose moving account of life in Sarajevo
made such an impact on civilized people everywhere.

"Dear Mr. President:

"I would like, in the name of the children of
Sarajevo, my home town, to thank you most
sincerely.

"Thank you for helping the civilization not to
die, because ordinary people and children truly do
not deserve it. Thank you for opening the door to
the future for the children of my country, because
everything that happened to them was a historical
injustice.

"This century started with a war in Sarajevo;
let it end with peace in Sarajevo.

"Once again, in the name of the children who
have suffered, thank you, and we will not forget."
[Signed] Zlata Filipovic, age 11.

Three weeks ago, in Dayton, and yesterday in Paris,
one era ended and another began. The test of this new era
will be whether the vows of peace will be matched by the
symptoms of peace, by children playing, parents working
and families gathering without cause for fear in city
parks, village squares and busy markets.

Our task, set out in this resolution, is to give

confidence to the people of Bosnia so that those prepared
to work for peace will find its reality within their grasp.

 

Our hope, as this holiday season approaches, is that
Bosnians of all ethnic and religious backgrounds will seize
that opportunity. Our prayer is that, through our combined
efforts, the dark Balkan winter will finally give way to an
enduring and bountiful spring.

