Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome Australia's initiative in convening this
debate to allow us to reflect on the role of international
cooperation in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. This year, we have been called upon to
analyse and adopt concrete measures with regard to
such phenomena, in particular within the context of
the Security Council, which speaks for the collective
responsibility of the international community to prevent
and combat such threats to stability and international
peace and security.

We believe that the Security Council should
be proactive in that context and must realize that
working within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy presents us with
a permanent challenge to join forces in support of
combating and preventing that scourge. For its part, our
country accepts that collective responsibility, and Chile
has therefore ratified all the international conventions
that are part of the United Nations legal framework
relating to counter-terrorism. At the national level, we
have launched a parliamentary discussion with respect
to a new counter-terrorism law that would endow
the Office of the Prosecutor with greater powers and
additional means to investigate crimes of that nature.
The new law will not lose sight of the essential balance
that must exist between the prevention of terrorism and
repression, and respect for the fundamental rights of all
individuals. Such actions demonstrate our commitment
to support the resolutions that the Council has adopted
in this area, which require constant effort at the national
level to ensure their effective implementation.

Chile values the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate. We would
like to highlight the quality of the collection and
organization of the information that each State is
required to provide in its reports. We hope that the
exchange between States and the Committee will
contribute to improving the efficiency of its internal
functioning as well as serve to spotlight the areas where
individual countries need to improve their legislative
regimes. We believe that the Committee should
continue to encourage the exchange of information.
The establishment of committees of experts can be a
useful tool for sharing best practices with respect to
the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), as well as for identifying measures that will
support the implementation of the recently adopted
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

In that regard, we stress the strengthening effect
of the work of specialized organs within regional
bodies, such as the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States.
The atrocities committed by terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida, whose ranks include a
large number of foreign combatants, should prompt
us to analyse the root causes that have allowed those
groups to disseminate their extremist narrative. We are
concerned by the pull exerted on our young people by
speeches that oppose the fundamental universal values
that are shared by every civilization and culture. The
measures adopted by the international community
to combat extremist violence and terrorism are not
intended to persecute or stigmatize any culture or
religion.

We believe that the prevention and suppression of
terrorist acts should have priority, but that the treatment
of such acts as crimes should not be the only means
for addressing the phenomenon. Each society must
ask itself why the existing tools have failed and why
the terrorist narratives that we condemn have been
able to emerge and flourish. Moreover, we need to
ask why the international community and the affected
countries have been unable to prevent terrorist groups
such as ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida from
acquiring such power and why they have managed to
seduce citizens of other countries to embark on the
path of violence. That process of reflection should be
undertaken collectively but also within each country, in
the context of our distinct national realities and social
values.

Such an analysis should also take into account the
gaps in inclusivity, tolerance and respect for diversity
and identity in our societies. As President Bachelet
pointed out in her statement before the Council in
September (see S/PV.7272), we take heart from our belief
that among the most effective tools in the fight against
terrorism are education, the elimination of inequalities
and work among the most disaffected groups of society.
In that context, we propose that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee should undertake a study to identify the
social factors that favour the growth of terrorism and
the attraction of the extremist narratives and terrorist
groups for young people, with particular focus on the
growth in the number of foreign terrorist fighters.

Another crucial theme to be investigated is the
financing behind criminal acts of that nature, an area
that requires active cooperation. In that regard, we
would like to draw particular attention to the work of
the Sanctions Committees and their monitoring groups
in the area of preventing trafficking in weapons and
the freezing of assets that would otherwise be used
for financing terrorist activities. We must also analyse
the risks that terrorism and illicit activities imply for
countries facing situations of protracted conflict and for
post-conflict societies. In addition, both peacekeeping
operations and political missions should more formally
incorporate tools for preventing the rise of extreme
violence.

To conclude, we would like to reiterate our country's
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families, especially women and children. We extend
our condolences to those who have been barbarously
murdered by ISIL, most recently the humanitarian
worker Peter Kassig. Chile will continue to support the
fight against international terrorism and to promote
human rights, because we are convinced that we will
thereby contribute to the dignity, peace, stability and
inclusive development of all our societies.

