Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I wish to begin by associating my
delegation fully with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Finland on behalf of the European Union.

The Government and people of Ireland have been
deeply shocked and outraged at the unfolding events in East
Timor following the popular consultation on 30 August, and
most particularly following the announcement of the clear
result by the Secretary-General on 3 September.

On 30 August the people of East Timor had an
opportunity for the first time to express their will with
regard to their future. Ireland's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. David Andrews, in his capacity as the Personal
Representative of the European Union presidency, was
present to observe the event. His report, on behalf of the
European Union observer groups, clearly confirmed that the
ballot was conducted by the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in an eminently fair and transparent
manner, and that, in consequence, there could be no doubt
that the outcome, whatever it might be, could be taken as
the clear expression of the will of the East Timorese
people.

There has been a widespread systematic campaign to
negate the clear result of this transparent exercise in
self-determination, through organized intimidation and
Violence. There is growing evidence of a brutal policy,
through killings and forced displacement, to reverse the
result by removing from East Timor large numbers of those
who voted for independence. Virtually all of those who
would bear witness to these events to the outside world -
the staff of UNAMET regional offices, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), international
humanitarian agencies, non-governmental organizations and
members of the media - have been forced to withdraw.

Allow me to pay tribute to the courage and
commitment of all the members of UNAMET. I wish to
acknowledge their remarkable efforts in protecting, under
the most difficult circumstances, those who sought refuge
in the United Nations compound.

The responsibility for this turn of events lies squarely
with the Indonesian authorities. They undertook, in the 5
May Agreements, to maintain peace and security in East
Timor. In the face of mounting concern they insisted that
it was their prerogative to maintain security, while at the
same time cynically excusing unrestrained militia activities.
It is now entirely clear to us all that the Indonesian
authorities are not in a position to maintain security.
Despite the proclamation of martial law, the Indonesian
armed forces are unable or unwilling even to prevent
militia from threatening the remaining UNAMET
personnel in Dili.

The Secretary-General said in a statement yesterday
that there are reports that crimes against humanity have
been committed. My delegation is aware of similar
reports, including allegations of genocide. If that is the
case, those responsible must be apprehended and brought
to justice.

The international community has made an offer of
assistance to the Indonesian authorities in restoring law
and order and the re-establishment of the conditions
which would allow the people of East Timor to return to
their homes in safety. This offer has been conveyed
directly by the mission which was dispatched by the
Security Council. Ireland urges the Government of
Indonesia to accept this offer of help without further
delay. Ireland also urges all those who may hold
influence over the authorities in Indonesia to do all in
their power to persuade them to accept the offer.
The campaign of terror unleashed in East Timor has
created a major humanitarian crisis. International
humanitarian assistance is urgently required if starvation
and disease are to be avoided. However, there can be no
such assistance if the necessary security conditions are not
in place. It is clear that the people who need the
assistance are still under severe physical threat from those
who displaced them, and that the Indonesian security
forces are manifestly unable, if not unwilling, to contain
this threat.

Hopes were high that, by the exercise in
self-determination provided for under the 5 May
Agreements, the status of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of East Timor would finally be settled,
furthering an established objective of the United Nations
when it proclaimed the International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism, now drawing to a close. The
turn which events have taken is tragic, but, it is, we
believe, reversible if Indonesia now accepts the help on
offer. If it does not, the result will undermine and damage
fundamentally Indonesia's relations with its friends in the
international community. It is very hard to believe that
anyone, inside or outside Indonesia, could wilfully seek
such an outcome.

