Mr. Borello: I thank you, Madam President, and
the Government of Indonesia for inviting me to address
the Security Council at this important open debate.

I am honoured to address the Council on behalf of
my colleagues at the Center for Civilians in Conflict,
especially as the Council marks 20 years since placing
the protection of civilians on its agenda and the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.

Sixteen years ago, a young woman named Marla
Ruzicka, the founder of the organization I lead, made
it her mission to document the impact of conflict
on civilians. Marla worked tirelessly to collect the
testimonies of civilians harmed by conflict and bring
their stories to policymakers. Tragically, Marla herself
became a victim of war, killed in 2005 in Iraq. But her
ideas live on - that civilians are not collateral damage;
that they deserve recognition, especially in times of
conflict; and that those who go to war have it in their
power to spare civilians from its worst effects.

Today's open debate is a pivotal moment to reflect
on the past 20 years and to set out an ambitious and
concrete vision for the future. On that note, I would like
to draw the Council's attention to the joint statement
issued by 22 non-governmental organizations in
advance of this open debate. The statement makes an
urgent call to strengthen the protection of civilians.
This is a make-or-break moment. The situation is not
hopeless, but we need action by the Security Council,
the United Nations and all Governments to reduce the
suffering experienced by millions of civilians caught
in conflict.

I wish to focus my comments on three important
topics: minimizing civilian harm in conflict; protecting
civilians through peacekeeping; and engaging
communities on their own protection.

Over the past 16 years, we have worked directly with
armed actors and civilians to find solutions to civilian
harm. In Afghanistan, Nigeria and Ukraine, important
strides are being made, many of them through the
development of national policies on civilian protection.
Every Government should have such a national policy,
and that policy should include six key elements.

First, we must have a strong gender lens, recognizing
that women, men, girls and boys experience conflict
differently and that they must all be protected equally.

Secondly, we must create specific capabilities to
track, analyse and respond to civilian harm. These
capabilities have had an impact in reducing harm in
contexts like Afghanistan and Somalia.

Thirdly, we must make a commitment to avoiding
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in urban areas. I strongly urge all nations to support a
political declaration on this issue this year.
Fourthly, we must prioritize civilian protection
in arms transfers and security partnerships. Rigorous
safeguards are needed, especially where there are risks
of violations by partners.

Fifthly, we need dedicated training on the protection
of civilians within national military education systems.

Sixthly, we must find a way for civilians to receive
acknowledgement, amends and accountability for the
harm they have suffered in conflict.

There is no substitute for high-level and public
political commitment to civilian protection. This is
why we fully echo the call of the Secretary-General
on all Member States - including the members of the
Council 4 to adopt national policies on the protection
of civilians.

Twenty years ago, the Council endowed the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone with the first
explicit mandate to protect civilians. Since 1999,
United Nations missions have been an essential tool in
protecting civilians and interrupting cycles of violence
that threaten international peace and security. There
is currently no other kind of operation that can bring
to bear the comprehensive set of capabilities to protect
civilians that a United Nations operation can. In South
Sudan, a woman living in a protection of civilians site
powerfully expressed this, telling us: "This living soul
talking to you now is because ofthe protection provided
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan."

Yet, United Nations missions are beset by recurring
challenges that have been identified across consecutive
reform efforts since 1999. The Council, Member
States and the United Nations can help in three main
ways: providing political support, adequate financial
resources and the right capabilities.

First, diplomacy and political action are urgently
needed to support United Nations operations in contexts
where Governments or non-State actors threaten
civilians and peacekeepers.

Secondly, Member States and the United Nations
must ensure that mandates are matched with resources.
Pressure on peacekeeping budgets has undermined
efforts to protect civilians. In the Congo, after a base
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
closed following budget and troop reductions, a woman
told us that she felt that "even the United Nations has
abandoned us".
Thirdly, United Nations operations need the right
mix of civilian, military and police capabilities. These
include well-trained, equipped and rapidly deployable
contingents, expert civilian staff and appropriate
enablers, such as vital air assets. Without these essential
ingredients, peacekeeping operations will continue
to struggle to deliver on their mandates to protect
civilians. Action on critical peacekeeping reforms is
essential in 2019.

I want to end by discussing the critical work of
engaging communities on their own protection. We
strongly believe that engaging communities in a safe,
effective and meaningful way is essential to national
and international efforts to bring peace and stability
in conflict. Civilians are not just victims in armed
conflict; they are often the best stewards of their own
protection. They can devise and implement highly
effective solutions. We have seen communities demand
and obtain armed escorts for women leaving their
homes to gather firewood. We have seen community
leaders convince both parties to a conflict to agree to a
daily ceasefire that allowed civilians to go about their
daily lives. We have seen girls return to the classroom
as a result of advocacy by their own communities with
armed actors.

Efforts to protect civilians and resolve conflict will
more likely succeed if undertaken in full consultation
and partnership with civilians and communities.
Community engagement should empower and support
existing community-based protection initiatives and
abide by the do-no-harm principle. Furthermore,
community engagement should be conflict and gender
sensitive and ensure equal opportunities for all civilians
to voice and address differing protection concerns.
Finally, engagement cannot be a substitute for State
and non-State actors upholding their obligations under
international law.

Twenty years ago, the Council made a solemn
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict.
There has been much progress, but to the people of
Syria, Yemen, Mali and the Central African Republic,
and civilians caught in too many other conflicts, that
commitment remains unfulfilled. I strongly urge the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General and
all Governments to take concrete action to strengthen
the protection of civilians. The days of accepting
civilian casualties as an unwelcome but unavoidable
consequence of conflict must end. Parties to conflict
can minimize civilian harm and Governments can
prioritize the protection of civilians. With the right
support, peacekeeping operations can support civilians.
Safe, meaningful and effective community engagement
can lead to better protection on the ground.

With committed leadership at the global level by
the United Nations, the political will of all Governments
and the engagement of affected communities, a higher
standard of protection can be achieved. We all can
do more to protect civilians in armed conflict, and,
because we can, we must.

