Mr. Ramcharan: On behalf of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, I should like to
express my gratitude for the kind remarks and the
support expressed by many speakers for some of the
thoughts we have placed before members. This has
been an important debate, and for that we very much
thank the Council. Let me take this opportunity to say
that the cooperation among the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, my Office and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is good.
Mr. Guehenno, in particular, is very supportive of the
spirit of human rights and peacekeeping going together.

On the point concerning the protection of
investigations, allow me to say that, while there can be
no hard and fast rule, sometimes the pursuit of an
investigation makes it indispensable to protect sites.
When I was in the peacekeeping operations in the
former Yugoslavia, and we had first discovered the
mass grave sites at Ovcara, near Vukovar, we had to
ask the peacekeepers to protect the sites for us for
several months, and they did so. When, upon the
Security Council's request, I went to C6te d'Ivoire in
December last year, I myself visited one such mass
grave sites. Doing so becomes rather tricky if you have
no escort; the person on that occasion prevented us
even from taking photographs of the site. It got as
tricky as that. But, as Mr. Guehenno said, this is
something that one does case by case, and I would echo
his appeal for financial support for the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Observatory.

The question was asked how we can support
preventive efforts in places like these. My answer
would be that we must support the conflict prevention
Mechanism of the African Union and must call upon it
to play an increasingly greater role in the prevention of
gross violations of human rights. Perhaps we must
establish a dialogue with the African Union on the
Mechanism.

It was also asked how one can address the issue
of justice in this situation. I should like to give an
answer that refers to the models we have used so far.
As members are aware, we have the examples of the
two Tribunals, for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda;
we have the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is a
national enterprise supported internationally; we have
the court for Cambodia; we have a national court in
Ethiopia, which continues to deal with past crimes;
and, of course, we have the International Criminal
Court. This morning, we heard around this table that
one should support the transitional Government,
present evidence to it and encourage it to tackle these
issues.

The question was asked how one ensures that
justice is not secondary to reconciliation. That, of
course, is not an easy question to answer. I would say
that, first of all, we must publish the facts in any
instance so that we know what they are. And, as we
publish the facts, we must give each people a chance to
pursue its own route to reconciliation and justice, with
one proviso: it must be clear that there can be no
impunity for international crimes. I formulated that
carefully, because I think that publishing the facts is
important for the record, and then each people would
be given the chance to choose its own path to justice
and reconciliation, on the clear understanding that there
can be no impunity for international crimes.

In relation to paragraph 29 of the report, I was
asked what the possibility would be of sending an
international team and when the right time would be.
Well, I think the right time would be when security
conditions would permit it; this is linked to the fact
that, if you cannot go to a site, you cannot really
investigate it. Here, I must return to my own visits to
sites: you know that, if you are going there without any
kind of serious escort or protection, it is a non-starter.

I was asked about joint missions of special
rapporteurs. Let me say first of all that the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has visited and is planning another visit
soon; she will report to the General Assembly. But that
was not the question; the question was joint visits. I
should like to give a generic answer, which is that
sometimes, in situations of this nature, it has been
found useful to put together a set of the thematic
rapporteurs of the Commission on Human Rights. On
this occasion, I could envisage a joint mission, at the
appropriate time, of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Special Rapporteur on torture, the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women,
representatives of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances and the Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions.

Conceptually, the role of such a joint mission is
that it brings added authority and insights, and it aims
to achieve two purposes: first, to demonstrate to the
international community that there is such concern
about a particular situation that one is asking the
leading investigators to go there; and secondly, so that
experts from different perspectives can produce reports
on and document what is going on in a country. It is a
way of documenting what is going on in a country.

I think Mr. Guehenno dealt with the issue of
military observers. The question was raised whether
human rights observers should have immunity. I would
answer the question this way: of course, if you do not
have security, immunity is theoretical. But, as a matter
of principle, human rights investigators should be
protected with respect to what they do in pursuit of
their activities.

I was asked how one can engage the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
neighbouring Governments. I would give two answers.
First, as members are aware, many actors are engaged
in peacemaking, and I shall not enter that terrain; I will

just point to the fact that there are many peacemakers.
Secondly, I would indicate that the idea of a conference
on Africa's Great Lakes region at some point in time is
in view. I was Director of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia, and thus I can well envisage
that, when it is eventually held, such a conference
might give an important place to human rights issues.
For the purposes at hand, I would say that what is
crucial in a situation like this is to gather and document
information on violations. I cannot place too much
emphasis on the issue of documenting the violations.
What are the possibilities of bringing to justice
those who are responsible? I think that I have partially
answered that question by pointing to the options that
might be available and to the idea - which was floated
around this table - that one should present the
information to the transitional Government and help
the transitional Government to act.

I was asked how the Office of the High
Commissioner wishes to pursue the findings of these
two reports in order to bring to justice those concerned.
I should like to ask your permission, Mr. President, for
the Office of the High Commissioner to submit a paper
to the Council - informally, if necessary - on follow-
up to this important debate and to some of the issues in
the report. The quality of this debate indicates that it
should have a high-quality and considered response on
our part. I can well imagine that the Office of the High
Commissioner should, with the appropriate support,
help in the process of gathering information,
publicizing that information and, quite frankly,
identifying the responsibility of those concerned. It had
been my intention this morning to present the Council
with a list of names of the persons whom we consider
particularly responsible for some of the atrocities. I
hesitated to do that, because I felt that it might fall
more into the province of the Prosecutor. But my
answer to the Council is that what the Office of the
High Commissioner can do is to help in the process of
investigation.

We were asked what more MONUC could do.
Mr. Guehenno dealt with that question, so I shall pass
on it. I would simply note - picking up the earlier
thread of my answer - that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has made
public comments about cases that occurred in the Ituri
area that qualified even as genocide. I would also ask
that the Council take note of the plight of the
indigenous population in that area, who are particularly
victimized.

I was asked what practical measures one can take
to prevent impunity. I would like to stay, if I may, with
the answer that I gave: at the end of the day, each
people must be given an opportunity to strive for
peace, justice and reconciliation, on the understanding
that international crimes cannot be subject to pardon.

I was asked how the monitoring of human rights
can be strengthened, and how we can strengthen the
role of civil society. Mr. Guehenno also referred to this:
when working with partners, especially non-
governmental organizations, at the end of the day the
classic human rights method is to gather the facts,
publicize them and let the verdict of history be
pronounced on those involved. That is the answer I
would give, which I gave earlier. We must increase our
activities to document and to publicize the facts.

I welcome the comment that was made on the
gender dimension. I think it would be important for the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women to visit
this situation.

I was asked how the Observatory and the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission will work together and
how they will be financed. Mr. Guehenno answered
that question. Anything that we do in this kind of
situation is financed by voluntary contributions. We
spend $22 million from the regular budget per year,
and we spend double that amount from voluntary
contributions. If we want to mount an investigation or
if we want to act to support the Observatory or the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, we must launch
an appeal for voluntary contributions and come to
States for support.

Finally, a question was raised on how justice
should be brought to the chief commanders, and how
one would follow up on some of the information that
has been presented to the Council. Mr. Guehenno gave
an answer with respect to the chief perpetrators and
commanders. It is an issue that requires a certain
subtlety of approach. But on the concrete issue of who
would assume the responsibility to follow up, I would
use this occasion to say that it is my fervent hope that
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court will
consider the situation seriously; here we are faced with
a situation in which, while the needs of peace are
without doubt of the highest order, one may think that
the limits of conscience have been reached. It is
important for the hand of justice, through the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to be
heard.

To conclude, Mr. President, I will seek your leave
and the leave of Council members to submit to the
Council a further written response because the
questions posed here were serious and important ones.
The quality of the debate of the Council indicates that a
response of matching quality should be given.

