Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for the very kind words
addressed to my delegation and by wishing you all
the very best during the month of May. I would like
to thank Judges Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their extensive briefings
today. Lithuania also reiterates its thanks to all of the
staff of the Tribunals for their work.

The upcoming commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary ofthe Srebrenica genocide is a sad reminder
of that massive human tragedy and the dramatic
failure to implement the responsibility to protect the
population from genocide and crimes against humanity.
At the same time, the anniversary once again recalls
the importance of upholding and actively pursuing the
accountability of those responsible for the most serious
crimes.

Through its jurisprudence, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has significantly
contributed to international criminal law and continues
to do so. Both Tribunals have played a historic role in
the prosecution of wartime crimes of sexual violence,
thereby paving the way for the adjudication of such
crimes worldwide. Both have championed respect for
the rule of law and have contributed to the necessary
process of truth-seeking and reconciliation. The reports
presented today clearly indicate that both Tribunals
are moving steadily towards the completion of their
mandates. We welcome the steps that they have taken to
expedite their work and effectively conclude the cases
still under consideration, while referring outstanding
tasks to the Residual Mechanism.

With regard to the ICTY, the Tribunal made
substantial progress during the most recent reporting
period. Two appeal judgements were rendered,
including the Vujadin Popovic' et a]. case regarding five
individuals convicted at trial. Only seven trials and
appeals currently remain, involving the last 14 accused
individuals and appellants. We are looking forward to
the trial judgements in the Vojislav Seselj, Radovan
Karadzie and Ratko Mladie cases, involving three of
the most important indictees, and encourage the ICTY
to take all appropriate measures to expedite decisions
in those cases.

We note the concern over the high staff attrition
rates expressed by the President of ICTY in his report
(S/2015/342, annexes) and acknowledge the steps taken
by the Tribunal to tackle that concern. Challenging
circumstances and delays in judgements canjeopardize
the course of justice. We acknowledge the challenges
that the ICTY is facing in meeting the deadlines set for
the remaining seven trials and encourage it to continue
taking all measures necessary to minimize the delays.

Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends on the timely completion of the
remaining proceedings by the Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism. As the ICTY nears the completion of its
mandate, accountability at the national level is of utmost
importance. We welcome cooperation between the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY and the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia. At
the same time, we would like to share the concerns
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz with regard to
improper attempts to influence independent judicial
authorities and to politicize war-crimes prosecutions.
We urge concerned States to overcome the most serious
barriers to national justice and to properly investigate
and prosecute war crimes under their own jurisdiction.

With regard to the ICTR, we would like to commend
the tireless work and dedication of the staff and judges
in the continuing judicial and legal activities aimed at
completing the work of the Tribunal. We welcome the
fact that the transition to the Residual Mechanism is
close to completion and that the Tribunal plans to close
by the end of 2015. While the ICTR is completing its
mandate, nine fugitives under ICTR indictment remain
at large. We encourage all States to provide full support
to Rwanda and the Mechanism so as to achieve the
arrest and surrender of the fugitives.

We note that the Residual Mechanism, working
closely with both Tribunals, has assumed many of their
core functions, including with regard to the enforcement
of sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses,
the management of archives and the relocation of
acquitted and released persons.

We take note of the remaining challenges regarding
the relocation of acquitted individuals and those who
have served the sentence imposed by the ICTR. Greater
efforts are necessary to find a long-term solution to
that issue. In the meantime, we encourage all States
to cooperate, with a View to resolving the matter as
quickly as possible.
While the ICTY and ICTR have dealt with some
of the most gruesome crimes, mass atrocities continue
to be committed in other parts of the world, and
impunity continues to prevail. The legacy of both
Tribunals has taken concrete form in the establishment
of a permanent international criminal tribunal - the
International Criminal Court (ICC) - which today lies
at the heart of the entire criminal justice system of the
international community. In that regard, support for the
ICC is essential in order to ensure its ability to deliver
justice to the numerous victims.

