Mr. Pascoe: Mr. President, thank you very much
for the opportunity to appear before the Security
07-39337
Council today. This is an important topic and an
important issue for debate. As the Council recognized
in resolution 1625 (2005), there can be no question that
there often exists a close link between illegal
exploitation of natural resources and conflict. The
question before us is: What can we do about it?

In too many cases, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources has triggered, exacerbated and
prolonged armed conflict. The connection can be quite
complex, and it is not limited to one region or one
economic commodity. Nor is it limited to one phase of
conflict.

Solutions must take all of these issues into
consideration. With good governance and effective
measures to ensure accountability and transparency,
natural resources can be a great boon to a country and
contribute to peace and development. We need to work
actively to ensure that those factors are in place. A
wide range of actors will have to be involved.

As the Council is aware, I have just returned from
Somalia, where food and water insecurity, combined
with intra- and inter-clan rivalries and a legacy of poor
governance, have left the country mired in violence.
The proposed National Reconciliation Congress may
be the best chance Somalia has had in the last 15 years
to start moving forward. But we must not neglect the
crucial issue of natural resources as we seek to assist
Somalis in this important process.

Likewise, the African Union and the United
Nations are embarking on a new effort to assist the
parties in Darfur to conclude a political settlement and,
as a recent report by the United Nations Environment
Programme pointed out, it would be remiss of us to
ignore the environmental underpinnings of that crisis.

In Afghanistan, the drug economy represents a
fundamental threat to the still-fragile political,
economic and social institutions established according
to the 2001 Bonn Agreement. While progress is
required on all fronts - political, military and
regional- no solution will be possible without
making fundamental progress on eliminating the drug
economy.

As the international community faces those
challenges, we can draw on many lessons from the past
decade. Thanks in part to the efforts of the Security
Council, we have gained important practical
3
experience in the context of sanctions regimes and
peacekeeping, on which we must build.

The imposition of targeted sanctions in Angola,
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Cote d'lvoire, the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, backed in many
cases by the appointment of expert groups to monitor
compliance, has yielded a wealth of knowledge about
conflicts themselves and about the broader
phenomenon of how they are fuelled by the illicit
extraction of natural resources. As the Secretary-
General noted in his 2006 report on the prevention of
armed conflict, we must make better use of the
knowledge gleaned from sanctions experiences. That
knowledge can be invaluable in enhancing the quality
of our crisis-prevention work.

The Department of Political Affairs continues to
play a fundamental role in assisting Member States to
improve the effectiveness of targeted sanctions. As
Council members are aware, my department provides
substantive servicing to sanctions committees and
supports the work of the various expert groups and
panels. Targeted measures imposed by the Security
Council are playing a crucial role in sustaining peace
processes, especially in the post-conflict peacebuilding
phase, as in the case of Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Although peacekeeping operations are of limited
duration with explicit mandates, if they have adequate
resources they can play a vital role in monitoring
developments on the ground, enforcing sanctions and
embargoes and supporting State capacity in that area.
In Liberia, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) worked diligently to support Government
compliance with the Kimberley Process, a prerequisite
to removal of the embargo on rough diamonds, and
supported the development of a national forestry
reform law that allowed for the lifting of timber
sanctions in September 2006. Moreover, while the
diamond sanctions were lifted in April 2007, the most
recent Security Council resolution - resolution 1760
(2007) - provided for a continuation of the mandate
of the group of experts.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has been
helping to restore stability to the resource-rich
Democratic Republic of the Congo, working with the
Panel of Experts. However, the scale of illegal
exploitation of natural resources far surpasses
MONUC's resources.

Neither sanctions nor peacekeeping operations
alone can produce sustainable solutions to this
problem. What is required is a commitment on the part
of all stakeholders to the equitable sharing of natural
resources and to good governance, accountability and
transparency.

I have already alluded to the critical role that
natural resources often play in creating crises inside
and between countries. Our crisis-prevention strategies
must be greatly enhanced to include the capacity to
deal with natural resources issues early on.

The issue of natural resources management
should also be addressed during peace processes and in
constitutions. The fledgling mediation support capacity
in our department is working to develop operational
guidance for mediators on this question and will
include this expertise in the planned standing team of
mediation specialists. However, any agreements on the
management of resources will remain on paper only if
they are not accompanied by the necessary capacity.
We need to build the national capacities of vulnerable
countries to establish effective economic governance,
as with Liberia's Governance and Economic
Management Assistance Programme (GEMAP).

Good governance and transparency are required
not only of Governments in whose territory the illegal
exploitation is taking place, but also of Governments in
a position to police the activity of those engaged in
illegal exploitation and illicit trade. For instance, while
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must live up to its commitments under the
governance contract, which promises improved
stewardship of the country's resources, international
support for its efforts will be critical to success.

Translating those types of commitments into
action requires a comprehensive approach that draws
together the technical and financial resources of
development agencies, regional diplomacy and
international commodity-specific monitoring and
certification schemes.

Regional approaches are key, given the cross-
border dimension of the trade in illicit resources. I
welcome new regional initiatives, such as the
December 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
includes a Protocol against the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources. The Pact needs to be brought into
force as quickly as possible. Another example is the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, which brings together all
oil-producing countries of the western African coast
and will address specifically issues of natural resources
and security.

We must also continue to encourage efforts -
working with regional organizations, Member States
and non-governmental organizations - to regulate
business practices and promote corporate social
responsibility in conflict-prone environments, not just
with respect to specific industries but across the board.
The Global Compact seeks to do exactly that, and
encouraging lessons have been learned from existing
initiatives, such as the Kimberley Process and the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. I
welcome the recent admission of Liberia to the
Kimberley Process and hope to see the Process further
strengthened through better monitoring, stronger
verification and increased transparency.

Finally, we must not overlook the potential for
the natural resource challenge to provide opportunities
for cooperation and the defusing of political tensions.
The management of shared water resources can be a
powerful force for peace. One example is the Nile
Basin Initiative, which includes institutions for joint
problem-solving amongst the 10 riparian countries.

Equitable and accountable natural resource
management is a key element of an effective State and
must be a critical element of our efforts in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. A coherent and consistent United Nations
approach to natural resource management therefore is
essential and will have a critical role to play in the
Organization's peace, security and development
activities. We look forward to working closely with the
Security Council on that issue in the months and years
to come.

