Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
pleasure, at the outset, of congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I have every
confidence that your rich expertise will lead the
Council's work to great success, with regard to both
this international Organization and the current
international challenges. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the Syrian presidency of the Council
last month. It is also a pleasure for us to address the
Council, as we assume the chairmanship of the Arab
Group this month.

The Security Council is meeting at a time
characterized by the holding of many meetings and the
adoption of many resolutions and numerous
condemnations of all the negative developments. This
activity does not, however, even attempt to mitigate
Israel's intransigence and its persistence in
expansionist settlement policies - to say nothing of its
refusal to abide, as an occupying Power, by United
Nations and other Security Council resolutions. That
Power has continued to carry out every sort of
aggression, persecution and oppression against the
Palestinian people and has repeatedly scuttled every
effort to reach a political settlement.
It is no surprise to us that the road map has
reached a dead end. Since the map was introduced,
Israel has intransigently endeavoured to abort it. It has
also escalated its military campaign, overrun cities in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and continued its
policy of siege, closure and liquidation directed against
the symbols of Palestinian resistance. In addition, it has
continued to build an expansionist separation wall,
despite international rejection of such a destructive
step. It has dealt a powerful blow to every political
effort, including those of the Quartet regarding the road
map. We hope that the Council will hold a special
meeting to discuss this separation wall.

But Israel has not stopped at that. It has gone so
far as to declare, last Thursday, a sudden decision to
expel President Yasser Arafat from Palestinian
territory. In so doing, it has signalled a move
unprecedented in nature that will lead the entire
situation to the point of no return. If Israel succeeds,
the consequences will be extremely negative. The
international community and the United Nations are
bound by their commitment to peace and security to go
beyond rejecting and condemning such a step. The
Security Council, in particular, is confronted with a
major and immediate challenge to its ability to uphold
its responsibilities in that regard. The Council should
compel Israel to reverse its decision that could put a
definitive end to peace efforts and could threaten a
complete and uncontrollable explosion of the situation
in the Middle East.

The peoples of the world, and those of the Arab
and Islamic world in particular, expect the Security
Council to take a decisive decision to end Israeli
intransigence and to put things in proper perspective in
that explosive region of the world, so that all the
parties concerned can return to the path of peace and
fully implement their commitments under the road
map. They also expect the Council to compel Israel to
reverse its latest decision.

The Council no doubt saw the reaction of the
angry Palestinian street, which is still gripped by the
extremely tense situation following the announcement
of Israel's decision. Suffice it to say that the Israeli
decision coincides with the tenth anniversary of the
Oslo Accords. Israel is in effect declaring its intention
to terminate the existence of the Palestinian Authority
and to destroy the entire peace process, in complete
disregard of the road map, the efforts of the Quartet
and scores of Security Council resolutions. The
Council must measure up to its responsibilities as the
guardian of international law and maintainer of
international peace and security.

I would like to conclude by saying that what we
fear most is that, if the Council limits its reaction to
condemnation and rejection of Israel's latest decisions,
Council resolutions will not be implemented by Israel.
That would be tantamount to giving Israel a green light
to carry out its decision. We heard the Israeli Cabinet
state that President Arafat is an obstacle to peace and
that Israel will do its utmost to remove that obstacle.
Israel's Vice Prime Minister, Mr. Ehud Olmert, then
said on Israeli television that killing Arafat is an
available option. We must all realize by now that Israel
is the country most guilty of violating international law
and resolutions. It does not abide by the rules and
appears to be determined to realize its declared
intentions despite international rejection. It will do just
that unless the Security Council shoulders its
responsibilities and takes decisive steps to put an end
to Israeli intransigence before it is too late.

