Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The position of
Kazakhstan on the use of chemical weapons in Syria
is consistent and well known. We strongly oppose any
use of chemical weapons, as well as any other kind of
weapon of mass destruction by any State organization
or individual, regardless of the circumstances.

We were shocked and deeply saddened by this
terrible chemical attack in Idlib, Syria. Kazakhstan
strongly condemns such actions, which demonstrate
the ruthless intent to destabilize the situation in the
country. We wish to take this opportunity to express
our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of the
victims and to wish a speedy recovery to those injured.

Will our collective efforts to prevent further
escalation of the situation in Syria, including the
continued peace negotiations in Geneva, risk being
undermined by such provocative actions? Any criminal
behaviour that is implemented in such an inhuman
way, and that pursues intimidation, must be classified
as a terrorist action, which we must combat with
full determination.

Kazakhstan urges the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the United Nations to immediately conduct full
investigations without any delay, and to identify the
perpetrators of this heinous crime. As we see, it is
mainly innocent people who continue to suffer. The
deliberate use by criminals to sow fear and anxiety is a
characteristic method of terrorist organizations. In the
light of this, we request a full and prompt investigation,
which must go beyond routine procedural formalities.
The Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
must directly collect evidence and make every effort to
identify the perpetrators of this flagrant crime in order
to bring them to justice.

Given the circumstances and proceeding from
the need for a complete and unbiased disclosure
of these crimes, we need comprehensive and open
cooperation between the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the Fact-finding Mission.
As a proponent of impartial and full disclosure of
all chemicals crimes in Syria, Kazakhstan urges the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as
other parties, to cooperate fully with the international
inspectors of the United Nations and the OPCW. Any
delay in terms of disclosure or holding the perpetrators
accountable demonstrates tacit agreement to continue
such crimes in the future.

I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Kim Won-soo, for his briefing. Yesterday's
flagrant crimes in the Idlib region of Syria, as well
as the ongoing potential threat of the use of chemical
weapons in this country demand serious and energetic
efforts. Unfortunately, as we see from the report before
us (S/2017/260, annex), the critical issues that require
progress to move us forward remain unchanged.

First, there is the issue of the three remaining
facilities, the destruction ofwhich still seems impossible
due to the lack of the necessary security conditions. It
is necessary to take urgent action to finally resolve
this problem. In turn, it will help us to ensure that
all official sources that raise suspicions about the
storage of hazardous chemicals would no longer exist.
Therefore, more active interaction is needed with the
Government of Syria. In that regard we look forward
to the resumption of high-level consultations with
Damascus in May to address all unresolved issues
related to the declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We expect the results of these consultations in the next
report, which will outline the forthcoming steps that
need to be taken.

Secondly we would like to see more dynamic and
speedy measures taken by the fact-finding mission,
which would help the Joint Investigative Mechanism
commence investigations on new crimes.

Thirdly, the active interaction and collaboration
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism with the three
Security Council Committees in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2319 (2016) will result in a
more effective response for preventing and combating
such threats. Bearing in mind that the mandate of the
Mechanism is already coming to an end in November
2017, we must urgently take all measures to strengthen
the work, which is necessary if it is to complete in a
timely manner all pending investigations of previous
crimes as well as new ones committed in Syria.

