Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is grateful for this opportunity to address
the Council. We have distributed a complete text of our
statement and I shall limit my remarks to an
abbreviated version.

Switzerland welcomes the counter-terrorism
measures set out in the outcome document adopted at
the 2005 world summit on 16 September 2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Those measures stem from
an awareness that the effectiveness of the Security
Council counter-terrorism sanctions regime would be
affected if the legality of measures enacted by the
Council were contested before national or international
courts. In my country, the legality of those measures
was recently the subject of a parliamentary question
addressed to the Federal Council. Similar steps are
being taken in the rest of Europe and elsewhere in the
world.

It is in the light of those developments that we are
weighing the accounts presented here today. They
complement the analyses and recommendations set out
in the third report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2005/572), as well as
the provisions of resolution 1617 (2005), adopted by
the Security Council on 29 July 2005. My delegation
would just like to make a few additional observations.

Resolution 1617 (2005) contains important
provisions to facilitate the indispensable collaboration
of States with the sanctions Committees, and thus to
ensure the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism
while respecting fundamental human rights.
Switzerland particularly welcomes the provisions
which enable the list established in accordance with
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000) to be a
functional tool and to provide a solid working basis for
the fair application of sanctions.

The requirement that States proposing to add a
name to the Consolidated List must henceforth provide
a statement of their case describing the basis of the
proposal is a step in the right direction. Such
documents could be used by the Committee to reply to
the questions of Member States whose nationals,
residents or entities have been entered on the
Consolidated List.

However, we would like to point out that the
Monitoring Team recommended that an additional step
be taken towards the greater transparency which is
desirable. Diligent action by States with regard to the
parties concerned is possible only if their investigative
services or police have been duly informed of the
nature of the illicit activities that justify the inclusion
of those parties on the Consolidated List.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 1617 (2005) - which
requests States to inform individuals and entities
included in the Consolidated List of the measures
imposed on them, the Committee's guidelines and the
provisions of the applicable resolutions - is a further
step in the right direction. As the Monitoring Team
mentioned in its report, not only is the provision of
such information essential from a legal standpoint, but
it is also more conducive to the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime.

Switzerland, together with other States - in
particular, Germany and Sweden - is actively
involved in promoting the drafting and implementation
of more satisfactory provisions for listing and
delisting. The aim of this initiative is to improve the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism sanctions.

I assure members that Switzerland is prepared to
continue the dialogue with the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs on measures to strengthen the fight
against terrorism within the framework of effective
sanctions regimes that respect basic human rights.

The Chairman: I appreciate the heed paid by the
representative of Switzerland to the call for brevity.

I now call on the representative of India.

