Mr. J urica (Croatia): Let me begin with words of
thanks to the Secretary-General for his statement and
to Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing.

I would like to reiterate our full support for the
Annapolis process, which offers the only realistic
chance for peace. Despite recent difficulties, we are
encouraged by the resumption of meetings between the
two sides and by the recent high-level visits to the
region.

The principle at the core of the peace process -
the two-State solution, with a viable Palestinian State
and a safe and secure Israel - should remain the
ultimate goal for both sides. Any deviation from that
course will eventually lead us away from that goal and
will necessarily have negative effects on the outcome
of the process.

As has been repeatedly stressed in our earlier
debates this year, the peace process may also be
imperilled by the absence of tangible improvements on
the ground. We therefore welcome efforts to create a
calm atmosphere conducive to negotiations and the
implementation of the Road Map.

Actions such as the 6 March terrorist attack on a
Jerusalem seminary - the very epitome of the Jewish
identity - which we condemned in the strongest
terms, are unjustifiable. Equally terrorizing is the

launching of rockets into Israeli territory from Gaza by
Hamas. Such acts, which give rise to the exercise of
Israel's undeniable right to self-defence, are
unacceptable and have to be brought to an end. Let me
be clear - one cannot remain insensitive in the face of
persistent and unapologetic armed provocations that
threaten the security of Israel and its civilian
population. Terrorist attacks cannot be justified under
any circumstances.

However, Croatia shares the concerns raised
about the serious humanitarian situation in Gaza, while
being mindful of the circumstances that have
contributed to creating it, namely, the violent takeover
by Hamas last summer and its terrorist activities. We
are nevertheless encouraged by Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe's report on the improved importation
of much-needed supplies into Gaza today.

We are aware that the present situation is
negatively affecting the social and economic structure
of Palestinian society and can also have a destabilizing
effect on the peace process. We are particularly worried
by the fact that even the relief effort is facing obstacles
in a territory that is already heavily dependent on aid.
We hope to see the early resumption of United Nations
and other projects in Gaza, and we call on the parties to
continue to work on the controlled reopening of Gaza
crossings.

My delegation once again reiterates its View that
only a permanent political settlement can
fundamentally alter the economic and humanitarian
problems faced by the Palestinians and bring lasting
security for Israel. If some actors are allowed to
continue with their destabilizing and terrorist attacks,
the peace process will not be able to advance to its
desired conclusion - a just and sustainable peace for
both Israelis and Palestinians.

We continue to believe that 2008 is a decisive
year for the Middle East. In particular, we hope that the
parties will be able to reach a peace settlement based
on the parameters agreed to in Annapolis. It is
therefore crucial that the parties keep negotiating in
good faith, thereby fulfilling their obligations under the
first phase of the Road Map. International
humanitarian law should guide the actions of all parties
on the ground. No less important are the efforts
towards Palestinian institution-building and economic
reform.
Turning to Lebanon, let me stress that Croatia
remains deeply preoccupied with the volatile political
and security situation and lack of progress in
overcoming the political paralysis in that country. In
order to avoid the further destabilization of an already
fragile Lebanese society, the convening of presidential
elections should remain a priority.

The atmosphere of political uncertainty also
remains an impediment for reaching the goals of
resolution 1701 (2006), including those on
disarmament issues. The continued allegations of
breaches of the arms embargo, which Hizbollah does
not deny, are disturbing, as is the recent bellicose
rhetoric of its leaders. We condemn the continuing
string of acts of intimidation and brutal attacks in
Lebanon, which threaten the country's very
sovereignty and its legitimate institutions. It is our
belief that efforts to end impunity should be seen as an
integral part of a sustained political process, and we
salute the progress achieved thus far in setting up the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

