Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
extend our condolences to the Government of
Bangladesh and the families of the peacekeepers who
were killed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last week. That tragic development should receive due
attention from the Council.

We welcome the presence in the Council this
morning of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste. I should also thank
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Timor-Leste, for presenting the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in Timor-Leste
(UNMISET).

The overarching message of the report is the
prevailing calm and stability in Timor-Leste. The
reported security incidents appear routine and
characteristic of the formative stages of nationhood for
a country emerging from violent conflict.

Timor-Leste is making steady and sure progress
towards democracy, as demonstrated by the successful
and popularly backed local elections in the districts of
Bobonaro and Oecussi. Those elections will serve as an
example for the coming elections in other districts that
are scheduled for later this year. The National
Parliament has embarked upon a serious agenda of
enacting vital pieces of legislation that define, and lay
the foundation for, systems of political accountability,
the rule of law, justice, respect for human rights and a
modern public administration.

The report of the Secretary-General provides
useful benchmarks for assessing the performance of the
mandate of UNMISET as it implements resolution
1573 (2004). In the short period since independence,
the Government and people of Timor-Leste have
scored all-round positive achievements, in partnership
with the United Nations Mission of Support and other
multilateral and bilateral partners. Nonetheless, as the
UNMISET mandate expires, on 20 May 2005, there
remains business in critical areas that must be finished
to permit a seamless take-off to institutionalized self-
sufficiency in Timor-Leste.

The key areas identified by the working groups as
yet to be consolidated deserve particular attention from
the Council. The top leadership of Timor-Leste has
confirmed its need for support. It has also requested the
support of several heads of State and Government,
including members of the Council, to continue the
presence of UNMISET for one more year, to 20 May
2006. The Secretary-General's recommendation for a
scaled-down structure in response to needs, and for the
sake of continuity, is a reasonable, appropriate
investment in the stability of Timor-Leste. The
maintenance of law and order and justice is the
cornerstone of a convulsing fractured society
determined to live in peace with itself and its
neighbour, Indonesia.

The judiciary and the police are vital State organs
whose future must be firmly anchored in sustainable
professional expertise and operational capacities.
Developing specialized competencies and skills, such
as through training of competent judges and forensic
experts, will obviously take longer than the requested
extended duration of UNMISET. It will also require
longer-term advisers.

We note with interest the measures taken at the
highest level by both Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
fight impunity in relation to the serious crimes
committed in 1999, in accordance with resolution 1573
(2004). The establishment of the Truth and Friendship
Commission is a positive development in that
direction. We hope that the judicial processes in both
Dili and Jakarta, established in connection with the
serious crimes committed in 1999, will work closely
with the Secretary-General's newly established
commission of experts.

The security and management of the Tactical
Coordination Line at the border requires a political and
legal framework, of which the authorities in the two
countries are very much aware. They should be
encouraged in those constructive initiatives. On the
ground, progress in training the Border Police Unit is
satisfactory, but it requires more expertise. The
enhancement of the work of the Timorese defence
forces, including the required liaison services, should
continue beyond 2005, as specified in the Secretary-
General's report.

Timor-Leste will continue to require multilateral
and bilateral international assistance in other areas of
public administration and in the development role in
general. The pledges that have been made in those
areas need to be implemented. The adjustment of the
residual UNMISET presence for another 12 months
after May this year will then be made accordingly as
part of the exit strategy.

In conclusion, we should acknowledge, and take
pride in, the fact that the successes recorded by Timor-
Leste thus far are synonymous with the successes of
the United Nations and the international community as
whole. The opposite would be true if Timor-Leste were
to slide back for lack of assistance at this critical
juncture.

