Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and the Venezuelan
Mission for the work it is doing this month during
its presidency of the Security Council and for
having convened today's open debate on a subject of
vital importance for my delegation. We thank the
Ambassadors of Kenya and Sweden and Mr. Rosenthal
for their briefings earlier today.

As a peace-loving nation that voluntarily disarmed
67 years ago, Costa Rica is a firm believer in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts between peoples and between
States within a framework of international law and
multilateral diplomacy. That decision was made based
on our conviction of the importance of contributing to
international peace and security, principles that govern
our foreign policy. It is vital that we exchange the logic
of confrontation, blame and war for one of good faith,
goodwill and peace.

As is stipulated in its Charter, the main objective
of the United Nations must remain the maintenance of
peace, which requires that we act preventively and in
a timely fashion and that we be capable of preventing
conflicts and of maintaining a presence during and
after them. The post-conflict period is a critical stage,
and under no circumstances should be pushed into the
background. Since its creation, the United Nations
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security has evolved significantly. The global
dynamic has changed, with the emergence of new types
of conflicts and movements. The situation is more
complex and the clashes last longer, and therefore the
international Organization has to be more adaptive.
Modern conflicts have tended to transcend borders,
entering a new, transnational dimension. While that
makes the role of the United Nations a fundamental
one, it does the same for the regional and subregional
organizations that take on a more specific responsibility
for conflict areas. In that regard, creating alliances is
crucial.

Since the maintenance of peace is the principal
objective of the United Nations, it is essential that we
have shared responsibility and that all its Members
focus seriously on prevention, reconstruction and post-
conflict recovery, not just on the imposition of peace.
The fragmentation and lack of cohesion in the United
Nations are major problems that pose significant
obstacles to peacebuilding, and we have to address and
solve them and thus provide a speedy response to them.

We should place great emphasis on preventing
conflicts, both operationally and structurally. The
big challenges to peace require, among other things,
establishing greater economic equity, building
sustainable development, human security and effective
democratic participation, and replacing a culture of
violence with a culture of peace. Violent conflicts
are often a symptom of the existence of profound
inequalities, social exclusion, violations of human
rights and a lack of good governance and the rule of
law, to name only a few. Our challenge is arriving at
transitions to lasting peace that can enable democratic
participation in decision-making and the full
implementation of the Goals, targets and indicators of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Achieving sustainable
development is a prerequisite for preventing relapses
into conflict.

Peacebuilding definitely requires more time than
we currently allow it. We must work on post-conflict
reconstruction by rebuilding legitimate institutions
and restoring the people's trust. That requires adequate
transition time and careful attention to human rights,
security and sustainable development. That is how to
build inclusive, sustainable peace that is not imposed
and runs no risk of relapsing into conflict.

Women's participation is and will remain essential
to maintaining peace. As stated in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/466) on women's participation
in peacebuilding and the report (see S/2015/490) of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, women are crucial partners
in the transition from war to peace. They are key agents
in promoting social cohesion, political legitimacy and
economic recovery. We must also continue to demand
respect for the policy of zero tolerance for sexual abuse.

In regions as diverse as Central Asia, Africa and the
Middle East, many countries are struggling to address
the root causes of conflict, while in January 2014 the
Presidents and Heads of State of Latin America and the
Caribbean proclaimed the region a zone of peace and
reiterated their continued commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, with the goal of banishing
forever the use or threat of use of force in our region.
Our Heads of State also stressed the commitment of
the States of the region to complying strictly with their
obligation not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the
internal affairs of any other State and to observing the
principles of national sovereignty, equal rights and the
people's right to self-determination.

We are very happy with the joint statement of
19 January issued by the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
committing to their final peace accords. That goal
became even closer with the Security Council's
unanimous adoption, on 25 January, of resolution
2261 (2016), which creates a political monitoring and
verification mission that will have the support of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
On top of that came the announcement, on 16 February,
of the creation of a post-conflict stabilization and
peacebuilding fund. There can be no question that
the support we provide to that peace process will be
of benefit to the whole world. Costa Rica hopes that
Colombia will achieve its longed-desired irreversible
transition from war to sustainable peace with the
support of the international community.

My delegation believes that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are necessarily achieved through the
promotion of a culture of peace. We are talking about
an educational task based on studying and preventing
conflict, eliminating cultural violence, and promoting
disarmament, as well as educating people so that
dissent and non-conformism do not become triggers
of violence. Peace will continue to be a constant
challenge demanding means, resources, personnel and
thoughtfulness.

The existence of the University for Peace sends
a message that tells the entire world that peace is
not born out of nothing but is rather the result of a
constant building process, a question of responsibility
to humankind and one that must be worked on if it is
to be achieved. In that regard, we are very honoured
that Costa Rica hosts that academic institution, in
recognition of our pacifist, democratic, unarmed civic
tradition and on our trust in the multilateral system and
international law as our only instruments of defence.

At this seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
the three review processes connected to peace - of
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
women and peace and security - have taken on great
importance. What is crucial now is to be able to integrate
them and, above all, to truly understand and apply the
experts' recommendations. It is vital that we meet Goal
16 of the 2030 Agenda, which we must all support in
order to promote and strengthen security at both the
national and international levels by strengthening
democracy and human rights and promoting respect
for the rule of law. The world we bequeath to future
generations demands an enduring and collective effort
if we are to build a lasting and sustainable peace for all.

