Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his thorough briefing. The events and trends in
West Africa and the Sahel in the last period show
the countries' commitment to sustainable peace and
stability in the region. It is for good reason that we
recently attended the closure of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, just as the Liberia mission
is withdrawing from its ground operations.

Uruguay wishes to congratulate the Government
and the people of The Gambia for the swearing in of
President Adama Barrow in January, and hails his
commitment and efforts to promote human rights
and fundamental liberties. A few days ago, from this
very Chamber, we also commended the people and the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire for the progress made in
peacebuilding and conveyed our wishes for success in
this new stage for the country.

Uruguay wishes to underscore the key importance
of democratic principles in the region and the
institutional stability that underpins such principles.
In that regard, we particularly encourage the political
leaders of Guinea Bissau to find a political solution to
the crisis that is based on inclusive and constructive
dialogue. We must not lose sight ofthe fact that it is the
country's civilian population that bears the brunt of the
consequences of protracted political stagnation.

As for security, we are concerned about the
instability in the Lake Chad basin in the Sahel and
crime in the Gulf of Guinea. We applaud regional
countries' work in creating the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, as well as for their work in the West
Africa Coast Initiative. Uruguay understands that
regional countries face enormous security challenges
and that many improvements are in order. Nonetheless,
it is our View that the political will to join regional
forces in pursuit of a common goal is noteworthy and
is to be supported. We are encouraged by the progress
in the fight against Boko Haram - in particular by the
release of another 82 girls that had been abducted in
Chibok. Their rehabilitation and social reintegration are
essential. We also emphatically condemn the terrorist
group's cowardly practice of using women and girls as
suicide bombers.

The increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the G-5 Sahel shows the commitment of
the international community with that initiative and is
an implicit recognition that the efforts of its member
countries are on the right track. The Security Council
itself was able to see, through its visits to missions
ending in March 2016 and March 2017 in Bissau, Mali,
Senegal and, this year, the Lake Chad basin countries,
the enormous challenges that those countries and
Governments face.

Our talk with the Special Representative in March
was also quite useful, when he was starting to work at
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
after the approved merge and proactively addressed
anticipated challenges. As the Special Representative
aptly noted, the humanitarian situation in the region
is worrisome and is exacerbated by the effects of
climate change and insecurity - particularly in north-
eastern Nigeria and in the Sahel region. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of international partners that
provide support and we call on them to fully honour the
pledges made in the Oslo Humanitarian Conference for
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region in February.

Finally, we note that the effective implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
will be key to supporting the long-term stability of the
entire region.

