Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by first
conveying Pakistan's conviction that the leadership,
energy and dynamism of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres will help us in healing the complex conflicts
and crises in the Middle East and in restoring
world order which is being threatened today from
multiple directions.

For 50 years, Israel has persisted in its occupation
of the West Bank in defiance of the United Nations
Charter's central tenet that territories cannot be acquired
through the use of force or aggression. None of the
basic foundations for lasting peace between Israel and
the Palestinian people - Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 242 (1967), demanding Israeli
withdrawal from occupied territories, the Oslo Accords
outlining the principle of land for peace, and the
general consensus of the international community for
a two-State solution - have been implemented by the
occupying Power.

It is our conviction that enduring peace in the Middle
East is inconceivable without a just resolution of the
Palestine-Israel dispute. The establishment of an viable
independent and contiguous State of Palestine on the
basis of internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967
borders, and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is
the only sustainable guarantee for peace. It is clear that
the transfer of any State's embassy to Jerusalem will
also manifestly violate Security Council resolutions.

The international conference on the Middle East
peace process, held in Paris over the weekend, is a
welcome step in the right direction. With over 70
States in attendance, the conference reaffirmed the
primacy of the two-State solution. There must be
consequences for those who continue to defy the force
of international consensus.

We are also following with great dismay the tense
situation unfolding in Gaza, after 2 million Palestinians
have been left with just a couple of hours of electricity
a day in the middle of winter. We call for full respect of
the right to freedom of expression, peaceful protest and
assembly in Gaza.

Palestine, the Holy Land, is the heart of the Arab
and Islamic world. What happens to Palestine and its
people will resonate throughout the region. Let us not
forget that the basic narrative of the region's extremists
is that Muslim peoples can secure justice only through
resort to force and violence. It will be difficult to defeat
this narrative - and extremist ideologies - unless we
bring peace and justice of the Palestinian people.

Resolution 2334 (2016), recently adopted by the
Council, affirmed the self-evident conclusion that
the continuing expansion of Israeli settlements in the
occupied West Bank are likely to foreclose a two-State
solution and eliminate the prospects of a peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute. Pakistan
welcomes the Council's adoption of this resolution. Not
surprisingly, the resolution has been opposed by the
occupying Power. But others who have sought to apply
pressure and coercion on members of the Security
Council and on the United Nations display their own
narrow and deeply flawed vision. Resolution 2334
(2016) must be expeditiously and fully implemented by
the parties concerned.

The fratricide in Syria is now almost six years old.
The human suffering it has caused is unprecedented
in recent history. We have collectively missed many
opportunities to end this tragic conflict over this
period. Yet another such opportunity now beckons.
With a Russia-Turkey-brokered ceasefire backed by
resolution 2336 (2016) still holding, Syrians have
started believing again. Their eyes are now set on the
peace talks in Astana on 23 January. Those tentative
beginnings must be nurtured and regional and
international players must stay firm in their resolve to
bring peace back to Syria. That can be achieved if the
legitimate interests of all States and parties involved are
equitably accommodated and a viable coalition formed
to defeat Da'esh and other terrorist groups. Even as Iraqi
and coalition forces retake Mosul and defeat Da'esh,
thought must turn to building durable structures of
peace through the recognition and reconciliation of the
interests of all of Iraq's people.

Despite the untiring shuttle diplomacy of Special
Envoy Ismail Ahmed, Yemen continues to burn. The
extended war is grinding the country further into
poverty. The situation has been further exacerbated
by the external arming and encouragement of certain
groups. The endeavours of the Special Envoy must be
fully supported by all parties to restore peace with
dignity for our Yemeni brothers and our Yemeni sisters.

