Mr. Mahiga: Before I read out my statement, I
would like to introduce to you, Mr. President, and
the Security Council, Ambassador Basile Gateretse,
Deputy Representative of the African Union in
Mogadishu; Lieutenant General Andrew Gutti, Force
Commander of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), based in Mogadishu; and Colonel Kenneth
Muhairwe, Chief of Operations for AMISOM, also
based in Mogadishu. In addition, with me are staff
members of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS).

Mr. President, I thank you for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the recent
developments in the Somalia peace process. At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
Government on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. Allow
me also to express my profound gratitude to the Council
for its continued support for the peace process in
Somalia which has now entered a post-transition phase
of transformation into peacebuilding.

The nine-year-old transition period in Somalia
ended peacefully with the adoption of a new
Constitution, the selection of a new Parliament, and a
newly elected Speaker and President. The change met
the expectations of most Somalis and has raised high
expectations for more change. Somalia is now in the
process of forming its first post-transition Government.
This follows the election on 10 September of Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud as President of the Somali Republic.
It was the most representative election of a President in
Somalia since the country's 20-year-long crisis began,
and the first to be held inside the country.

The election of the President by Parliament was
preceded by an equally transparent and open process
of selecting 275 members of Somalia's new Federal
Parliament by traditional elders, who gave legitimacy
to the process. The new Parliament is leaner, with the
highest number of graduates, including women, than
any other previous Parliament in Somalia. Earlier, an
825-member National Constituent Assembly adopted
a new provisional Constitution. I pay tribute to the
outgoing president, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, for
his magnanimity and statemanship in conceding defeat
in the election, as well as his public commitment to
supporting and working closely with his successor. I
also pay tribute to all six of the principal signatories
of the road map, whose sustained political commitment
underpinned the inclusive nature of the process to end
the transition.

I thank the Secretary-General for convening a
mini-summit in New York on 26 September on the
margins of the General Assembly, which was unanimous
in welcoming the political change in Somalia. In a video
teleconference from Mogadishu, President Mohamud
outlined his six-pillar policy priorities for the new
Somalia, which include security stabilization, political
outreach and reconciliation, and the delivery of basic
services to the people. There was an encouraging and
reassuring collective message of goodwill and support
from an impressive cross-section of the international
community at the mini-summit, which included several
members of the Security Council.
On 6 October, President Mohamud appointed
Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon as Prime Minister. The process
leading to the appointment was broadly consultative
within the constitutionally stipulated timeline. The
Prime Minister will outline his plan of action before
Parliament this week, to be followed by Parliament's
endorsement ofhis appointment. He will then proceed to
appoint a cabinet. Thereafter, the Council of Ministers
will develop a policy framework incorporating the plan
of action to implement the six-pillar policy priorities,
which Parliament will officially approve and adopt.
At the same time, Parliament has already developed
its own four-year plan of action, which captures the
six-pillar principles and defines its obligations as the
representative institution of the people, as well as its
relationship with the executive, including its oversight
responsibilities.

The security situation in Somalia has vastly
improved thanks to the continuing efforts and sacrifices
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the Ethiopian
forces, and the Somali Government and its local allied
forces. The fall of Kismayo, the last stronghold of the
extremist Al-Shabaab insurgents, in late September
marked a decisive turning point in the conflict. The
challenge now is to align the security and political
strategies in Kismayo with the overall stabilization
strategy in the newly recovered areas.

AMISOM. is close to reaching its full authorized
strength. The deployment of the Djiboutian battalion in
sector four is ongoing, starting with contingent-owned
equipment and followed by personnel. Two hundred
thirty-five Djiboutian troops have already been
deployed. The deployment of the contingent from Sierra
Leone is also on call. Contingent-owned equipment has
arrived in Mombasa for onward transportation to sector
two. I am also pleased to report that the AMISOM
force command headquarters in Mogadishu is fully
operational, following the deployment of the entire
senior leadership and almost all of its support staff
officers in Mogadishu.

Although Al-Shabaab is now dispersed into a
ragtag militia, it has nonetheless continued its attacks,
using more asymmetrical terrorist and hit-and-run
tactics, which it carries out occasionally in Mogadishu.
AMISOM. and the Somali forces must be equipped
to deal with such tactics as they come to control
more territory and their lines of supply get extended.
Another worrying trend is the ongoing assassination
and targeted killings of civilians. Those trends call for
expeditious deployment of AMISOM. to its full strength
with the necessary logistical support and the intense
training and strengthening ofthe Somali security force.
It is also essential that AMISOM. be supported so that it
can control more effectively the coastal waters around
Mogadishu, Merca, Baraawe and Kismayo in order
to protect its own forces and supply lines, interrupt
Al-Shabaab's supply lines and effectively secure the
ports for commercial use, including containing the
trade in charcoal. I therefore encourage the Council to
support the request contained in paragraph 50 of the
fourth report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the implementation of the AMISOM,
mandate addressed to the Secretary-General in a letter
dated 5 October 2012 (8/2012/764, annex).

The surrender of disengaging Al-Shabaab
combatants to AMISOM. and Government forces has
increased considerably, while some of the deserting
former fighters are mingling with the civilian
population. That poses a special challenge for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and the International Organization
for Migration have developed a plan for receiving
disengaging Al-Shabaab fighters and for reintegrating
them into their respective communities. That plan has
not yet started for lack of funding.

Civilian casualties resulting from the conflict
continue. The majority of cases derive from insurgent
tactics involving the increased use of activated and
improvised explosive devices in contravention of the
basic rules of humanitarian law. At the same time, all
United Nations-sponsored security forces need to be
strengthened to comply with the humanitarian, human
rights and international humanitarian law in their
operations. The AMISOM. force intends to support that
process by implementing the human rights due-diligence
promise with regard to the United Nations support for
non-United Nations security forces.

Violence against women and girls is still
widespread in Somalia despite the improved
constitutional protection for women and vigorous
campaigns by Somali human rights defenders and
other advocacy groups. In Mogadishu, sexual violence
against internally displaced women also continues.
My Office, in coordination with the other groups, will
continue to work towards improving the protection and
promotion of the rights of Somali women, including
their participation in public life and the peace and
reconciliation processes. The target of 30 per cent for
women representatives in Parliament, posts that have
up to now been held only by men, has been only half
met, but the agenda of women's representation in public
institutions has gained momentum, and it is now part of
a firm political agenda in Somalia.

The protection of children in armed conflicts
has also received encouraging compliance from the
Government and from AMISOM.

On the humanitarian situation, the great political
security strides that Somalia has made must not distract
us from the persisting dire humanitarian situation. More
than 2 million Somalis remain in urgent need of food
aid and other assistance. Meanwhile, herding pastures
are drying up less than one year after the famine raged,
which has led to the worsened humanitarian indicators
that we see now. Funding for the humanitarian
appeal for 2012 stands at only 52 per cent, making it
increasingly difficult for aid agencies to support and
strengthen the livelihoods and resilience of Somalis to
withstand future shocks. I urge international partners
to sustain and expand their assistance of Somalia to
prevent it from sliding back into famine and misery.

The international humanitarian community now
has a promising partner in the new Somali leadership.
Al-Shabaab's ban on Islamic Relief, which was one of
the last aid organizations operating in areas under its
control, came at the worst time and is unacceptable.
With the new territory under the control of AMISOM
and Government forces, we hope that the situation will
improve quickly. I urge all armed factions in Somalia to
grant unimpeded humanitarian access.

In conclusion, the new Administration in
Mogadishu must now move with speed to lead in the
stabilization of the newly liberated area. President
Mohamud has already undertaken visits to Belet Huen
and Baidoa in central Somalia in a show of commitment
by reaching out to local authorities and communities.
That is critical in filling the vacuum that could
otherwise emerge from the retreat of the insurgents.
The immediate challenge that the Government faces
is therefore the establishment of local and district
administrations, including justice and the rule of law,
as well as to provide basic services to the population. It
is evident that while taking leadership, the Government
does not have the necessary resources.

UNPOS is now focusing on extending good offices
and assistance to the new Administration in stabilizing
the newly liberated areas. There are several actors that

need to be engaged and coordinated in stabilizing the
newly recovered areas where the Government needs to
be assisted so that it can assume political leadership.
Civilian activities have to come in quickly behind
military operations to establish local administrations
and provide humanitarian and development-related
activities. That remains slow in coming. The Office has
furthermore embarked on a consultative process with
other stakeholders as part of the strategic review of
the future presence of the United Nations in Somalia,
which will come soon.

With regard to the strategic review, under the
leadership of the Department of Political Affairs, we
have begun a highly consultative process of analysis
and assessment, also engaging the African Union,
in preparation for consultations with a new Somali
authority. I would emphasize that in developing options
for the future United Nations presence, as the Council
requested, we must be led by the needs and expectations
of the Somalis. That may mean adjusting our deadlines
for reporting back to the Council in order to respect the
Somalis' need for some time and space to constitute
the Cabinet and begin establishing their programme
of work before engaging with us. In that regard, I am
glad to report that today I presented a letter to President
Mohamud from the Secretary-General expressing our
intention to begin the review in mid-November this
year. The President welcomed the proposal.

I pay tribute to the international and regional
partners for the support that they have extended to me
and to the Somali peacemakers throughout the road
map process. The Somali authorities now urgently need
assistance to meet the new challenges in the various
sectors to help them own and lead the process in the
post-transition period.

The efforts of partners to develop a new aid
framework for Somalia, in partnership with the
Government, are most appropriate and timely.

