Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is a pleasure for me to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, and to thank him
for his useful briefing on the most recent developments
in the Sahel region. We also commend the efforts made
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) in a number of areas, as well as the
efforts of all the staff of the regional Office to provide
technical and electoral assistance to the States that
hold elections in the region, while exercising good
offices so as to reduce tensions. The role of the Office
in strengthening Government sectors to confront the
various challenges of the region is also important.

I should like to focus on three key aspects: first,
the elections in the Sahel region; secondly, the security
situation in the region; and, thirdly, the humanitarian
and development situations.

Concerning the elections in the Sahel region, we
would like to refer to the elections held in a number of
countries in the region and to welcome the efforts of
the Governments of Cote d'Ivoire, Mauritania and Mali
to hold transparent and successful elections. Those
positive developments will undoubtedly contribute to
achieving development and stability and have a positive
impact on the regional security situation in general.

We commend the vital and central role of UNOWAS
and the Economic Community of West African
States, as well as that of the African Union and other
international, regional and national organizations, in
contributing to the success of the electoral processes
and providing the necessary assistance to States of
the region.

We hope that the upcoming elections in Nigeria,
Senegal and Guinea-Bissau will be held in conditions of
transparency and with the participation of all segments
of society. We call on the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to continue the efforts that he
has undertaken, in the midst of the challenges facing
certain States of the region, to avert tensions during
preparations for the holding of elections. UNOWAS and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
play a pivotal role in implementing the Secretary-
General's strategy for preventive diplomacy and
avoiding conflicts.

Concerning the security situation in West Africa
and the Sahel region, it remains unstable due to
armed conflicts and terrorist operations in general.
Such actions have now gone beyond their traditional
nature and have extended to maritime piracy, leading
to revenue losses and the deterioration of economies
in a number of States in the region. In addition, a
key problem in the region is drug trafficking, which
is a topic that was addressed by the Security Council
last month (see S/PV.8433). During that meeting, the
important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) was highlighted. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (8/2018/1175) on the
roles of UNOWAS and UNODC in supporting regional
States to address that challenge.

The unstable security situation in the Republic of
Mali has a negative impact on the entire region, since it
facilitates transnational terrorist acts and affects many
regional States, claiming the lives of many innocent
civilians. We call on all relevant stakeholders in Mali
to abide by the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
of 2015. We also appreciate the role and efforts of
the Multinational Joint Task Force in combating the
terrorist group of Boko Haram, and the role of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in combating
terrorist groups as well.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we are
deeply concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the region, especially in the Lake Chad
basin, where 1 million people suffered food insecurity
in the first half of 2018. Nevertheless, we welcome the
efforts of the Governments and active humanitarian
organizations, which contributed to the decline of the
cholera epidemic since 2010. However, more funding
is required by the region in order to ensure the
implementation of the response plan. Only 50 per cent
of the pledges made have been fulfilled so far. We call
on all relevant parties in the region to provide access to
all humanitarian assistance for all those in need in the
Lake Chad basin, particularly the elderly and children.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the efforts of UNOWAS to prevent conflicts and to
strengthen the capacities of the national authorities
in the States of the region in order to achieve all the
objectives in West Africa. That would ensure a better
future for the region and its populations. We welcome
the cooperation of States in the region with UNOWAS
to date and call on them to continue their cooperation
with the United Nations Office in the upcoming period.
We also underscore the support of the State of Kuwait
for achieving stability in the region.

