Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I thank
the delegation of Slovenia for convening this historic
Security Council meeting. I would especially like to thank
the Foreign Minister of Slovenia and Ambassador Turk for
the enormous amount of work they have done to make it
possible to hold a meeting that could not have been
imagined four years ago and would not have been possible
even 18 months ago.

I also welcome back to New York Ambassador
Lavrov, who arrived only a few hours ago from the region.
We look forward to hearing his views on the situation in
the Balkans based on his first-hand observations.

Before I speak to the issues we are here to discuss
today, I would like to recognize the extraordinary
gathering of members of the United States Congress who
have joined us here today. The fact that they have come
here during one of the busiest times of the year - a time
during which negotiations in Washington over the budget,
including the United Nations arrears, have reached their
decisive, culminating point - speaks to the importance
that we place on the work of the United Nations and to
the issue of fulfilling the Dayton Agreements. With your
permission, Sir, I would like to introduce them because I
believe it will illustrate to our friends from the many
nations represented here today the wide and varied
responsibilities of the Congress and help some of our
friends better understand the unique and important role of
the Congress - which, as you all know, pays the bills.

First, it is my great honour to introduce the ranking
minority member of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee Subcommittee on the United Nations, the
Senator from California, Barbara Boxer. Secondly, it is
my great honour to introduce the Chairman of the House
International Relations Committee, from the State of New
York, Congressman Ben Gilman. Behind Congressman
Gilman is the ranking Democratic member of the
Committee, from the State of Connecticut, Sam
Gejdenson. Also in the group behind me, the ranking
Democratic member of the Africa Subcommittee, from
the State of New Jersey - in fact, specifically his district
is Newark, in case you want to know who is in control of
that airport you use - Congressman Donald Payne.
Congressman Robert Wexler, from Florida, on the Asian
and Western Hemisphere Subcommittees. From the
Banking and Government Reform Committees,
Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney, from the State of New
York and the City of New York. Also form the State of
New York, the Congressman in whose district LaGuardia
Airport lies - well, you should know who is in charge
of your districts, where the airports are - working on the
Policy and Trade Subcommittee, Congressman Joseph
Crowley. Tony Hall, our Congressman from Dayton, and
some other members, are no longer here. I think that
covers everyone. Thank you for allowing me to introduce
them to you. I hope you will get a chance to know them
better.

In an era of bad news and difficult crises, today is
a remarkable conjunction of several major events. Earlier
today, the United States and China reached an agreement

 

on the World Trade Organization (WTO), and I hope that
the European Union and Canada will similarly move
forward soon. This is a truly historic achievement and I
have been in touch with our negotiators, who wanted it
noted here today. Secondly, it has been announced today
that there will be talks on Cyprus under the auspices of the
United Nations - another hopeful and promising
development. Finally, before we turn to the matter at hand,
I would note that the reports in the media this morning of
a breakthrough on the question of the United States
payment of its arrears to the United Nations are accurate to
this extent: we are within a tiny amount of a final
agreement. I believe the elements are in place but that there
is some clean-up to do on some issues not related to the
United Nations. I am delighted that we appear to have
reached a point where we will be able to begin discussing
with the United Nations the Helms-Biden-Albright package
that will allow us to pay our arrears.

So it seems auspicious that on the same day you, Sir,
have convened this historic gathering. When I look around
the room it seems scarcely believable that we could be
sitting here in peace, seeing representatives of elements that
were fighting each other for so many years all speaking
about their support of the Dayton Agreements. Four years
ago, on this very day, on 15 November 1995, we were
locked in a difficult, tense negotiation at Dayton, Ohio, as
the world watched. We were entering our third week. We
were at a critical and difficult stalemate. Several people in
this room - including President Izetbegovic, Ambassador
Sacirbey, Foreign Minister Prlic, Ambassador Alkalaj,
Ambassador Chris Hill, Ambassador Jim Pardew,
Rosemarie Pauli and my wife, Kati Marton - were with us
at Dayton at that difficult and tense time. The international
community demanded that the leaders of the former
Yugoslavia make tough choices. And six days later, on 21
November 1995, they did so, signing the Dayton
Agreements and giving Bosnia a foundation for peace.

Significant as that was, the Agreement in Dayton only
ended the war. Winning the peace still lay ahead. Events
over the past four years have proved how difficult it is to
overcome years of bloodshed and ethnic hatred. But what
we have just heard today from Presidents Jelavic,
Izetbegovic and Radisic gives us reason for some hope.
Over two years ago, in August 1997, when I met with the
three Presidents at Sarajevo - two of whom have been
subsequently replaced - they could barely sit in the room.
They argued over whether or not they would meet and
where they would meet, and they barely spoke to each
other. But today, two new Presidents join President
Izetbegovic to show us and the world that they can work
together to reach additional agreements beyond Dayton to
strengthen Bosnia.

We have an important opportunity before us to push
the Dayton peace process forward. The announcement this
morning of the New York Declaration is another
important step in that direction. The Declaration is, I
hope, a clear indication by the Presidency that all three
men are committed to removing the remaining obstacles
to the full implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. With this important act, the Presidents have
taken a major step towards consolidating the progress of
the past few years and in doing so have helped Bosnia
take another step towards fulfilling the vision of
Dayton - a unified, single, democratic country.

The commitments made this morning have important
practical as well as symbolic value. By establishing the
State border service, by supporting a single national
passport, by creating a permanent executive staff for the
joint Presidency, and by expressing a commitment to fund
the State ministries fully, the Presidents have, in the New
York Declaration, committed themselves to strengthening
the central Government, without which Bosnia will not
hold together. The Declaration also commits the
Presidents to take a number of concrete measures to
accelerate refugee returns, the ultimate test of a future
Bosnia. And finally, the Declaration signifies that by
undertaking a willingness to join international
peacekeeping operations, Bosnia is giving back to the
international community, rather than simply taking from
it.

But great problems and concerns remain.

I was pleased that President Izetbegovic, whom no
one has ever accused of being overly optimistic, said

today - and I have never heard him say it before - that
the glass is half full. This pleased me greatly, but I know
he would agree with me that the rest of the glass must be
filled and that we ought to move more rapidly.

Four years after Dayton, Bosnia remains far from
where we hoped it would be. We call on the Office of the
High Representative and on Ambassador Petritsch to press
for full implementation. I do not believe that he has
expanded his authority or that the Peace Implementation
Council has expanded its authority beyond what is
authorized in the Dayton Agreements. And let me state to
those who have suggested that they have exceeded their
authority under the Dayton Agreements that, as one of the
people who worked on the Dayton Agreements, I do not

 

accept that interpretation. The role of the international
community is far from over. Indeed, by this historic
meeting today, we are reaffirming it and strengthening the
United Nations role in that process. We did that earlier this
month when we heard from Jacques Klein, the Secretary-
General's personal Representative.

Let me be specific on what needs to be done. First,
the presidency must not shirk from its commitment on
refugee returns. This is the test. Can people live in areas
where they are an ethnic minority? The news is not yet
sufficient or satisfactory. While, as President Jelavic,
President Izetbegovic and President Radisic all pointed out,
minority refugees have gone back in twice the numbers this
year as last year, most of the returns have been to damaged
and empty houses in rural areas and outlying villages.

Outside of Sarajevo, there has been insufficient return
to major cities in the Federation or Republika Srpska. Our
efforts on refugee returns must now shift, and we must
focus on promoting returns to urban areas and all the
challenges that that brings, including new property
legislation. I am glad the Presidents here today recognize
this problem and declared in the Declaration of New York
that they would establish a joint commission, with
international representation, that will report back to the
Security Council by March of next year. This is an
important new obligation by the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the international community.

Secondly, as President Izetbegovic said in his remarks,
much more must be done to enhance transparency, promote
the rule of law and fight the insidious cancer that is called
corruption. Like many former communist countries in
transition, Bosnia is suffering from a culture of corruption
inherited from the previous system. The fact is - let us be
honest - the Governments of Bosnia could do far more to
fight corruption than they have in the last four years.

Thirdly and finally, there must be a stronger, sustained
fight against the forces of evil and darkness that still lurk
in many parts of Bosnia - the murderers, the fascists, the
racists, the crooks, the thugs who seek to destroy what has
been achieved for their own narrow goals. Let me be clear:
fighting these forces is not easy. They are dangerous, and
when confronted they will lash out against the voices of
moderation and tolerance in Bosnia, as they did two weeks
ago in trying to kill Zeljko Kopanja, the brave Bosnian
Serb journalist in Banja Luka who nearly died from a car
bomb after exposing some of these people for the gangsters
and war criminals they really are. Here I would take note
of the Government of Austria's rapid and generous efforts
towards the rehabilitation of Mr. Kopanja, who has either
been moved already or will be moved soon to a hospital
in Vienna.

To be sure, political and economic reforms now
under way will curtail some of the activities of the most
obstructionist ultra-nationalist groups. That said, more
must be done to confront ethnic parallel institutions and
structures of authority. For example, we cannot tolerate
separate intelligence services in the Federation, which
function as illegal police forces under ultra-nationalist
party control. For example, banks and other businesses
illegally seized by nationalists during the war must be
challenged by joint police forces and the international
community. For example, radical nationalist political party
obstructionists and individual politicians should be
removed from the political process when they seek to
destroy it. Here I refer again specifically to my public
statements in Mostar two and half months ago that I
believe that the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) and
radical parties are in open defiance of Dayton and that the
Office of the Office of the High Representative (OHR)
has the authority to shut them down.

As today's Declaration here in New York makes
clear, Bosnian leaders must do a better job of establishing
and reinforcing the institutions of statehood. They should
act so that they represent the interests of all Bosnians and
not just a particular ethnic group. The goal of Dayton,
and the goal we should address here today, is simple: one
country, one central government, two democratic, multi-
ethnic entities. The tasks ahead will require each of us,
and the international community as a whole, to
demonstrate unity, strength and courage as we press
ahead with implementation of the Dayton Accords.

In this regard, I wish to point out that not far away
in Kosovo, Mr. Kouchner and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
are struggling with far greater problems. As I have said
before in private session, and I wish to repeat again
today, success in Kosovo and Bosnia are equally
important to the international community, and one cannot
be separated from the other in the long run. Bosnia is
years ahead of Kosovo on the time-lines of history, but
success in both will be required for stability in the region.
The ultimate obstruction to all of this remains what it has
been for the last nine years: the leadership in Belgrade.

We all know that there are those in Bosnia who will
continue their efforts to stop progress and reconciliation.
Even among us there are some who will say that
democracy, respect for human rights and an end to ethnic

 

hatred are not worth the effort or the cost to the
international community. The people who came together in
Dayton four years ago understood the price of war. We
must not forget the costs they have borne and the sacrifices
they have already made. It is our responsibility to be there
to support them.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening this
historic meeting.

