Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, and to
express our thanks and appreciation to you for having
convened this important meeting on Iraq.

At this meeting we are discussing an extremely
serious issue that poses a threat to peace and security in
the Middle East and internationally, through the huge
massing of troops and all kinds of military hardware
and the unprecedented preparations that are under way
with the goal of waging war against Iraq. Such a war
would have dire consequences for the Iraqi population,
which has suffered for so long as a result of the
sanctions. It would pose a threat not only to the unity,
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Iraq, but also to the entire region, with unforeseeable
consequences.
My country strongly opposes any attack against
Iraq that has no reason or justification, especially given
that Iraq has been cooperating fully with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) inspectors, as indicated in the briefings of Mr.
Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei recently, on
Friday, 14 February. Those briefings made clear that
Iraq is implementing resolution 1441 (2002) and that
the inspection process is moving forward satisfactorily.
No proof has been shown of the presence or
development of weapons of mass destruction since
1991. In response to international demands, Iraq is
cooperating seriously and is determined to abandon
proscribed weapons, as it emphasized recently by
taking a series of measures. For instance, it has enacted
effective legislation and formed committees to that
effect.

The inspection process must run its full course in
order to fulfil its mandate, especially since inspections
are proceeding smoothly and effectively. That was
made clear by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. ElBaradei here in
this Chamber. This is also the wish of the members of
the international community, as demonstrated clearly in
the discussions that have taken place during Council
meetings and by the large number of participants in this
debate. The views expressed that war or the threat of it
should be averted and all peaceful means supported,
and the massive public rallies and demonstrations in
many countries of the world, including in the United
Kingdom and the United States, by millions of people
of various nationalities - all this is proof of the fact
that the world favours a peaceful solution to this crisis
through international legitimacy.

The haste shown by some Powers to rush to war
and use force, with the potential for destruction in the
region; to renounce the logic of reason and wisdom that
would give a chance to the inspections process to
remove weapons of mass destruction peacefully; and to
attempt to create flimsy pretexts for war without any
concrete evidence, employing intensive information
campaigns to justify a war against Iraq: all this raises
serious questions in the minds of all prudent and fair-
minded people concerning the real invisible agenda
behind a war against Iraq and that country's
occupation.

This way of dealing with the Iraqi crisis reveals
total bias and double standards in addressing issues of
the Arab region. While the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council concerning Iraq are to be
implemented in the light of the repeated charge that
Iraq possesses weapons of mass destruction and that it
poses a threat to international peace and security, we
see the Council turning a blind eye to its resolutions
against Israel. Israel is not subjecting its nuclear
facilities or ballistic missiles to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system,
although it possesses a nuclear weapons arsenal and it
refuses to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Even worse, the Security Council
has done little with regard to Israeli practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the use of
the most advanced weaponry, such as aircraft, missiles
and tanks, against an unarmed population that lacks
even the basic needs of life. Those practices include the
random killing of women, children and the elderly, the
destruction of homes, the displacement of entire
families, collective detention and the continued policy
of siege and starvation directed against the Palestinian
people. As all of that is happening, the international
community remains silent, failing to put an end to these
horrendous crimes, which are unprecedented in modern
history. At the same time, the Security Council is
unable to fulfil its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security owing to attempts to hinder the
adoption or implementation of resolutions that would
end the conflict and would bring about peace and the
establishment of a Palestinian State.

The sense of injustice and frustration, the unfair
treatment of issues and the double standards, especially
with regard to the Middle East and the wider Arab
region, will not only lead to more violence and
instability there, but will also affect other regions. The
world is not what it was yesterday; it has become a
small village. Interests have become intertwined, and
the crisis will have spillover effects around the world.
That requires that we fulfil our responsibilities to our
peoples and to history in order to put an end to
international crisis flashpoints, particularly the
Palestinian crisis, by enabling the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate rights and to establish a
Palestinian State on their national soil, like all other
nations, at a time when the crime of occupation has
become a stigma for humanity and for those who claim
to be civilized.

We hope that the Powers that are beating the
drums of war will respond to the calls of their peoples,
as demonstrated in massive demonstrations in many of
the world's cities, and to the appeals made by the
international community in this forum, and that
wisdom will be our guide as we deal with the Iraqi
crisis, renouncing the policy of using or threatening to
use force. The inspections process must be given
adequate time, and this issue must be addressed in the
context of international legitimacy, through the United
Nations and through Security Council resolutions, by
beginning the lifting of the sanctions against Iraq,
which have lasted for 12 years, and by implementing
paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991) to make the
Middle East region a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction, including those of Israel.

Once again, we call for the voice of reason to
prevail and for the inspections process to be given
enough time to address this issue within the framework
of the international community in a way that preserves
Iraq's territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty and that saves the region and the
concerned parties from a war that would claim the lives
of many innocent people. All possible avenues for a
peaceful resolution of this crisis must be explored.

