Mr. Vukasinovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and wish you and your delegation every success.
We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his
fifty-third report (S/2018/4l6, annex) on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from
22 October 2017 to 21 April 2018.

Bosnia and Herzegovina further intensified its
efforts during the reporting period in the implementation
of the reform agenda and continued dynamic work in
implementing the socioeconomic reforms necessary for
integration into the European Union (EU). As a result
of continued and synchronized efforts at all levels to
finalize the answers to a comprehensive questionnaire
of the European Commission, the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina provided the answers to more than
3,000 questions, relating to the compatibility of the
country's economic, legal and social systems with EU
standards, to the European Commission's President,
Jean-Claude Juncker, on 28 February, thereby
reflecting its readiness to join the European Union. We
look forward to receiving the opinion of the European
Commission based on the answers to the questionnaire,
which we hope will be forthcoming soon. Pending the
results of the Commission's analysis of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's readiness for accession to the EU, we
will continue the implementation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement.

We thankthe European Union and its States members
for their strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European path. For its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to work towards improvement in all areas,
including reforms, strengthening the rule of law and
good governance, thereby emphasizing the unwavering
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership
in the European Union.

One of the main priorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region on issues of mutual interest.
That is why Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to pay
special attention to strengthening cooperation with
countries in the region. The countries of the Western
Balkans continue to hold regular meetings at the
highest levels that are generating a positive political
atmosphere. A recent significant meeting took place
on the 6 March, when members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina hosted a successful trilateral
meeting with President Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovie of
Croatia and President Aleksandar Vueie of Serbia.

We recognize the Government of Bulgaria, which
holds the presidency of the Council of European Union
for the period from January to June of this year, for
organizing the summit of the EU and Western Balkans
leaders to be held in Sofia next week. That will be the
first summit of the EU and Western Balkans leaders
since the one held in Thessaloniki in 2003. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will actively participate in the summit in
Sofia. The Western Balkans Cooperation, within the
framework of the Berlin process, remains a crucial
driver for the integration of the region into the European
Union, as well as for cooperation and stability within
the region of the Western Balkans. We look forward to
actively participating in the upcoming summit, which
is expected to be held in London in July.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
in strengthening the rule of law in the following
key areas. During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan and the
strategy for prevention and combating terrorism for
the period from 2015 to 2020 is being implemented.
The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to prosecute individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
facilitating the recruitment of terrorist fighters. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, together with
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization undertaken by national stakeholders,
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil society organizations and the media.

Moreover, during the reporting period, Bosnia
and Herzegovina's rule of law and security institutions
made progress in combating organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs, corruption and money laundering.
The action plan to address Bosnia and Herzegovina's
deficiencies in anti-money-laundering regulations
has been implemented, and, in February, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was removed from the Financial Action
Task Force's list of high-risk third countries with
structural deficiencies in anti-money-laundering and
counter-terrorist financing.

With regard to processing war crimes before
domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that
fighting impunity is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the national strategy for processing war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin of
perpetrators and victims, is essential for reconciliation
and long-term stability.

With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy, like others in the region, has been affected by
global economic fluctuations. However, we are making
progress in establishing a functioning market economy
and furthering our economic growth. Economic growth
has been at 2.5 per cent on average annually over the
past five years. The number of registered unemployed
persons in 2017 dropped by 6.9 per cent, as compared
to a decline of 3.9 per cent in 2016. Nevertheless, the
youth unemployment rate is still over 50 per cent. Job
creation for youth and the creation of a legal framework
to improve the business environment will remain
priorities in the economic reform programme in the
upcoming period.

The international migrant crisis continues to pose
a substantial challenge to the States of the region and
their economies. During the second half of 2017, Bosnia
and Herzegovina experienced a significant increase
in refugees and migrants, most of whom crossed the
border in an irregular manner. Arrivals have continued
this year, which temporarily exceeded Bosnia and
Herzegovina's accommodation capacity in January.

In that context, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
authorities have undertaken a set of comprehensive
measures, including in the humanitarian and security
areas. Bosnia and Herzegovina is implementing its
strategy in the area of migration and asylum, along
with its plan of action for the period of 2016-2020. The
document has specified the Bosnia and Herzegovina
policy in the area ofmigration and asylum in accordance
with the highest European and international standards.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has in place a migration
coordination body led by the Ministry of Security,
which has been closely reviewing the evolving context
of the refugee and migrant situation in the country
and planning further action in coordination with the
Council of Ministers.

The European Union-led Operation Althea has been
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many years. It is
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has had respectable and fruitful cooperation with
Operation Althea, particularly in the capacity-
building and training of the armed forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We wish the new Commander of the
European Union Force, Major General Martin Dorfer,
every success in further strengthening cooperation
with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute to
international peace and security by providing its military
and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Presently, we have 42 personnel serving in
United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At the same time, we would also like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.

