The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

As this is a wrap-up meeting, by definition we are
supposed to take stock of what we have done during
the month, or what we have not done, or what we
would have liked to have achieved. This exercise can
also be an opportunity to evaluate the way in which the
Council has conducted its business during the month.
In that connection, I invite members to comment on all
the issues that we have dealt with during the month,
and also to comment on the manner in which these
issues have been dealt with. I also invite the comments
of members on how we can improve upon what we
have not been able to achieve during the month.

For this meeting we do not have a list of
speakers, and I invite those who wish to take the floor
to raise their hands.

I would now like to make a very brief statement
on how we have seen our own presidency before I open
the floor to Council members.

The programme of work of the Security Council
for the month of January has been determined mainly
by the exigencies imposed by previous decisions of the
Security Council. The Council renewed the mandates
of four peacekeeping operations, examined 11 reports
of the Secretary-General and adopted seven resolutions
and two presidential statements. We also issued 12
press statements on various issues discussed during the
month.

While the attention of the international
community continues to be occupied with the situations
in Afghanistan and the Middle East, as well as with the
threats posed by terrorism to international peace and
security, the programme of work for the month of
January attempted to strike a balance in its approach by
addressing these issues in an adequate manner and, at
the same time, refocusing attention on conflict
situations in Africa and elsewhere.

We are pleased that the public meeting on the
situation in Africa, with the participation for the first
time of the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), attracted several ministers from
both member and non-member countries of the
Council. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to
all those delegations that participated in the meeting, in
particular those ministers from member and non-
member countries of the Council who travelled to New
York for the occasion.

It is our hope that the presidential statement
which we have just adopted will serve as a basis for
greater and more effective interaction between the
Security Council and the OAU. We also hope that
succeeding presidencies will continue this focus on
African issues by taking a global and holistic approach,
and we are grateful in this regard that the United
Kingdom delegation has already announced that it will
do so during its presidency in July.

I invite members to comment on the open briefing
by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, which took place on 18
January. Their comments could focus on whether that
meeting was useful and on how we can further the
work both of the Security Council and of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to attain the goals we set
ourselves in resolution 1373 (2001).

During this month we also remained engaged and
committed with respect to the situation in Afghanistan.
We had our regular briefings; we lifted sanctions
against Ariana Afghan Airlines; we were able to
unfreeze the assets of the Central Bank of Afghanistan.
Yesterday's address by Mr. Hamid Karzai, Chairman of
the Afghanistan Interim Authority, stressed once again
how important the continued involvement of the
Security Council is to the Afghan people in their quest
for peace and stability.

At the beginning of the month we had said too
that we would try to promote transparency in our work.
One of the ways we did that was by setting up a web
site on which we provided daily summaries of meetings
and consultations of the Security Council. Members of
the Council may wish to comment on whether that was
useful or whether it could be further improved to make
our work more transparent. In the same vein, I am very
glad that the public meeting on the situation in Africa
was broadcast live through a United Nations webcast.
That was indeed a technological breakthrough which
allowed the whole world to follow the business of the
Security Council. It is probably too easy to find out
whether this was well received, but it would be
interesting to find out whether this kind of service
could be of use in the future to promote transparency in
the work of the Council.

During this month we were also able to pursue
discussion of some issues relating to the documentation
and procedures of the Security Council. We spent quite
a bit of time both at ambassadorial and experts level to
review the format and the content of the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly. This shows
that it is possible, with good will, to have discussions
on issues that may appear to be difficult. We are glad
that on this issue we are, almost, near agreement and
that we will be able to have something ready for next
month.

During several past wrap-up meetings, we have
laid emphasis on the need for the Council to interact
with non-members of the Council in order to share
views on issues before the Council. Members of the
Council may wish to comment on the format we
adopted during the debate on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, whereby we heard three
members of the Council, then three representatives of
non-Council States, and had Sir Jeremy Greenstock
intervene after every six or so speakers. Our aim was to
promote some kind of interactive dialogue. I would like
to get the views of members on whether that was
successful and on whether it might be encouraged in
the future. We were also able during January to have
two short but very interesting meetings on the format
of future wrap-up meetings; even here we seem to be
moving towards some consensus. We hope that we will
be able to try the new format - on which, again, there
is near-consensus - next month.

During this month we were also able to start
regular briefings on the situation in the Middle East, a
subject which had remained in the footnote of the
Council's programme for far too long. The briefing by
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Process, was, I hope, extremely useful,
because we were able to get first-hand information
from somebody who has actually been operating in the
field.

We are also very grateful that the President of the
Economic and Social Council was able to respond to
our invitation to participate in the public meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Africa. We hope
that this participation heralds a new era of cooperation
and coordination in addressing issues of international
peace and security, in particular the post-conflict
peace-building components of peace-building
initiatives. The interaction between these two major
organs of the United Nations had long been awaited.
Members of the Council may wish to address this
matter and to suggest ways in which we can improve
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

The work of the Council during the month of
January proceeded, in our view, without too much
pressure: we had only one evening sitting. That was
possible thanks mainly to the cooperation and support
extended by everyone here to me and my team during
the month. I will reserve my vote of thanks until
everybody else has spoken.

I now open the floor to those members who wish
to speak.

