Mr. Hill (Australia): The Australian Government
remains committed to the Middle East peace process
and to the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. The tragic
events of December and January have underlined yet
again the vital importance of efforts towards Middle
East peace. Australia was deeply saddened by the
recent conflict in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel
and its humanitarian cost. Australia condemns any
ongoing rocket and mortar fire perpetrated by Hamas
as a threat to peace in the region.

We recognize the importance of the Gazan
people's having access to humanitarian and other
assistance so that rebuilding and reconstruction can
take place, and call on Israel to do all it can to help
increase the flow of humanitarian goods and other
necessary supplies into the Gaza Strip.

Australia believes that the priority for both sides
remains just as much as ever the pursuit of a two-State
solution to the conflict based on the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a viable State of
their own and Israel's right to live in peace within
secure borders. It is also essential that members of the
international community lend their support. In this
regard, we recognize and commend efforts, such as the
Arab Peace Initiative, towards a broader Middle East
peace. We also commend the role Egypt has played and
strongly support a durable and fully respected
ceasefire, as called for in resolution 1860 (2009). We
welcome Palestinian reconciliation, which should be
consistent with Quartet principles.

Australia recognizes the vital importance of
recovery and reconstruction efforts and the central role
of the Palestinian Authority in this regard. That is why
Australia was pleased to announce at Sharm el-Sheikh
a contribution of $20 million to assist the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, with United Nations agencies
and other donors, to meet the recovery and
reconstruction needs of the Palestinian people. This
assistance builds on the $10 million which Australia
had already committed in January for emergency and
humanitarian relief through United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, and the $45
million provided in 2008. Australia stands ready to
provide whatever further practical assistance we can.

