Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. Out of respect for the many speakers who wish to take the floor, I will give an abbreviated version of it. First, let me express my appreciation to Belgium for initiating this debate, and my thanks to the excellent briefers. Transitional justice is often described as dealing with the aftermath of conflicts or atrocities. However, it is not only a matter of providing meaningful justice, but also an essential building block for sustaining peace and avoiding relapse into conflict. Transitional justice is also a means to achieve reconciliation. Only by dealing meaningfully with the past can a society move forward without being taken hostage by its own history. The European Union, in its very essence, is the product of a collective vision and commitment to overcome the past and build a sustainable peace through reconciliation and the establishment of free democratic societies in which human rights and the rule of law are upheld. We adopted a comprehensive policy framework on support to transitional justice in November 2015, becoming the first regional organization to do so. Since then, we have witnessed several positive developments. We welcome the African Union's transitional justice policy, adopted last year. In our policy framework, we underline that all transitional justice processes have to be nationally owned and context-specific. Each situation requires a tailor-made approach. Since it is a whole-of-society endeavour, special attention needs to be paid to tailoring inclusive transitional justice processes, while promoting the participation and influence of women and young people in decision-making at all levels, in all areas. Criminal justice, accountability, the establishment of truth, reparations and institutional reform are all possible entry points for ending impunity, providing redress to victims, fostering trust and strengthening the rule of law. The European Union recognizes that accountability and justice are most successful if the justice system functions effectively and independently, thereby enabling the International Criminal Courtto play its intended role, national jurisdictions. while complementing Victims and affected communities should be at the centre of all efforts. Transitional justice is a complex issue, and is therefore best considered from the start of any peace support efforts, ranging from mediation to restoring peace and security in countries emerging from conflict. It also requires a truly integrated approach. The active advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission in support of the Security Council could be further drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention is paid to transitional justice and reconciliation at all stages of the conflict cycle. In recent years, the EU has made considerable efforts to translate our policy commitments into more concrete action on the ground, while always working closely with, and in support of, the United Nations. In Syria, we support the International Commission on Missing Persons in setting up mechanisms and partnerships for data collection and the systematic compilation of information from the families of missing persons. In Colombia, we stepped up our support immediately after the peace accord was signed in order to help overcome the obstacles that might occur during the early implementation of the agreement. In the Central African Republic, we also support the Special Criminal Court as a critical body to fight impunity. We collaborated with UN-Women to strengthen the integration of the gender dimension in transitional justice processes. Supporting transitional justice requires specific expertise. We have therefore set up a flexible instrument that enables the EU to deploy transitional justice experts on the ground to provide assistance upon request. We are also ready to engage over the long term, through our missions on the ground or our dedicated financial instruments. Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the crucial role that civil society organizations have played in so many transitional justice processes. They have often been the driver behind numerous initiatives, giving a voice to millions of victims. We stand ready to further engage on the subject and hope that today's deliberations mark only the beginning of a deeper conversation, as it touches upon so many different topics that are on the agenda of the Security Council, ranging from mediation to children and armed conflict, among others. (Resumption 1)
