Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its impact on international peace and
security (S/2010/463). I would also like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
efforts and his exhaustive briefing. I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank him for his important
statement.

I would like to make the following comments.
First, the parliamentary elections of 18 September were
at the very centre of our concerns, as they are a key
element of democracy. They were a test of the Afghan
electoral institutions and the entire international
community. We welcome the logistical and technical
steps that were taken to guarantee the successful
conduct of the elections in a transparent and free
manner and to avoid or overcome the shortcomings and
gaps in the 2009 presidential election. Furthermore, the
encouraging participation rate of candidates and voters
alike - and of women in particular - in these very
difficult conditions demonstrated the extent to which
Afghan society is wedded to the democratic process.

However, the security situation remains a major
stumbling block, whether in terms of threats against
and even assassinations of candidates and electoral
staff, or of situations where a number of voters were
not allowed to exercise their right to vote. Moreover,
irregularities and fraud are very serious challenges no
less important than security. That is why the role of the
Electoral Complaints Commission was essential in
limiting the negative fallout of these aspects of the
elections, in which we had a number of incidents.

Secondly, certain that a political solution is the
appropriate way to end the crisis in Afghanistan and to
ensure that all main stakeholders without exception
participate in Government, and realizing that partial
solutions are not viable, we support the reconciliation
and reintegration process and affirm the need to
implement the decisions of the 20 July Kabul
Conference in a timely way. That process must involve
every stratum of society throughout the country.

The Conference was a twofold commitment. On
the one hand, it reflected the commitment of the
Government to improving the security situation and
governance, promoting economic and social
development, and fighting drug trafficking to the
benefit of the people. On the other hand, it also
demonstrated the commitment of the international
community to backing the national Afghan
Government, bringing into play various resources and

means to ensure that the Government regains complete
control of its territory, and reaffirming our
condemnation of terrorist activities. We note with
alarm that the security situation has not improved in
many regions around the country. The overall number
of security-related incidents has clearly grown in
comparison to the same period last year; the number of
civilian deaths, including among women and children,
is still increasing.

Thirdly, we reaffirm the need to cooperate at the
regional level and to support neighbouring countries,
given the relationship of the security situation,
including the economy, to the fight against drug
trafficking, which is a basic source of financing for
terrorism. It is clear that peace in Afghanistan will
further the interests of all countries of the region.

