Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, as well
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Shearer, for the analysis that he has provided to us.

As Mr. Shearer pointed out, South Sudan is at a
critical juncture, in which the hope of an improvement
in the situation is unfortunately being threatened by
a number of dangers and significant shortcomings in
three areas.

First of all, with regard to security, the arrival
of the rainy season should automatically reduce the
level of fighting, just as it will ground helicopters and
heavy equipment. However, we cannot say that the
situation will improve. During the past three years of
the conflict, we have seen that the rainy season only
served to freeze the situation, with the fighting starting
back up as soon as the dry season returned. We must
remember that the outbreak of violence last year in Juba
took place in July. We are therefore not immune to fresh
violence or crises in the months to come. Moreover, in
recent years the parties have not failed to use the rainy
season to rearm. That is a constant in South Sudan. We
must act to prevent such actions, which only feed the
conflict. The imposition of an arms embargo would
help in that regard.

The second issue is the humanitarian situation and
the difficulties faced by the civilian population. South
Sudan is experiencing a large-scale humanitarian
catastrophe that is intensifying every day. In recent
weeks, for example, fighting has continued to have
an intolerable impact on civilians. We have seen it
particularly in Upper Nile state. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has had to face
many challenges in its efforts to provide assistance
to the many displaced persons, and we would like to
commend its efforts in that regard, as well as those of
all humanitarian workers in South Sudan.

The spread of the cholera epidemic, highlighted by
Mr. Shearer, is a real risk, while famine, or the risk of
famine, continues to plague some areas of the country.

In that context, the cessation of hostilities and
humanitarian access remain priorities, including during
the rainy season. The parties must commit themselves
unconditionally to those points, and UNMISS must be
able to fully implement its mandate to protect civilians.
More than nine months after its creation, the Regional
Protection Force has finally begun to deploy, faced
with the many obstacles that have been placed in its
way there. It can contribute to the better protection of
civilians. The authorities in South Sudan must allow
for the full deployment of the force, without hindrance.

Thirdly and finally, the political process is also at
a critical juncture. While the implementation of the
peace agreement remains at a standstill, the opening of
national dialogue can nurture the hope that the various
constituents of South Sudanese society will finally be
able to tackle the country's many problems. In order
to achieve that, national dialogue must be conducted
in a transparent, impartial and independent manner. In
order to meet the objectives assigned to it, it is also
essential that that dialogue be fully inclusive, including
all political sensitivities, as well as civil society. Those
actors should be able to maintain an unrestricted and
fear-free dialogue, with respect for civil liberties.
President Kiir's directive to security services to stop
the harassment of opponents is encouraging. We hope
that it will be implemented fully.

The mobilization of the international community
remains essential to efforts to accompany, encourage
and facilitate the political process with a View to
achieving progress in the implementation of the
2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. President Museveni's
presence in Juba in recent days is an important sign
of regional mobilization. We hope that it will help to
convince South Sudanese actors to move forward on
the road to peace. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and bilateral and multilateral partners in South Sudan
must remain fully mobilized and fully coordinated, in
order to move the process forward. That is essential.

In that regard, we welcome and support the efforts
of the Special Representative, and those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom, to
ensure that the international community speaks with
one voice. For its part, the Council must continue to
remind South Sudanese actors that they must work to
make the necessary progress to get their country out of
the conflict. We must remind them of our expectations,
rally the parties to action and, if necessary, consider
imposing sanctions on spoilers to the peace process.
Here we welcome the one-year renewal of the
sanctions regime that which we unanimously adopted
this morning.

Given the current challenges, the Council must
keep a close eye on South Sudan. It must ensure that
the actions expected of South Sudanese stakeholders,
as set forth in the presidential statement of 25 March,
are taken.

The coming months can be an opportunity to take
strides towards peace, failing which the experience of
past years will be repeated and violence will resume.

