Mr. Gonzalez de Linares (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate on the situation in Somalia at a crucial
time when the support of the Security Council and the
international community for the new Somali authorities
is especially important.

Spain fully supports the statement made by the
Observer of the European Union. We would like to
make some brief remarks in our national capacity in
order to emphasize our commitment to Somalia.

We are very pleased with the progress made in recent
months in implementing the road map. With Somalia
having successfully reached the end of its transition
period, we are facing a new era in the country's history.
We are confident that the new Government will make
the right decisions in dealing with the challenges ahead.
In that regard, it is essential to expand State authority
and the provision of services to the people who have
been liberated from Al-Shabaab's control, as well as to
encourage development so that the Somali people can
begin to enjoy the rewards of peace after so many years
of destruction and suffering.

For its part, Spain firmly intends to support Somalia
in this new phase, as it has been doing since the beginning
of the process in the political, security and development

areas. In the political area, since the road map was
launched on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement and
the Kampala Accord, Spain has supported every effort
undertaken by Somalia's Government and transitional
institutions. We have participated actively in the
meetings of the International Contact Group, one of
which was held in Madrid in September 2010, as well as
at the London and Istanbul conferences and the Group's
meeting held in July in Rome.
In the security area, aware that security plays a
key role in Somalia's economic, developmental and
institutional development, Spain has contributed
actively to helping the African Union to train troops
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
and until July 2011 led the European Union training
mission for security forces in Somalia. In recognition
ofAMISOM's central role in stabilizing Somalia, Spain
will continue its commitment with a contribution of
$1 million in 2012.

Spain has also played an important part in the
fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia. We are
one of the main contributors to Operation European
Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta, led by Spain
between December 2011 and April 2012. My country
also supports NATO's Operation Ocean Shield. Under
Spain's chairmanship, the updating in July of the
working methods of the Contact Group on piracy off
the coast of Somalia is another example ofmy country's
active commitment to improving the effectiveness of
the Group's work.

Regarding the development of Somalia, Spain
has contributed €3 million in financial assistance to
projects and initiatives in this area. I would also like
to highlight our humanitarian assistance, which has
amounted to €8.7 million euros since 2011.

In sum, in View of all the elements highlighted
in my statement, I would like to reiterate Spain's
firm commitment to continuing to play an active role
in providing Somalia with all the support it needs to
tackle the significant challenges ahead in this new era.

