Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their briefings. We encourage pursuing de-escalation efforts in order to achieve a cessation of hostilities throughout the country. The statistics of the most recent report of the Civilian Impact Monitoring Project show a decrease in the total number of civilian casualties in 2019 compared to 2018 - from 2,049 in 2018 to 1,104 in 2019. That is mainly owing to a decrease in air strikes, which have entailed mass casualties, as well as in the number of deaths caused by shelling and landmines. We hope that those trends will continue and that the next steps in the political process will be able to begin as soon as possible under the auspices of the United Nations. This process must be inclusive, with the meaningful participation of women and young people, and reflect the ethnic, geographical, social and political diversity of Yemen's population. Let us not forget, however, the already-concluded agreements, whose implementation is encountering difficulties, as in the case of the Riyadh agreement. We once again call on all parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement, including the Hodeidah Agreement, the agreement on the exchange of prisoners and the statement of understanding on Taiz. As we heard earlier, humanitarian access remains difficult. The operating environment for humanitarian actors in Yemen remains one of the most restricted of its kind in the world, entailing interference in humanitarian operations and restrictions on movement, which only add to the conflict and continuing insecurity. It is imperative that all parties facilitate humanitarian access and respect international humanitarian law. Belgium is particularly concerned about reports that the Houthis are now demanding 2 per cent of the budget of every humanitarian project as a precondition for their assent. As we also heard, the economic and financial situation remains of particular concern as well. The Central Bank stands in need of a foreign-exchange injection to stabilize the rial. Corruption in Yemeni institutions is not helpful and, according to the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), it could jeopardize peace and security. The announcement of 19 December 2019 that the Houthi authorities in Sana'a had banned the use and exchange of the new bank notes in the areas under their control places a new strain on already heavily burdened civilians, in particular in northern Yemen, and further worsens their economic situation. We also encourage the Houthis to finally provide access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to facilitate a review of the situation and avoid the possibility of an environmental disaster. Lastly, all parties must uphold their obligations and commitments under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We are particularly concerned about the continuation of serious violations of children's rights and reports that the Houthis aresystematically using sexual violence against women who are politically active in the areas under their control. That is entirely unacceptable and must stop.
