Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by saying that Ecuador felt very
honoured by the presence of the President of Costa
Rica, who led the Council's discussion this morning.
We would also like to welcome His Excellency
08-60947
Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Panama.

My delegation would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the excellent initiative of organizing
an open debate on such an important topic for our
States, and we believe that this is a very crucial step
for the establishment of true interaction, a real
dialogue, between the Security Council and all the
States Members of the Organization. My delegation is
convinced that the fight of the international community
to strengthen collective security must deal with the
underlying causes as well as the origin of the vast
majority of conflicts, these being extreme poverty and
the unequal distribution of resources, employment and
power.

Police, military nor intelligence measures are not
enough to eradicate these serious problems. What we
need is to introduce a radical change in the structures
of the current international order. In recent times, we
have witnessed various areas of insecurity and violence
around the world. Given this state of affairs, there has
been criticism by public opinion against what they
have observed us the inability of the United Nations to
prevent conflicts, to restore peace and to prevent the
loss ofinnocent civilian lives.

Nevertheless, the United Nations is what its
members make of it. This global Organization is not a
super-State with coercive prerogatives over its
members. This is why we can only reiterate the crucial
responsibility that the Security Council has, in
accordance with Article 24 of the Charter, as well as
the Council's necessary interaction with the General
Assembly, in accordance with Article 26 of the same
instrument.

My delegation believes it essential that the
Security Council establish a relationship with the
General Assembly, which is the most democratic and
representative organ, in order to strengthen the
multilateral system as the sole effective way to
establish peace and build development.

Ecuador, resolute in its commitment to
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, not only has joined the various
international instruments adopted in this area, but also
supports and implements all the actions that emanate
from those instruments, in order to achieve their real
implementation.
3
Given the transnational effects of drug
trafficking, the illicit arms trafficking, organized crime
and terrorism, Ecuador is part of regional and
international organizations and conventions to combat
these scourges. In the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security, Ecuador actively
participates in peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian assistance.

The challenge of small arms and light weapons is
above all due to the uncontrolled proliferation of the
trade in these weapons. The ease of acquiring them has
been a decisive factor in the increase in domestic and
international conflicts and the escalation in violence
and social disintegration that threatens many countries,
in particular the most vulnerable sectors of civilian
populations, especially women and children.

Along the same lines, my delegation would like
to reiterate its willingness to continue work on
developing an arms trade treaty that would make it
possible to strengthen the commitment of all countries
with respect to international peace and security.
Likewise, my country has recently hosted a regional
meeting on cluster munitions. In this respect, we have
stressed the importance of ratifying that international
instrument.

A decade has passed since Ecuador and Peru
signed the Brasilia peace agreements, through which
the border area was transformed from a conflict zone
into an area of peace, work and cooperation. The
humanitarian mine-clearance programme became a
successful mechanism to strengthen mutual trust and
security between our countries. Similarly, given the
impact of the domestic Colombian conflict on
Ecuadorian society, the efforts of Plan Ecuador are
based on a preventive, multidimensional and
multisectoral approach. The implementation of that
approach is based on achieving national social and
economic development goals, strict compliance with
international commitments on human rights, the
conservation and sustainable use of natural resources
and the fight against any type of illicit activity that
would affect civil security.

For Ecuador, the topic of collective security is
fundamental, and we see it above all as a State policy
that guarantees the right to well-being and dignity for
human beings, the promotion of collective interests
over private interests, intercultural exchange, social
inclusion and the fight against all forms of
discrimination.

That is why we think it is paradoxical that,
although some countries, such as Ecuador, are deeply
committed to disarmament as an instrument of
development, in many other cases there has been no
abatement in military spending by other States. In the
current context of the energy, food and climate crises,
we must have a serious discussion on the priorities of
our public spending and our investments. Once the
cold war was over, we believed - too optimistically -
that we had achieved the conditions necessary to
restore peace and security through confidence-building
measures. Article 51 of the United Nations Charter is
therefore the only means for some States to safeguard
their security when the Security Council fails to take
timely, effective and impartial action to restore peace
and security in the world.

We live in a global and interconnected world, and
as a result, threats to peace and security require that we
strengthen multilateralism, as the President of Costa
Rica rightly pointed out this morning. For this reason,
my delegation sincerely hopes that the ideas expressed
in this debate will be followed up appropriately and
translated into concrete action, accompanied by
continuous reflection and review and contributing to
the greater effectiveness, transparency and legitimacy
of this very important body.

