Mr. Guehenno: I would to thank the United
Kingdom, as the presidency of the Security Council,
for having convened the meetings on justice and the
rule of law. I am heartened that the ministerial meeting
last week, and earlier consultations in the special
committee, suggest emerging unanimity among
Member States about the critical role of the rule of law
in building a sustainable peace in post-conflict settings.

I am speaking today on behalf of several United
Nations departments within the Secretariat and United
Nations entities that are engaged in supporting justice
and the rule of law in post-conflict societies, among
them the Department of Political Affairs, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office
of Legal Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

The restoration of the rule of law is a sine qua
non for the sustainable resolution of conflict and the
rebuilding of secure, orderly and humane societies. If
the aim of the United Nations is to prevent conflict and
relapses into conflict, it seems self-evident that
promotion of the rule of law should be among the
priority concerns of the international community.

Too often, however, we have failed to give this
critical sector the importance it is due. Too often, our
rule-of-law activities have been considered a subset of
our so-called real mandate - either because we were
not provided with an adequate mandate to carry out
rule-of-law activities in a comprehensive manner,
because we had done insufficient planning to be able to
hit the ground running, because we had inadequate
access to resources and expertise - or for all of those
reasons.

We have witnessed, time and again, a
population's loss of faith in a peace process owing to
the absence of security and lack of accountability for
criminal acts. We have been present in countries where,
even a year into the peace process, courts do not
function in even a rudimentary way; lawyers,
prosecutors and judges are scarce or untrained; and the
population feels it has no real recourse under the law.

We can no longer afford to treat the rule of law as
a side activity in which we engage alongside political
objectives. In many cases, it lies at the heart of the
success or failure of our peacekeeping operations. It is
time, therefore, to fundamentally rethink the way in
which we address the rule of law in post conflict
societies.

This does not mean that the United Nations has
neglected the rule of law. On the contrary, many parts
of the system have worked in this field for years, and
our multidimensional peacekeeping operations
demonstrate our broad involvement in the promotion of
the rule of law. From policing, judicial reform and
corrections, to child protection, human rights and
electoral assistance, our operations worldwide are
engaged in a range of activities aimed at reinforcing
justice and the rule of law. Much of this work is carried
out in a system-wide partnership and with our non-
governmental organization partners. Yet, in spite of the
efforts expended, the results of our work have been
decidedly mixed.

In some cases, the failure of a peace agreement to
address rule-of-law concerns has tied the hands of the
United Nations. It is essential, therefore, to ensure that
the rule of law figures more prominently from the early
stages of peace negotiations onwards.

Equally, the rule of law must be recognized as a
key element of any post-conflict effort - and this must
be reflected by political actors and donors when
drafting peace agreements, adopting and interpreting
peacekeeping mandates and funding programmes. This
issue surfaced in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for example,
when ambiguities in the United Nations mandate were
interpreted very narrowly as being limited to traditional
policing functions, rather than including broader
support for the justice sector. It was not until July
1998 - two and a half years after the Dayton Peace
Agreement - that the Security Council passed a
resolution that specifically referred to legal reform and
authorized the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to engage in monitoring and assessment
of the judicial sector. The loss of valuable time may
explain why we were unable to achieve the same level
of progress in the judicial sector as we did with the
police.

In contrast, transitional administrations in
Kosovo and East Timor have provided the United
Nations with broad mandates and authority in the area
of the rule of law, bringing to light a number of
important lessons and paving the way for subsequent
operations that dealt more effectively with that crucial
sector. In the case of Kosovo, Member States were not
organized to provide us with qualified personnel,
especially police, quickly enough, which slowed our
deployment. As the first of two interim administration
missions, we had not appreciated the need for
international judges and prosecutors or a full cadre of
corrections personnel. We lacked budgeted funds even
to provide pencils and paper to the new national
judiciary. We were unsuccessful, for several months, in
appointing a sufficient number of local judges and
prosecutors to get the judicial system up and running.

After a difficult start, international judges and
prosecutors are now active in Kosovo, handling the
most sensitive war crimes and inter-ethnic crime cases.
As a check on corruption and misconduct, we have
instituted a Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, which
is involved in the appointment of judges and
prosecutors and in disciplinary matters. Pillar III of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which is led by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, has established a
judicial training centre, a trial monitoring programme,
a Criminal Defence Resource Centre and an
Ombudsman Institution. It has also assisted the Kosovo
Bar Association in restarting its activities.

Despite these successes, UNMIK has difficulty
recruiting qualified international judges and
prosecutors. Ethnic bias can still taint cases handled by
the local judiciary. And the recent riot, and tragic
deaths, in the Dubrava prison, represent a serious
setback in our efforts to develop and administer the
corrections system.

Since the establishment of the missions in
Kosovo and East Timor, we have learned - perhaps
the hard way - that significant assistance in the
judicial and corrections areas should not be limited to
interim administration missions.

At the same time, it has become clear that United
Nations effectiveness in promoting the rule of law in
many parts of the world has been hampered by the
inadequacy of our mandates and resources, both at
Headquarters and in the field. Indeed, while the
Security Council recognizes that activities such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
elections and policing are essential elements of a
peacekeeping mandate, other rule-of-law activities are
often included only in relation to law enforcement
efforts.

I cannot overemphasize, however, that the
maintenance of peace and security requires the
establishment of the rule of law in post-conflict
settings; and the establishment of the rule of law
requires more than just a focus on policing. It requires
that all components of the criminal justice chain - the
police, the judiciary, the defence bar, prosecutors and
corrections - be included and funded.
In the case of Liberia, the Secretary-General
recommended that we address the criminal justice
chain in a comprehensive manner, and those
recommendations were adopted, albeit with some
hesitation, by the Security Council. Liberia will be a
real test of our ability to move beyond a piecemeal
approach to the rule of law and lay the foundations for
a truly just and peaceful society.

In addition, focusing on the full criminal justice
chain may prove to be a more effective and efficient
use of resources which, in the long run, does more to
prevent relapse into conflict and saves both dollars and
lives. And, as far as costs are concerned, judicial and
corrections mission components are quite small when
compared with the more substantial costs of deploying
large military forces or police-training and
restructuring programmes. In short, support for the rule
of law is a good investment.

In light of last week's ministerial statements, let
me highlight some of the steps that we have taken over
the last year to enhance our rule-of-law capacities. And
today is a fitting day to do so, given that it was one
year ago today that the Executive Committee on Peace
and Security (ECPS) approved the recommendations of
its rule-of-law Task Force.

Recognizing the need for peacekeeping
operations to address the entire criminal justice chain,
we established, in February, the Criminal Law and
Judicial Advisory Unit within the Civilian Police
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, with two staff members dedicated to
criminal law, judicial and corrections issues. This is a
good start, but in order to make good on our stated
commitment to the rule of law, the Unit will need
significant additional resources.

Rule of law focal points in 11 United Nations
departments and agencies now confer regularly on rule-
of-law issues that arise in peacekeeping. It remains to
be seen, however, whether the network will fulfil its
potential of providing support to the Unit on the core
aspects of its rule of law work, as the ECPS Task Force
recommended.

We are, however, beginning to see concrete
results from this initiative, providing evidence of the
degree to which the rule of law has come to be
recognized as a standard element of peace-building
efforts. Recently, for example, we have conducted rule-
of-law assessments in Afghanistan, Iraq, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - in Bunia
specifically - Liberia. Those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Liberia were conducted,
probably for the first time, by police, judicial and
corrections experts working together in an integrated
fashion, as had been recommended by the Brahimi
panel report.

The Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit is
also exploring the desirability of establishing a Rule of
Law Trust Fund as one way to draw upon the resources
and the expertise of entities outside the United Nations
system - including governmental, non-governmental
and intergovernmental organizations - to support rule-
of-law aspects of peace operations. In the coming
months, we hope to discuss with interested Member
States our recommendations on how best to designate

voluntary funds - through existing or new
mechanisms - for rule-of-law initiatives in peace
operations.

I will now turn to the subject of post-conflict
justice. By this, I mean the process whereby those who
have committed the most serious violations of
international humanitarian law - genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and grave breaches of
the Geneva Conventions - are held accountable and
punished.

The United Nations has attempted to meet the
challenge of post-conflict justice in the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone
and Cambodia. Both the United Nations and the
Security Council can draw a number of useful lessons
from these experiences.

First, the international tribunals that the United
Nations has established, or helped to establish, have
proved that it is possible to deliver impartial criminal
justice on the international plane.

By and large, though, the international tribunals
have so far not always proved to be efficient or
effective instruments for prosecuting and trying those
suspected of the most serious crimes, and they have
been too slow and too costly. This is certainly so in the
case of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and it appears
that the same might prove true in the case of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone.

Secondly, if the international community limits
its response to post-conflict situations to the creation of
traditional criminal justice mechanisms such as courts,
focused on delivering retribution and meting out
punishment, then it will fail to respond to many of the
expectations that victims and "victim societies" have
concerning mechanisms of post-conflict justice, in
particular reparation, a full accounting of what
happened and national reconciliation.

Among other judicial or quasi-judicial
mechanisms, truth and reconciliation commissions
seem to offer the best prospects for meeting the various
expectations and demands both of individual victims
and of the societies from which they come. But if
courts alone are not enough, neither are truth and
reconciliation commissions.

Thirdly, creating specialized courts, whether at
the international or the national level, does little to help
re-establish the rudiments of the rule of law in post-
conflict societies. Indeed, creating such specialized
institutions may divert resources from support for the
rebuilding and operation of the "ordinary" court
system.

Ideally, these crimes should be addressed within
the framework of the ordinary court system, which may
require the assignment or the allocation of prosecutors
and judges who have the requisite expertise and other
forms of specialized assistance.

There is much that the Security Council can do to
facilitate our efforts in the field of the rule of law. In
terms of addressing post-conflict justice, the practical
lesson to be drawn is that we should conduct case-by-
case assessments of the range of mechanisms available,
rather than relying solely on the establishment of ad
hoc institutional mechanisms. In addition, there should
be a move towards broader assistance and support to
national justice systems.

We must also ensure that any amnesty clauses in
peace agreements exclude amnesties for war crimes,
genocide, crimes against humanity and other serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. When domestic justice capacities
have collapsed, we must mandate interim measures,
including international support for the establishment of
temporary courts, policing capacities and detention
facilities, and the provision of provisional codes for
criminal law and procedure.

Our assessment report for Liberia offers another
example of how Member States can help bolster our
achievements in the rule of law. It recommends
components that would assist in the training of
Liberian legal professionals, provide advisers to work
alongside national counterparts in judicial reform
efforts, engage in trial monitoring to protect human
rights and improve the functioning of the judicial
system, and support and monitor the corrections
system. We look to Member States to support these
strategies.

Staffing remains one of our greatest challenges.
We must ensure that we have access to high-quality
police, corrections and judicial officers to complement
the work of our own staff experts, ensure that that
personnel are trained in international human rights
standards and that we deploy them to the field as
quickly as possible. We must also keep in mind the
need for broad geographic representation, which can be
difficult to achieve, particularly in our missions in
Africa, where some of our largest police contributors
are reluctant to participate.

Equally challenging is the issue of gender.
Indeed, only 3 per cent of our police and corrections
officers seconded to peace operations are women.
Experience in the broad range of legal systems found in
United Nations Member States - whether civil law,
common law, Islamic law, or other systems - is also
crucial. These are other areas in which we need your
urgent assistance.

In addition to providing individual personnel for
rule-of-law activities, Member States can assist by
providing staff for an entire sector. This is what the
United Kingdom has done in Kosovo, by providing
staffing for an entire criminal investigation unit.

Another model is for Member States to serve as
lead nation for assistance to a particular sector. In
Afghanistan, for example, Germany is in the lead for
policing and Italy for the justice sector. We must also
explore stand-by arrangements whereby Member States
commit to providing an integrated package of resources
and personnel as soon as the need arises. This was
attempted in East Timor, but with very little success.
Without significant assistance from Member States,
however, the United Nations will not be able to carry
out these complex mandates.

(spoke in French)

We all recognize that, while there is a wealth of
universal norms and standards developed by the United
Nations in this field and through their experience in the
field, there is no single approach to justice and the rule
of law. We must begin with sound assessments on the
ground to determine if our assistance is needed. Any
strategies we adopt must be tailored to the needs and
conditions of the host country and must have as its
primary objective the promotion of national ownership
of their justice system and capacity-building.

We must avoid the mistakes of the past, where
imported solutions failed to take into account local
culture and traditions and our activities were
sometimes carried out without adequately consulting
national actors.

Indeed, those who will ultimately be subject to
the system of law to be established have far more at
stake than we do and must take the lead in developing
and implementing any strategy for reform of the
criminal justice sector. And we must ensure that the
reference point for all of our work is international
norms and standards - whether in the area of human
rights, international humanitarian law or criminal law.

The United Nations is learning lessons from past
experiences, strengthening its capacities, and
developing new ways to work together more efficiently
and more effectively. What remains to be seen,
however, is how effective we - the United Nations
Secretariat, our other United Nations system partners,
the Security Council, Member States, and outside
entities who are able to contribute - will be in
effectively developing peacekeeping mandates, by
determining budgets that are appropriate to needs, by
deploying human and material resources that are equal
to the challenge, and - most difficult of all - by
taking into account, with a sense of realism, the
difficulties we will face in the field.

We cannot hope to effectively assist in building
stable, peaceful societies if the crucial area of the rule
of law is neglected. We have been in the peacekeeping
business for more than half a century now, and we will
have failed in our responsibility to suffering
populations throughout the world if we neglect to learn
and apply the lessons of the past half a century.

I hope that we can count on your continued
support and commitment as we strive to ensure that the
rule of law obtains the central, strategic role that it
merits in all peacekeeping efforts.

