Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
Mr. Huang Xia's valuable briefing and express our
gratitude to him. We also wish to assure him of our full
support in his efforts to bring about lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region.

We recognize the ongoing commitment of the
signatory countries to implementing the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which continues
to demonstrate its relevance and significance in helping
to alleviate the principal issues and tensions in the
region, such as those that arose between Rwanda and
Uganda but were later overcome thanks to the signing
of a memorandum of understanding. We particularly
appreciate the potential for regional rapprochement
that the Framework agreement affords, not only
in identifying common trends and challenges but
also in promoting political dialogue and alternative
complementary actions, particularly in cross-border
regions. In that regard, we welcome the projects that the
Special Envoy will promote to generate employment
and investment in those areas.

We welcome the positive developments detailed
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783)
linked to the deepening of bilateral ties and the quest
for greater coordination and regional integration based
on the establishment of confidence-building measures
and the revitalization of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.
In the political sphere, we consider the engagement
of countries in the electoral process in Burundi in 2020
and in the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in the Central African Republic within this
framework to be very positive. Equally promising
is the broad political space promoted and fostered in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by President
Tshisekedi, as well as the formation of a civilian
Government in the Sudan following mediation by the
African Union and Ethiopia.

Nevertheless, we continue to be concerned by the
ongoing presence of armed groups and the potential
for disruption that they represent through attacks on
the civilian population and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. We are also seeing an increase in
intercommunal violence and persistent violations of
human rights across various territories. All of those
phenomena are fuelling the fragility, volatility and
insecurity of the region. We therefore view it as the
utmost priority to take a coordinated approach in
addressing security challenges through such joint
initiatives as the meeting held last June that brought
together the intelligence and security services of
various countries in the region.

At the same time, the humanitarian situation
remains cause for serious concern, given the persistently
alarming numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons living in conditions of extreme vulnerability,
who must be protected. Added to this is the troubling
health situation due to the prevalence of the Ebola virus
in Uganda and eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and multiple outbreaks of cholera, malaria and
measles. We hope that the international community,
especially those countries committed to peace and
stability in the region, will continue to provide sustained
and predictable financing to the crucial humanitarian
response plans.

We welcome the vision of Special Envoy Xia to
continue supporting and funding the various gains
aimed at neutralizing the activities of armed groups at
the regional level, protecting natural resources against
illegal exploitation, promoting economic cooperation,
supporting the fight against impunity and promoting
inclusive political dialogue and action with adequate
representation of women and young people committed
to sustaining peace and development.

All ofthis should be done based on the commitments
made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and through efforts coordinated with the
various regional bodies and the United Nation system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, humanitarian
agencies and civil society.

