Major General Goulart: It is a great honour for
me to speak to the Security Council on behalf of the
military component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). My presentation today
will focus on the military component's contribution to
Haiti's stabilization and the support it provides to that
country's institutions.

Since its creation in 2004, MINUSTAH has been
working tirelessly towards establishing the rule of law,
restoring public safety and order, protecting civilians,
supporting the democratic process and preserving
human rights. In the context of the Mission's broad
mandate, the military component's contribution is
primarily aimed at promoting security and stability,
protecting civilians and responding to disasters. In
addition to that, however, the military also makes a
focused contribution to strengthening relevant Haitian
institutions.

Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter and in close coordination with the United
Nations police and the Haitian National Police (HNP),
MINUSTAH's military component has been making
steady progress in all its mandated tasks. In this regard,
daily operations are conducted in order to assist in
the maintenance of the rule of law and public order.
Each military unit manages its area of responsibility
by conducting patrols and setting up checkpoints. Such
activities have deterred Violence and crimes and instilled
a sense of security in the local population, thereby
improving law and order. By maintaining a secure
environment in Haiti, the military component has also
helped to enable further political and socio-economic
developments in the country.

We are very proud of the accomplishments that
have helped Haiti to recover from the 2010 earthquake
and the efforts made to reduce criminal violence
and improve protection of the civilian population.
Regarding the cholera outbreak, the Mission's rapid
response, supported by the military component, has
been mitigating the effects and spread of the disease.
That support includes preparing cholera treatment
centres, allocating medical teams and distributing clean
water to affected populations. I should also mention that
the measures that the Mission and other agencies have
been developing to fight cholera have had the additional
effect of enhancing the Haitian response capacity in
that area.

I should also highlight the various work projects
done by the military engineers. Besides fulfilling the
force's requirements, they are engaged in demolishing
unsafe buildings, removing debris, preparing sites
for relocating internally displaced persons, cleaning
ditches and canals, repairing roads and drilling wells.
The engineer units have been working effectively to
support the Haitian Government through improvements
in HNP installations, constructing new police stations,
preparing the ground for schools and hospitals, and
erecting prefabs to house the judiciary. Such efforts
mitigate the effects of rains and storms, improve living
conditions for poor communities, make the population
more secure and further enhance the conditions needed
for stability in the country.

Regarding institutional development, the security
generated by the military presence is unquestionably
its best contribution to strengthening the country's
political and security sector institutions. Particularly
relevant are the military component's contributions to
the HNP and the Haitian Coast Guard, as well as its
support for the electoral process. Military units conduct
regularjoint operations with United Nations police and
the HNP in order to prevent crime and arrest criminals
and gang members. Where there are demonstrations
and civil unrest, the military component provides
backup and support as needed. More important, our
presence has been a confidence-builder for the HNP,
which knows that it can count on our support as it goes
through its own development process.

Such joint operations have recently featured
support for the HNP in its actions against the former
Haitian military or former members of the Forces
armees d'Haiti, and other elements threatening to
organize into a second armed force and questioning
the Government's authority. I am pleased to report that
MINUSTAH's military component, working closely
with its police counterpart, successfully supported the
HNP's operation against such elements last month.
Operation Sunrise proved firmly that joint operations,
when planned in advance and in close conjunction with
the Government, bring the Mission improved results.

During the past year, the military component's
interaction with the HNP has increased even more.
Joint planning and coordination have improved our
success in the field, but more importantly, by observing
and participating in joint exercises, the HNP has been
able to demonstrate increased planning capacity for
security operations.

Along the same lines of support for Haitian
institutions, our plan is to add a new task for
MINUSTAH's maritime element, composed of
Uruguayan patrol boats and crews. That unit will
incorporate a capacity-building role for the Haitian
Coast Guard, in partnership with MINUSTAH's
police component. Taking advantage of the mentoring
experience and French-speaking abilities of the United
Nations officers, the Uruguayan crews will provide
the Coast Guard with technical knowledge to improve
its training and thereby increase its participation in
patrolling Haiti's maritime borders.

Another of the military component's contributions
is its participation in the electoral process. In the period
leading up to elections, military units are involved in
logistical support for polling stations and warehouses
around the country, mainly by transporting ballot
boxes and electoral material to them. On election days,
the military component provides overall security in
departments or regions that have a high-level threat
assessment. This covers polling stations and areas
where electoral material is being gathered or counted,
as well as key Government buildings and sites, in case
of election-related violence.

As some here may remember, the military
component's role in preventing the violence that
resulted in December 2010 after the announcement of
the first round of presidential elections was extremely
important to preventing the situation from spiraling out
ofcontrol. Along the same lines, the military component
is ready to provide support for the upcoming local and
partial senatorial elections, though the date has yet
to be confirmed. It should also be noted that, while
MINUSTAH'S resources and assets have enabled it to
support elections effectively, the Government of Haiti
will have to inherit many of these tasks and functions.

In the wake of the adoption of resolution 2012
(2011), MINUSTAH has completed a drawdown of its
military, police and civilian capabilities. The military
component's authorized strength is currently at 7,340
troops, of whom 7,285 are currently effective, after
a reduction of 1,600 troops and related equipment.
Along with the drawdown, the military component
has reconfigured its force to maximize mission
effectiveness. The remainder have been concentrated in
higher-risk areas and, thanks to close coordination with
the police component, the presence of formed police
units in areas being vacated by the military has ensured
the gradual transition of responsibilities to the HNP.

Looking towards the future, we are currently
consideringthemilitarycomponent'snextconfiguration,
taking into account resolution 2012 (2011), according
to which future adjustments of the force configuration
should be based on the overall security situation on the
ground and the increasing development of Haitian State
capacities.

All in all, we firmly believe that MINUSTAH has
successfully been carrying out its tasks in providing
security and stabilization in Haiti. However, some key
challenges, which I would like to present to the Council
before finishing my presentation, remain ahead of us.

Above all, the HNP must be further strengthened
so that it can assume the entire responsibility for the
country's security needs. The Government of Haiti
and MINUSTAH have the same objective: the timely
drawdown and ultimate departure of the Mission.
However, that must happen without a security vacuum
being created when the military component withdraws.
In addition, the country's capacity to conduct elections
with limited external support, to deal with the effects
of seasonal rains and hurricanes by itself and to remain
focused on the path of good governance, political
stability and socio-economic development are of
paramount importance.

I thank the Council for its attention, and I reaffirm
the continuous strong commitment of the military
component in giving all its strength and best effort to
the accomplishment of the mandate that MINUSTAH
received from the Council.

