We thank the delegation of Estonia for organizing today's important debate. Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and Nobel Peace Laureate, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for sharing their perspectives on this very important subject. I commend health-care workers, Member States, United Nations agencies, civil society, the private sector and, in particular, the World Health Organization for providing vital support and services to defeat the coronavirus-disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As we contend with COVID-19 and its far-reaching effects, Nigeria calls on all Member States and parties to conflict to join and support the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. It is a matter of grave concern that conflict situations expose civilians to killings, kidnappings, torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking and other dangers. This is particularly the case where non-State armed groups are involved. Their complete disregard for international law, in particular international humanitarian law, highlights the challenge they pose to the protection of civilians in conflict situations. It is also an unfortunate reality that women and girls are the most affected groups in conflict situations. Accordingly, we acknowledge the Security Council's commitment to the protection of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations, as exemplified by the adoption, inter alia, of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013). The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an obligation that requires the collective efforts of various stakeholders. Indeed, close collaboration among the Security Council, the United Nations Department of Peace Operations, troop- and police-contributing countries and their respective missions, as well as such regional organizations as the African Union, is vital to the success of protection-of-civilians mandates. It should be underscored that a clear and common understanding of protection mandates is fundamental to the effectiveness of missions. In this regard, we strongly support community engagement in promoting the protection of civilians. Community-alert networks and community-liaison assistance are vital to understanding perceptions of threat at the community level, including how communities seek to reduce risks and how peace operations can address them. We urge the international community to continue to recognize these imperatives. Nigeria endorses the Secretary-General's emphasis on preventive measures to stop armed conflicts. We wish to state in this regard that the efforts aimed at protecting civilians in armed conflicts require that the conditions that allow these conflicts to thrive be brought to an end. In other words, beyond the law enforcement approach, dealing with the political economy of conflicts in a more holistic manner is crucial to finding potential remedies to situations of conflict and the related crimes around the world. In the same vein, the world must find solutions to the thriving market in small arms and light weapons. Terrorist, militant and rebel groups continue to have access to weapons that are used to wreak havoc on communities in attempts to gain political power or push forward their selfish and unpatriotic agendas. Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of civilians in armed conflict and recognizes the primary responsibility of States in protecting civilians within their national jurisdictions. That conviction underlies our resolve to continue to take all the necessary measures, in full compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law, to protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group Boko Haram and its ilk. Nigeria has had its fair share of extreme terrorist activities by Boko Haram in the north-east region of the country, which have led to huge displacement of people and conflict-related violence against civilians, including women and children, that has been widely condemned. Since the establishment of the Multinational Joint Task Force, made up of Nigeria, Chad, Benin, the Niger and Cameroon, resounding successes have been recorded in the degradation and decimation of the group. Nigeria is collaborating with the United Nations and other international partners to improve service delivery and enhance protection measures, both in communities and in areas where civilians seek refuge. In furtherance of that, Nigeria has appointed a national focal point on the responsibility to protect under the presidential committee on small arms and light weapons to tackle the issue of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. A human rights desk has also been established by the Nigerian military to ensure that the military operates in accordance with its rules of engagement. The Government has taken measures to enhance the security of civilians, including women and children in the camps for internally displaced persons, to reduce their vulnerability and promote their safe return to their homes and their reintegration into society. Nigeria is a signatory to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It has put in motion legal remedies for victims of Boko Haram terrorism, which have resulted in diligent prosecution of many detained Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as well as in reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation programmes designed to meet the specificities of each victim of violence. We have also intensified efforts to demine and remove improvised explosive devices, facilitate military escort of humanitarian workers and aid, grant access to detention facilities, release detainees after screening and profiling and conducting medical outreach to remote communities. Furthermore, the military's code of conduct and rules of engagement have been revised to address the new trend of violent extremism and the protection of human rights. The federal Government set up an independent judicial commission in 2017 to look into human rights abuses by military personnel in the country. Its mandate is, among other things, to scrutinize compliance by the armed forces with human rights obligations and rules of engagement, especially in local conflict and insurgency situations; to investigate alleged violations by the Nigerian security agencies of international humanitarian law and human rights law, the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria of 1999, as amended, the Geneva Convention Act, the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other relevant laws; and to look into factors that might be hindering the quick resolution of local conflict and proffer solutions on how to prevent human rights violation in times of conflict in future. In addition, Nigeria has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, thereby committing to implementing the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Following the endorsement, the Nigerian Government launched the Safe Schools Initiative, aimed at providing education and piloting safe education facilities in the conflict-affected areas of the north-east. As part of efforts to counter violent extremism, Nigeria is taking steps to deradicalize convicted terrorists through the deployment of emergency teams of psychosocial counsellors and health professionals to the north-east to assist with the profiling of victims for appropriate therapies. Furthermore, we are utilizing Islamic scholars to counter extremist narratives by training them on various aspects of dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working assiduously with the affected communities to design economic revitalization programmes targeted at those most affected by terrorism and violent extremism. Recognizing that our efforts will be more productive with international support, we call for the full implementation of the provisions of resolution 2349 (2017) and for our international partners - technical and financial alike - to remain unwavering in their support. Protecting civilians in conflict situations remains a critical challenge, not only for the United Nations but also for the entire international community. We pay tribute to our security forces, peacekeepers, humanitarian workers, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders for their hard work, often in difficult circumstances, to ensure the safety and security of civilians.
