Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for having placed on the
Council's agenda a sensitive and crucial item: peace
and security in Central Africa. Through you, I thank
the entire Council for the interest that they have always
shown in the evolution of the geopolitical and security
situation in the subregion, which has been rocked by
conflicts for decades. Moreover, one need only consult
the Council's agenda to see that, on a regular basis,
questions concerning Central Africa and the Great
Lakes - Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
name but a few - remain at the centre of the Council's
ongoing concerns.

The potential for conflict in our region is
illustrated, inter alia, by the following facts. First of
all, seven of the 11 countries in the region are prey to
disastrous and ruinous conflicts. Five of the 12 United
Nations peacekeeping, peace-building or peacemaking
missions on the continent are located there. Six of the
20 Special or Personal Representatives and Envoys of
the Secretary-General in Africa are in Central Africa.

My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
made earlier by my colleague from the Republic of the
Congo, who expressed with eloquence and clarity the
major concerns of our subregion.

My statement will address problems related to
peace in Central Africa, mechanisms for cooperation
between the United Nations system and the States of
the Central African region in maintaining peace and
security, and the real scope and current prospects of the
problems.

Concerning problems related to peace in Central
Africa, I note that, for too long, the Central African
region has been shaken by violent conflicts that cause
unprecedented human suffering and that hinder the
region's development. The international community,
through the United Nations, is doing its utmost to help
the countries of the region to relieve the suffering of
populations and to find and implement negotiated
solutions for that situation.

In a large part of Central Africa - to which some
of the States present here today belong - the United
Nations has shown its willingness to associate itself
with wide-ranging action with a view to tackling
comprehensively the root causes of problems, of
conflicts and of instability and to promoting peace and
sustainable development in the region, inter alia by
recommending the convening of an urgent international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region.

The conflicts in our region are largely due to the
accumulation over many years of such complex and
interrelated problems as bad governance, the lack of
democracy, individual or ethnic monopolies over
political power, entrenched political exclusion,
endemic corruption, nepotism, violations of basic
human rights and ever-increasing poverty. Such
extremely negative factors account for the recurring
cycle of political and ethnic violence and the almost
permanent state of instability in the region. They also
explain the fact that, despite its enormous mineral,
water and agricultural resources, our region has been
slow to begin its economic and social development and
economic integration. Various elements are also adding
a regional dimension to the effects of those conflicts,
both due to tension among States and to the
repercussions of that tension beyond the national
borders of the countries concerned.

The consequences of this situation are well
known and extremely serious and worrisome. They
include a serious social crisis; the devaluing of human
life as a result of decades of brutal oppression of
populations, massacres and other even more despicable
violations of human rights; deterioration and ageing of
infrastructure and production facilities; the ravaging
and criminalization of economies and the emergence of
significant shadow economies; a decline in
qualifications and the displacement of the workforce;
negative impacts on cooperation and regional
development; a long-term humanitarian crisis; and a
precarious and explosive overall atmosphere.

In order to establish mechanisms of cooperation
among the States of the region that might serve to end
this grave situation, the countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
decided to ask for the help of the United Nations under
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. Their
proposal, whose primary objective is to establish peace
and progress in the region, calls for a set of activities to
promote trust, security and development in the
framework of ECCAS. The following are some of the
activities already envisaged by our States.

Our members seek to create an atmosphere of
peace and constructive cooperation among themselves
that is characterized by stable and predictable relations
based on mutual trust among the States of the region.
They also seek to promote adherence to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations by
focusing on peace, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
human progress and human rights, as well as to
establish lasting peace and solidarity among the States
and peoples of Central Africa.

Given that request and the overall responsibility
of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, a meeting was held in
Lome, Togo, from 15 to 17 February 1998 on the
subject of promoting confidence, security and
development through the CEEAC framework. The
conference identified measures to increase trust and
security and to promote development within the
Economic Community of Central African States. Those
measures included establishing a legal framework for a
system of subregional collective defence that includes
a common armed force; creating a centre for strategic
military studies; holding joint military exercises and
patrols; setting up a standing crisis committee for the
prevention of conflict and the peaceful settlement of
disputes; encouraging periodic meetings between
ministers for foreign affairs and/or defence; and
strengthening diplomatic cooperation by opening new
embassies and consulates, establishing hotlines
between the region's heads of State and concluding
border treaties. The Lorne conference also recognized
that greater cooperation among the States of the
subregion in the areas of security and defence would
help bolster confidence and speed up the process of
socio-economic development in member countries, in
line with the constitutive treaty of the Economic
Community of Central African States.

We are grateful to the entire United Nations
system for helping us in this effort, in particular by
establishing the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa in
May 2002. The purpose of that Committee is to
promote peace, security and development in Central
Africa through confidence-building measures, arms
limitations and disarmament. The Committee's
programme of action calls for a set of measures to be
taken in the areas of preventive diplomacy, peace-
building, peacemaking, peacekeeping, compliance and
monitoring.

Among the most important decisions taken by
States members of CEEAC under the auspices of the
Standing Advisory Committee are the non-aggression
pact adopted in Libreville, Gabon, in September 1993
and signed in Yaounde, Cameroon, on 8 July 1996; the
establishment of the Central African Early Warning
System; the establishment of the Central African
Multinational Force; the setting up of the Central
African Defence and Security Commission; the
establishment, on 25 February 1999, at Yaounde,
Cameroon, of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, following the signing of the relevant
protocol at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, on 25 June
2000; the establishment of a subregional centre for
human rights and democracy in Central Africa; and the
establishment of a subregional parliament in Central
Africa.

My delegation would also like to express its full
satisfaction with the tremendous amount of work done
by the secretariat of the Advisory Committee, which
has been responsible for the holding of 18 ministerial
meetings and numerous conferences and workshops.
Every one of those meetings, seminars and conferences
adopted very diversified recommendations and
measures in the priority areas identified by the member
States of CEEAC under the auspices of the Committee.
Those measures and recommendations pertain to, inter
alia, the promotion and respect for human rights,
including minority rights; the establishment of viable
socio-economic conditions; promoting transparency in
democratic governance; strengthening economic
integration; increasing cross-border cooperation,
including in the area of transportation; bolstering
military and security cooperation, including by
organizing joint patrols and joint training exercises to
promote participatory democracy; and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. The entire set of measures and
recommendations would take too long to recite here.

With regard to the scope of these efforts, as the
Council might be aware, although in recent years
cooperation between the United Nations and CEEAC
through the Advisory Committee has resulted in the
adoption of numerous relevant and practical decisions
aimed at promoting and strengthening peace in the
region, only some of those recommendations and
decisions have been implemented, while the majority
have yet to be put into effect. Moreover, most, if not
all, of the bodies established in this cooperative
framework have not yet begun to function.

Moreover, while some States enjoy a security
situation that could be called stable, most of them
continue to face serious social and economic problems,
as well as domestic and/or international conflicts.
Those countries are either in an open state of war, still
in the process of negotiating and making peace, or have
just completed electoral processes after years of
troubles whose consequences they still feel. A number
of persistent problems continue to beset the entire
region, including those associated with common
monitoring of borders where there are cross-border
conflicts; disarming armed groups; trafficking in small
arms and light weapons; large-scale transnational
banditry; implementing lasting solutions to the problem
of refugees in accordance with the relevant
international conventions; and, finally and obviously,
serious problems pertaining to economic and social
development, poverty and the promotion and
enjoyment of human rights.

The least we can say is that existing mechanisms
for cooperation have generally not made it possible to
achieve real physical, economic and political
integration. That has been due mostly to the persistence
of conflict, insufficient human and institutional
capacity - especially with regard to integration - and
the very slow pace of implementing the political
commitments made at the highest levels in this regard.
With regard to prospects and based on what I have
said, it would appear that the challenges are still there.
The strategies to be adopted must be multifaceted and
take into account all dimensions, internal and external,
if we want them to be lasting solutions that would
restore peace, security and development to us.

Yet, for the first time in a long while, prospects
for a return to peace are emerging in most of the States
concerned. The Security Council is being asked
particularly to take all necessary measures to
encourage, accompany, speed up and consolidate
positive developments and make the incipient peace
process irreversible.

Along these lines, the agreements and peace
protocols signed by different warring groups in the
region should be seen as provisional arrangements
which, in order to be lasting, must necessarily be
supported by various confidence-building measures,
either between States or within States. At the regional
level, the United Nations system should help all of the
Central African States in promoting and implementing
goals deriving from the Charters of the United Nations
and the African Union, in particular by taking measures
which will help strengthen harmony, peace, security,
democracy and respect for human rights and economic
development, supported by transparency in
administration, governance, combating corruption and
regional cooperation.

The United Nations system can also help the
States of the region to implement the decisions and
recommendations adopted by the Economic
Community of Central African States, in the
framework of regional cooperation, as well as those on
the settlement of conflicts, peace-building,
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced
persons, and all other relevant measures adopted in the
framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa.

We believe that priority should be given to the
following: establishing an effective response system
for the conflicts that are tearing Central Africa apart,
namely establishing an early-warning mechanism for
Central Africa (MARAC) and a Central African
multinational peacekeeping force (FORMAC);
partnership with the United Nations system in training
for peacekeeping operations and the formation of
military units trained for the job; partnership with the
women's organizations for peace and security in
Central Africa, given the recognized role of women in
the processes aimed at restoring a lasting peace;
humanitarian assistance for refugees and displaced
persons, especially as regards their integration and
reintegration, and the rehabilitation of their homes;
material and financial support to implement the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Rehabilitation and
Reintegration (DDRR) programmes.

My delegation would like, in that connection, to
welcome and thank the World Bank for its positive
initiative in proposing a programme of demobilization
and reintegration that operates in several African
countries, including some that are not part of Central
Africa. Here, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming the presence of Mr. Mbi of the World Bank.

Generally, increased involvement of the United
Nations is required and must be encouraged in all its
human, institutional and financial dimensions. This is
why my delegation appreciates and supports the
initiatives aimed at holding an international conference
on peace, security and development in the Great Lakes,
which will help to find a solution to end the cycle of
violence and enable the development of the region.

At the national level, after five years of foreign
occupation that were preceded by several years of
chaotic administration, and bearing in mind current
developments, including the signing of peace
agreements between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, new prospects of peace
with Burundi, and the preparations for an inclusive
national dialogue, my delegation, on behalf of
President Kabila, calls the attention of the Security
Council to the need for critical support on the part of
the United Nations so that my country can consolidate
the peace process by recovering its territorial integrity,
strengthening national reconciliation and putting into
place new democratic institutions.

My delegation also calls the Council's attention
to the urgent need for post-conflict assistance so that
we can restore the country's economy, infrastructure
and ecosystem and strengthen its institutional and
human capacities. In the short term, it is urgent and
crucial to strengthen the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) after the aggressor forces start withdrawing
and support efforts to hold a successful and inclusive
dialogue culminating in national reconciliation through
free and transparent elections.

