Mr. Cardi (Italy): I welcome this opportunity as an
outgoing Security Council member to give a briefing
on the work I have done in leading a subsidiary body
of the Council and on the lessons learned. I will try to
draw some conclusions from my activity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) for the implementation of sanctions imposed
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I will
also briefly refer to my experience as facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorses the Iranian nuclear deal.

I would like to touch upon three main concepts that
inspired a reaction this year: effectiveness, unity and
transparency. Acting as Chairman and facilitator, I felt
that our main responsibility was to lead the work of
the 1718 Committee in the 2231 format by making a
constant effort to achieve consensus, not only because
of the decision-making rules that apply to all subsidiary
bodies, but also because of the importance we have
always attached to the principle of Council unity when
taking action.

A Council that can act in unity at the time ofadoption
and throughout the implementation of its resolutions is
a stronger Council. As Chairs of subsidiary bodies, we
are tasked to provide crucial inputs for the second part
of the equation: implementation. The wide articulation
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea sanctions
regime and the quick succession of new measures in
recent months required the Committee to make a special
effort to assist United Nations Member States and
international organizations. Likewise, the innovative
set of provisions established by resolution 2231 (2015)
needed to be better understood and assimilated in
their second year of life. I could always count on the
constructive cooperation of other Council members in
these efforts, and today I wish to thank them all for
their continued support.

While unity is essential for the Council to deliver
effectively, transparency is key to fostering a better
understanding and, ultimately, a better implementation
of Council resolutions. This is where I have decided to
invest more time and resources for the benefit of the
United Nations membership as a whole. By organizing
two open briefings and five regional meetings in 2017,
we have tried to shed light on the evolving Democratic
People's Republic of Korea sanctions regime while at
the same time providing Member States with a platform
to raise specific issues and establish a dialogue to
discuss implementation challenges. I have received
words of appreciation for this outreach initiative, and I
therefore wish to encourage future Chairs to follow this
path. Increased efforts can be made to build the most
solid relationship and a more proactive engagement of
Member States with the Council in working together
on implementation.

Let me also recall the June open briefing on
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/PV.7990), with a particular
focus on the procurement channel - a mechanism that
continues to be underexploited and which I believe
requires further attention. At last year's briefings by
the Chairs of the Security Council's subsidary bodies
(S/PV.7845), the former Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) (2006)
said that the greatest joy of his mandate had been to
see that Committee disappear. I can only second those
words today, reiterating Italy's unwavering support for
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the need
for the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Unfortunately, I cannot express myself in similar
terms on the 1718 Committee. While we hope for a
surge in diplomacy, Member States must redouble
their efforts for the full implementation of sanctions
in order to lead the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea back to the negotiating table. That is the crucial
purpose of the sanctions imposed on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea - to create conditions
conducive to restarting negotiations, while at the
same time hindering the development of the nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

As repeatedly stated, in no resolution have sanctions
ever been meant to have a negative impact on the North
Korean people or affect the humanitarian situation in
the country. During our next meeting on 11 December,
Committee members will hear a presentation on United
Nations humanitarian operations in the field and have a
discussion dedicated to the subject. At the same time, it
remains entirely in the hands of Pyongyang to abandon
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes and return
to international legality. We are also nearing the end of
a mandate; there is still work to be done.

In closing, allow me to wish my Dutch colleague,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, the best of luck.
I am sure he will do a superb job in his capacity as
the new Chair of a subsidiary organ. True to the spirit
of our split term, my team and I have been working
hand in hand with our Dutch colleagues to ensure a
smooth transition, and from 1 January we will be in the
front row to support their work from the other side of
the table.

Finally, allow me to express my gratitude for the
invaluable assistance received from the Subsidiary
Organs Bransh of the Secretariat and give a special
mention to the tireless work of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea Panel of Experts. Their cooperation
and advice have been fundamental to our task.

