Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for inviting me to participate
on behalf the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) in today's meeting on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/262) on the latest developments in Guinea-
Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (UNIOGBIS).
Those developments show that, with political will, it
is possible to overcome complex obstacles through
dialogue. The dialogue between local stakeholders
should continue to be encouraged and fully supported
by the entire international community.

The appointment of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau has generated new momentum
that we should all seize in order to move towards a
lasting solution to the crisis. The sober and objective
assessment he presented to the Security Council
encourages all of us to look to the future with a certain
degree of optimism about Guinea-Bissau's prospects.

We welcome the recent positive developments,
including the emerging consensus among national
actors with regard to the imperative of holding general
elections this year, the implementation of a road map,
the formation of an inclusive transitional Government
and the election of the President of the National Electoral
Commission. Those positive trends, particularly the
elections later this year, are consistent with the CPLP's
calls for the use of democratic means for the restoration
of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.

We are of the view that any optimism relating
to Guinea-Bissau should be moderated due to the
complexity of the situation, political polarization and
a deteriorating economic, social and humanitarian
situation in the country, as well as the prevalence of drug
trafficking. The arrest of Rear Admiral Jose Americo
Bubo Na Tchuto and the indictment of General Antonio
Indjai by the United States authorities may give us an
accurate picture of the involvement of certain military
leaders and others in drug trafficking in the country.

Combating that phenomenon, supporting the
political process and contributing to the implementation
of many urgent reforms in the country, particularly of
the security sector, will also require that the mandate
of the Integrated Office for Peacebuilding in Guinea-
Bissau be reinvigorated. In addition, the establishment
of a panel of experts to fight drug trafficking networks
and facilitate the adoption of sanctions against
traffickers would constitute a concrete contribution
of the international community to overcoming the
problem of drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, and thus
contributing to the promotion of stability in the country.

Another threat that deserves particular attention is
that posed by the illegal fishing taking place in Guinea-
Bissau's territorial waters. Appropriate measures
should be taken to stop the pillaging of Guinea-Bissau's
resources.

The evolution of the situation in the country requires
Guinea-Bissau's international partners, particularly
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the CPLP and the
European Union, to act in an increasingly concerted
and coordinated manner and to strengthen cooperation
to support a consensual, inclusive and nationally owned
transition process that would lead to the restoration
of the constitutional order, in line with the spirit of
resolution 2048 (2012).

The CPLP is not indifferent to the reports ofhuman
rights violations, which the Community has persistently
condemned. We therefore welcome and would confirm
our support for the recommendation that the UNIOGBIS
mandate be reinforced in that regard.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that the CPLP
member States associate themselves with the efforts
of the United Nations and the wider international
community aimed at a credible, inclusive and durable
solution for the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. In that context,
we support the leadership and determination of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
to achieve that goal.

