Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the accession of your country, the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. At the same time, I would like
to express our great appreciation for the outstanding
work undertaken by the delegation of France during its
presidency of the Council in December 2013. We would
also like to wish every success to the new members of
the Security Council.

Allow me also to wish, on behalf of the people
and Government of Mali, a very happy new year to
the members of the Council, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and United Nations peacekeepers deployed
in different theatres of operation, who give their lives
fighting for a better world - one that is free of conflict,
war, terrorism, trafficking in drugs and human beings
and so on.

I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the gratitude of the highest Malian authorities to
French President Francois Hollande for his courageous
decision to launch Operation Serval on 11 January 2013
to halt the spread of jihadist groups towards the centre
and south of Mali.

This is also the time to pay a heartfelt tribute to the
African forces, in particular those from Chad and Mali,
who, alongside the French army, freed the largest cities
of the north of my country.

On 16 October 2013, exactly three months ago, the
Security Council considered the second report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2013/582),
pursuant to the relevant provisions of resolution 2100
(2013) (see S/PV.7043)Since then, significant advances
have been made on the political and security fronts and in
the areas of restoring State authority, protecting human
rights, developing humanitarian activities, carrying out
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and international coordination.

At the political level, we note the conclusion of the
electoral process with the holding of presidential and
legislative elections, which were recognized as being
transparent and credible both by all political players in
Mali and by the international community, including the
Security Council.

In its ongoing search for peace, the Government,
under the authority of President Boubacar Keita, has
undertaken a series of efforts aimed at decentralization,
national reconciliation, the development of the regions
of the north and good governance, with the end goal
of, iter alia, promoting respect for human rights and
combattng corruption and impunity. Therefore, in the
context of strengthening decentralization and the power
of local authorities, the Government recruited more
than 10,000 teachers and 2,400 health-care workers last
year to fill in human resource gaps in those two vital
sectors.

As part of that initiative, the Government
organized a national forum on decentralization
from 21 to 23 October 2013. Those meetings were
aimed at establishing institutional mechanisms to
empower decentralized communities. They allowed
all stakeholders to take stock of the achievements and
shortcomings of our experience and to propose new
ways to achieve significant progress in that area.

Along the same lines, the President instructed the
Government to organize a national conference on the
north to discuss, debate and exchange views on all
issues of concern for the Malian nation. That conference
took place from 1 to 3 November 2013, and was aimed
at establishing a foundation to change attitudes and
encourage behaviour essential to the emergence of a
new future for the country that is reconciled with its
history and its positive traditional values, forward-
looking and determined to create a new society based
on creative work.

With the overwhelming participation of all sectors
of our nation, the national conference on the north
helped to build trust between the Malian people and
engage in dialogue armed groups and all the other actors
in the north who have their own views with regard to
their immediate environment. The recommendations
made to address the concerns of affected populations
will be taken into account in the implementation of
development projects in the northern regions of Mali.

In that connection, the Government has drawn up
and adopted with MINUSMA elements of a road map
out of the crisis, based on the following guidelines:
first, convening by the end of January 2014 meetings of
the active forces of the northern regions on the issues
related to ending the crisis; secondly, holding a meeting
of the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee of the
agreement of 18 June 2013; and, thirdly, initiating
inclusive peace talks in the very near future. Those
talks will be preceded by three preparatory meetings,
namely, a workshop on cantonment, a symposium
on lessons learned from preceding agreements and a
seminar with technical and financial partners on the
accelerated development plan for the northern regions.

The Government of Mali is strongly committed
to restoring an environment conducive to the peaceful
cohabitation of the people of the northern and the
southern regions. In that context, a ministerial
department dedicated entirely to national reconciliation
and the development of the northern regions was set
up to address, among other things, the economic and
human dimensions of the issues inherent to the three
northern regions.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/1), the security conditions in the
north deteriorated considerably from 30 September
to 21 December 2013. A series of asymmetric attacks
perpetrated by criminal gangs against civilian
populations, the Malian armed forces and MINUSMA
troops suffice to show that terrorist groups are
reorganizing themselves. Faced with the threat that
the progressive reduction of the Operation Serval
force could exacerbate that situation, it is crucial that
MINUSMA be provided with adequate resources
to enable it to fulfil its mandate in line with the
strategic objectives of the Government of Mali, whose
centrepiece is the immediate re-establishment of the
authority of the Malian State throughout its territory,
including in the Kidal region.

With regard to the incidents in Kidal on 28 November
2013, when the Prime Minister and his delegation were
prevented from going there by individuals from the
Mouvement national pour la liberation de l'Azawad, the
report states that the Malian armed forces opened fire
on demonstrators, injuring four of them. In response,
I would like to point out, as was done by the Minister
for Reconciliation and Development of the North of the
Republic of Mali, bearing the message of the President
to the Secretary-General on 5 December 2013, that
this information does not reflect reality because the
MINUSMA elements who were the closest to the scene
of the incident were actually 400 metres away, which
does not allow them to provide an objective testimony.
Therefore, they are not able to say who opened fire on
the crowd, without knowing the results of the ballistic
analysis ordered by the Government.

The members of the Security Council, having
reaffirmed in resolution 2100 (2013), adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, their
commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Mali, should not accept today that Kidal remain a
regional safe haven for terrorism, drug traffickers
and kidnappers. Armed groups must lay down their
weapons, not associate with terrorists and participate
in the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and inclusive dialogue.

In terms of international coordination, my
delegation agreed with what is stated in the report of the
Secretary-General on the need to adopt a comprehensive

and coordinated approach to meet the challenges of the
Sahel. Such an approach was reaffirmed in Bamako on
5 November 2013, at the first ministerial meeting on the
establishment of a coordinating platform for the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. On that
occasion, the ministers of the Sahel agreed to, among
other things, adopt common priorities for regional
initiatives in the Sahel and monitor progress, including
through coordinated support from the international
community. My country, which holds the rotating
presidency of the coordinating platform for the next two
years, is already hard at work to diligently implement
the recommendations of the Bamako meeting.

On the occasion of the first anniversary of the
launch of Operation Serval, I should lie to pay tribute
to the memory ofthe brave soldiers who sacrificed their
lives in the fight against terrorism and "narco-jihadism".

On behalf of President Keita, I should like to thank
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
and our bilateral partners. Our thanks also go to the
new countries contributing troops and equipment to
MINUSMA. My delegation welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General before us and Mali is honoured
to welcome in the coming days the Security Council
mission.

I cannot conclude without asking the Security
Council, on behalf of my Government, to call on
Member States, perhaps through a presidential
statement, to support the strengthening of MINUSMA
with appropriate means and to encourage them to
uphold their commitments made in Brussels in May
2013.

