Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): With your
permission, Sir, I would like to share with members of
the Council some reflections in my personal capacity
on the work of the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council to which you just referred: the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 918
(1994) concerning Rwanda, and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.

I would like at the outset to refer to the sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In general terms, the measures established and
progressively adapted by the Security Council in
resolutions 1493 (2003), 1596 (2005), 1698 (2006),
1771 (2007) and 1807 (2008) aim at preventing all
rebel groups operating in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo from being supplied with arms
and/or participating in military activities. Adopted on
31 March 2008, resolution 1807 (2008) marked an
important watershed in the duration of the sanctions
regime. While supplier States continue to be required
by the resolution to notify the sanctions Committee of
arms shipments to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to include in such
notifications all relevant information - including,
where appropriate, the end user, the proposed date of
delivery and the itinerary of shipments - the Security
Council effectively lifted the arms embargo on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Resolution 1807 (2008) was also adopted by the
Council with a view to simplifying the sanctions
regime and improving the implementation of the arms
embargo, for instance by terminating the requirement
on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to designate receiving sites for the authorized
shipments of arms and related materiel. One could
make the case, in fact, that the introduction of more
clarity and the simplification of the sanctions regime
played a positive role in the renewed cooperation
which the Democratic Republic of the Congo
authorities extended to the Group of Experts, as noted
in the Group's final report submitted this month.

During the course of 2008, the Committee
proactively conducted its work and convened a number
of sessions of informal consultations, the majority of
which were held to discuss the reports of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including possible actions to be taken by the
Committee arising from the Group's recommendations.

In connection with the list of individuals and
entities subject to the measures imposed under
paragraphs 13 and 15 of resolution 1596 (2005), the
Committee acted on new information conveyed by the
Group of Experts and Member States by updating the
list and with a view to providing Member States with
the most accurate information possible to facilitate
implementation of the measures imposed on listed
individuals and entities. Implementation is hindered,
however, when listed individuals have no tangible
assets or do not travel across international borders, thus
limiting the impact of the assets freeze and travel ban.

The Committee also considered four requests in
2008 for de-listing. In terms of proposals for listing,
the Committee currently has under consideration a
request submitted by the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda in May 2008, whose delegation transmitted a
list of individuals to the Committee, requesting their
inclusion in the list.

Further to its efforts to engage with Member
States, the Committee continued its practice of
acknowledging notifications received by supplier
States during the course of 2008. However, challenges
remain, as only seven notifications have been received
by the Committee since the adoption of resolution 1807
(2008) on 31 March 2008.

The Committee also interacted with a number of
Member States in connection with a request for
exemption to the assets freeze, and transmitted a
number of letters to Member States drawing their
attention to the recommendations contained in various
reports of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Committee also addressed
letters to a number of international organizations,
drawing their attention to possible areas of assistance
to reinforce the capacity of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to fully implement
the arms embargo.

The Group of Experts has played an instrumental
role in monitoring the sanctions regime and in
facilitating action by the Committee towards the
improvement of the implementation of the sanctions
regime. As part of these efforts, the Group collaborated
extensively with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
a View to analysing information gathered by the
Mission on the ground that is relevant to the mandate
of the Group and the Committee.

As highlighted in the latest report of the Group of
Experts, many challenges remain towards achieving
full implementation of the sanctions regime. It is
unfortunate that, several years after the adoption of the
Committee's travel ban and assets freeze against
individuals and entities violating the arms embargo, the
level of awareness and implementation of such
measures remain very limited. To that end, the full
collaboration and engagement of States in the region
are essential.

Looking back over the course of 2008, I have
relied on the support and the flexibility of members in
moving the Committee's work forward. As Chairman, I
have endeavoured to engage actively with my
colleagues to bridge differences and build the
consensus that is very crucial to the work of the
Committee.

Looking forward, it is my personal view that the
final report of the Group of Experts submitted this
month has broken new ground in terms of the
Committee's and the Council's understanding of the
support networks for the two major rebel groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the
Congres national pour la defense du peuple,
particularly these groups' financial networks. It is my
hope that, in 2009, the Committee and the Council will
actively use the sanctions regime as a positive
instrument that can be integrated into a wider political
strategy to end a conflict which has so deeply harmed
the civilian population in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and to reinforce the Government's efforts to
exercise authority in the eastern part of the country.
This may also include the Committee's engaging
further with States in the region and other States with a
view to ensuring increased compliance with the
sanctions regime.

Let me now turn to the sanctions Committee on
Rwanda. As Council members are aware, the Security
Council decided in resolution 1823 (2008), adopted in
July, to dissolve the Committee. The Security Council
also decided in that resolution to terminate the
remaining measures relating to Rwanda.

It will be recalled that the Committee was
established in 1994 to oversee the arms embargo and to
undertake other tasks mandated by the Security
Council. In subsequent years, the complete arms
embargo and other measures were gradually terminated
by the Security Council. In 2007, for example, the
Security Council, in its resolution 1749 (2007),
terminated the notification requirement for the delivery
of arms to the Government of Rwanda.

Prior to its termination, the Committee met on
11 April 2008, at which time members noted that it had
been largely inactive over the past 10 years and that the
signing of the Nairobi joint communique of November
2007 could be seen as a sign of the continued
improvement of the political climate in the subregion.
It was also noted that the termination of an inactive
subsidiary body could be seen as a good business
practice that could help rationalize the functions of the
Security Council. Some members expressed the view
that the termination of the sanctions regime should be
considered a technical rather than a political matter.
Committee members agreed that I should recommend
the dissolution of the Committee, which I subsequently
did on 22 May. The Security Council agreed with that
View.

Let me now make a few observations regarding
the work on the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. The Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations met on 27 March 2007. The meeting took
up two subjects: surge in peacekeeping operations and
security sector reform. The members of the Working
Group expressed their views on the various related
issues and provided suggestions on enhancing the
effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
system.

On 26 March 2008, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations again convened to exchange
views on issues related to United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). The members of the
Security Council, a number of the troop-contributing
countries to UNMEE, and representatives of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support participated in the
meeting.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Costa Rica and Viet
Nam, who serve as Vice-Chairs of the Sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the Permanent Representative of Italy, who
serves as Vice-Chair of the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda, for their respective support and assistance.

I also thank all delegations for their constructive
cooperation with the Chair.

I also wish to convey my appreciation to the
Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, led by
Mr. Aleksandar Martinovic. In particular, I would like
to thank Mr. David Biggs, Ms. Francesca Jannotti-
Pecci and Mr. James Sutterlin for their untiring support
to the work of the Chair.

