Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for organizing
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, and Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing.

The Kingdom of Morocco associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the Kingdom
of Jordan on behalf of the Group of Arab States.

The international situation has been characterized
recently by events that have unfolded at incredible
speed and have had a very deleterious impact on the
Palestinian question, which is the main issue for our
region. The negotiations for a settlement have been
experiencing a real crisis. Under the auspices of the
United States of America, the negotiations have been at
an impasse since 2014, and the prospects are particularly
bleak. The situation is blocked, and the Israeli policy
of settlement expansion has continued on Palestinian
lands occupied since 1967.

In that context, the two-State solution is in serious
danger, and the negotiations could collapse. That is why
the major Powers in the Arab world and the friends of
peace, including the Kingdom of Morocco, have tried,
through the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, to present an Arab initiative to
put an end to the occupation. We have also made every
effort to promote peace and to uphold international
law. Indeed, settlement expansion prevents concrete
progress in achieving a two-State solution, and that has
been the case even after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) last December, which Morocco welcomed.

It is no secret that Jerusalem is extremely important,
not only for its inhabitants, but for all the believers of
the three monotheistic religions. That is why the city
should remain a symbol of tolerance. At one time,
1.5 billion Muslims used to turn to Jerusalem to pray
before turning to Mecca. Moreover, it is the third
holiest site for Muslims.

It is regrettable that breaches of international
law, in particular in connection with Jerusalem, have
generated such hatred and contributed to the terrorism
that we know today. Under the auspices of His Majesty
Mohammed VI, the Chair ofthe Organization oflslamic
Cooperation's Jerusalem Committee, the Kingdom of
Morocco has been working to ensure that the rights of
the Palestinian people are upheld, chief among which
is the right to establish a State with Jerusalem as its
capital, as that is the only way to achieve peace in the
Middle East and strengthen international peace and
security. On many occasions, in both bilateral and
multilateral frameworks, His Majesty Mohammed VI
has called for an end to the colonization and Judaization
of Jerusalem. He has also called for implementing the
various initiatives that would enable the establishment
of a Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967 borders,
with the two States living side-by-side in peace.

In that regard, the international community must
fully assume its responsibilities and end the current
freeze in the negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis, which has resulted, to date, only in a
regressive situation marked by previously unseen
levels of violence. We must restart the initiative, and
there must be a genuine willingness on the part of the
Palestinians and Israelis to return to the negotiating
table and work for the two-State solution, which should
be realized within the framework of the 4 June 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
The various parties must come together armed with
the best intentions possible so that there is a return to
a feeling of trust and that the Palestine State can be
viable within the international legal framework.

Lastly, the Moroccan position is well known. We
support the Arab Peace Initiative and, above all, the
principles of international law for the establishment of
a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital
within the 4 June 1967 borders that would live alongside
Israel in peace. As we have always done, we will spare
no effort to push ahead on the path to peace so as to
reach a settlement that will lead to peace and security
in the entire region.

