Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We note with satisfaction the great progress
achieved with regard to a peaceful settlement for
Somalia, particularly the election of the country's
President and the appointment of its Prime Minister by
the Transitional Federal Parliament. A unique
opportunity is being created to bring about the rebirth
of a country destroyed by a long internecine war. We
should like to pay tribute to the United Nations, the
African Union and the member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for their important role in advancing the peace process
in Somalia. In the near future, we expect to see the
formation of a Somali transitional Government, which
will make it possible to swiftly re-establish a lasting
peace in the country, provide stability, strengthen
national reconciliation, develop civil society and
restore Somalia's status as a full member of the
international community.

However, a breakthrough in the political sphere
must be underpinned by tangible progress in the area of
security. In that context, we welcome the African
Union's intention to send a military observer mission
to Somalia. But we cannot fail to be concerned at the
periodic violations of the ceasefire agreement. For that
reason, strict observance of the embargo on supplying
weapons to Somalia remains urgent.

At this critical stage of the peace process in
Somalia, the international community must support the
efforts of the Somalis themselves to complete the
national reconciliation process. We are confident that
the scheduled donor conference will help to define the
best arrangements for international institutions and the
new Somali leadership to work together in the post-
conflict reconstruction of the country.
We believe that increasing United Nations
involvement in addressing serious post-conflict
problems in Somalia should be accompanied by a
strengthening of the positive results achieved in the
peace process. That will be possible, first and
foremost, if the Somalis honour the commitments that
they have made to the international community. We
view the Security Council presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of today's meeting as a clear signal
to the Somalis of our readiness to support their efforts
to peacefully rebuild their country.

Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and as a participant in the IGAD Partners
Forum, will continue to make a practical contribution
to the achievement of a comprehensive political
settlement and to the re-establishment of the State
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia.

