Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
1 would like to acknowledge the presence in the
Security Council of Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz.

I take this opportunity to thank Chile and to
acknowledge the way in which it has guided the work of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
I extend my appreciation to Ambassador Cristian Barros
Melet and his team.

After two decades of activity, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
are at the stage of completion and, in accordance with
the completion strategy adopted by the Council, must
complete their judicial work according to schedule and
transfer cases and files to the Residual Mechanism.
Argentina wants to positively recognize the progress
reported with respect to the Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda as well as the way in which the
Mechanism continues its work at its two locations.

As for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, it should be noted that the prosecutions
of almost all of the 161 individuals charged have been
completed and that there are no more cases of fugitives.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of
the cases that are pending. Ofthese, some will continue
to the end of this year. It is therefore worth taking into
account the circumstances that may affect the length
of proceedings, such as the recent discovery of mass
graves and the challenge or difficulty in retaining
qualified personnel.

We believe that the judicial function itself is facing
certain difficulties, given the complexity of the cases,
the current transitional situation, and such issues
as the arrest of last fugitives from the ICTY in 2011.
Argentina will support the Security Council's renewal
of the mandates of judges and prosecutors of both
Tribunals. My country also believes that the Security
Council should continue to consider, in the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, measures to
facilitate the retention of staff from both Tribunals. We
recognize the active role the Chilean presidency of the
Working Group is playing in this regard.

We also appreciate the information from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda with
respect to the implementation of its completion strategy.
The Tribunal has completed substantive activities for
all of the 93 accused, having completed or nearing
completion the cases in the trial phase and advance
appeals, leaving only the appeal of the Nyiramasuhuko
et al. ("Butare") case for completion in August 2015.

We recognize that it is a priority to capture the
fugitives of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. The fact that nine defendants among
those indicted by the Tribunal remain fugitives is
not encouraging. Of those, three are still under the
jurisdiction that has been transferred to the Mechanism,
which is ready to submit them to trial as soon as they
are arrested. However, as Argentina already indicated,
in order to arrest fugitives, both those under the
jurisdiction of the Mechanism and those who have been
transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, the cooperation of
all States is necessary in accordance with the obligation
set out in resolution 955 (1994).

I wish to highlight the activities of both Tribunals
on cooperation for training in investigative and trial
skills, including on sexual and sexist gender-based
violence.

With regard to the Residual Mechanism, 1 would
like to note in particular that the branches in Arusha
and The Hague are fully operational and will be fully
ready to operate when both Tribunals close. Therefore,
I take this opportunity to once again acknowledge the
Government of the Republic of Tanzania for supporting
the Mechanism by concluding the headquarters
agreement, which entered into force this year,
and providing the facilities for the construction of
headquarters, as well as the Netherlands support to the
branch in The Hague.

The international community should continue to
support the work of the Tribunals, not only in their
judicial activity but also through the lives of those
directly affected by the justice they render. An important
element is reparations to victims. A few months ago,
we were encouraged by the signing of a memorandum
of understanding with the International Organization
for Migration to discuss how to address the issue of
reparations to victims of the genocide in Rwanda in
a way that would promote positive involvement on
the part of victims' and survivors" associations, civil
society and the Rwandan Government. We are now
pleased that International Organization for Migration
has completed a study that identifies options for
providing reparations to victims and survivors of the
genocide in Rwanda, including for financing them. We
eagerly await the final report, which will be issued in
the coming months.

In addition, there is the challenge of those whose
charges have been dismissed or who have completed the
sentences they received from the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. The Tribunal has actively sought
to find a State that would host such persons and provide
them with the documentation necessary for full civilian
lives and the enjoyment of their rights, and Argentina
welcomes those efforts. Argentina welcomes, as an
important step, the readiness of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals to continue to consider
this issue in order to support these efforts. It would
also be fitting for the Security Council to encourage
all Member States to do the same, and for Members
to commit ourselves to supporting the Tribunal in line
with our ability to do so.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the genocide in Rwanda and of the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We believe it is appropriate that the international
community recognize the progress in the fight against
impunity that that Tribunal and the ICTY represent,
with important contributions in terms of doctrine to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and that we also recognize the role and importance
of international criminal justice.

The legacy of both ad hoc Tribunals in terms of
affirming the recognition on the part ofthe international
community that there can be no lasting peace without
justice is undeniable. That legacy has taken concrete
form in the establishment of a permanent international
criminal tribunal - the International Criminal
Court - which is today at the heart of the entire
criminal justice system of the international community.
This system requires commitment by all States, not
just States parties, as well as on the part of the United
Nations, in the same way that we are committed to the ad
hoc tribunals. Argentina is pleased that both Tribunals,
in particular the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, have initiated joint workshops with other
criminal tribunals, such as the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
International Criminal Court.

Finally, as this is the last time that Argentina
speaks on the subject of the work of both Tribunals as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like to
again pay tribute to the judges, prosecutors and officials
of the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the Former Yugoslavia for their contribution to the fight
against impunity, as represented in a phrase contained
in the report of the ICTR and which has haunted my
country for three decades: "never again" (S/2014/829, para. 56).

