Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): Thank you very much,
Madam President, for this opportunity to participate
in the debate of the Security Council on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) .
Let me assure you of my delegation's support for your
leadership in our deliberations.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/163), and the
Special Representative for his briefing. I believe this
is an appropriate moment to express appreciation for
the work of His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin in his
relentless diplomatic efforts and wisdom in many areas
contributing to better understanding and stability in
Afghanistan.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
my national capacity, allow me to briefly make a few
comments on some important elements of the current
situation in Afghanistan with regard to the following
challenges.

Overall security remains the most important
precondition for continued development in
Afghanistan - political, economic and cultural. In
that regard, the Slovak Republic strongly condemns not
only the attack on a restaurant in Kabul on 17 January,
which took lives, including those of four members of
the United Nations family in Afghanistan, but also all
use of force and violence in any form against anyone.
Once again, I would like to express my condolences to
the families of all victims, as well as my appreciation
for the work of UNAMA's staff.

I wish to reiterate the long-term commitment of the
Slovak Republic to providing assistance and training
to the Afghan National Security Forces. I would also
like to encourage the Afghan forces to continue in their
transition at what the Secretary-General described
in his report as a greater operational tempo, despite
targeted attacks by anti-Government elements on
Afghan forces.

The prevention and management of security
challenges will be crucial, especially ahead of and
during Afghanistan's national elections next month. In
that regard, we fully support the calls of the Special
Representative, Mr. Kubis, on the Afghan authorities
and the independent electoral bodies to ensure that the
polls are credible, that any concerns are voiced prior
to the elections and that the level of transparency is as
high as possible.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Afghan authorities with regard to the
preparations for the upcoming elections, which remain
on track for the scheduled polling date of 5 April. We
hope that all candidates and election workers will
be able to perform their duties in the run-up to the
elections without being threatened by those who seek
to disrupt the firm will of the Afghan people to live
peacefully in their country and to choose their own
destiny and political leaders. The right of all Afghans
to enjoy freedom and basic human rights, privileges
and responsibilities should be protected and fought for.

We are pleased at the increasing participation of
women in the transition process. The Commission on
the Status of Women, which concluded its fifty-eighth
session a few days ago, was enriched by a number of
side events. Of those, I would like to note the event
organized by my colleague, Ambassador Jarmo
Viinanen of Finland, on 12 March.

On that occasion, we had the opportunity to
welcome a group of politically active Afghan women,
led by Afghan Deputy Minister for Women's Affairs
Her Excellency Mrs. Fawzia Habibi. For those who cast
doubt on the progress achieved in Afghanistan, such a
workshop on security and the role of women, with the
active participation of prominent Afghan representatives
in New York, would have been unthinkable 13 years
ago. Let me also express my appreciation of the fact that
the Ministry of the Interior of Afghanistan continues
to take steps to better protect and to empower female
police and Ministry staff in fulfilment of its goal of
recruiting and training a total of 10,000 female officers.

The progress mentioned has, to a great extent, been
achieved with the assistance, performance and outreach
of UNAMA. We note and highly appreciate not only
internal activities assisting the Afghan authorities in the
transition but also the regional outreach of UNAMA. It
proves that the Mission pays the necessity attention to
promoting fruitful collaboration among all countries of
the region in facing threats that surpass their individual
capacities. That approach is important, especially in
fighting terrorism, cross-border trafficking and illegal
trade. The Slovak Republic therefore supports the
renewal of UNAMA's mandate with today's unanimous
vote.

Finally, I would like to congratulate the people of
Afghanistan on the upcoming Nowruz holiday.

