The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel,» Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab

- Republic, Timisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate-in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the' invitation of the President, Mr. Peleg (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Buallail(Bahrain), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Karsgaard
(Canada), Mr. Garcia (Colombia), Mr. Nur'iez
Mosquera (Cuba), Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia), Mr.
Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak
(Lebanon), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr, Berteling (Netherlands), Mr. Biom
Lian (Norway), Mr. Al-KhuSsaiby (Oman), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Al Khalifa (Qatar), Mr. Al~Ahmed
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr, Wehhe (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Celem
(Turkey), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 3 March 1997 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol 8/1997/194 and reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, to
participate in the current debate of the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the current debate in accordance
with the rules of procedure and previous practice in this
regard.

There being on objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 3 March 1997 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads
as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request that
I be invited to participate in the debate on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguene Ka.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 5 March 1997 from the Permanent

Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request'that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer
Security Council 3745d1 meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's discussion of the
item entitled 'The situation in the occupied Arab

In

territories .

This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol 8/1997/ 196. If] hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Engin A. Ansay.

There being'no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations, at the request of Egypt under rule 2 of the
Council's provisionalrules of procedure.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1997/ 149 and
S/1997/157, letters dated 2] and 25 February 1997,
respectively, from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/l997/165, letter dated 27 February 1997
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1997/l72, letter dated 28 February 1997 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council; 8/1997/ 175, letter dated
3 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1997/l.77, letter dated 3 March 1997
from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; S/l997/181, letter dated 28 February
1997 from the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of the declaration by the Presidency on
behalf of the European Union on the decision of the Israeli
Government to approve" construction plans for Bar
Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim; and 8/1997/182, identical letters
dated 3 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General and to the President of the Security Council. .


The President: The first speaker is the representative
of Palestine. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.


