Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway, as co-Chair of
the International Contact Group on Somalia, welcomes
this opportunity to address the Council on the situation
in Somalia, and we thank the Special Representative
for his briefing. Let me take this opportunity to
emphasize our full support for his efforts to bring about
positive change in Somalia.

We are all deeply worried by the present state of
affairs in Somalia. The security situation is at best
volatile in Mogadishu and in several other areas of the
country. The humanitarian crisis has gone from bad to
worse, as hundreds of thousands flee the war-affected
areas.

We are now at a critical junction for Somalia and
for its Transitional Federal Institutions. We welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur
Hassan Hussein, and trust that he will focus on the
humanitarian crisis in the country. He has indicated
that this, along with improving security and deepening
the reconciliation process, will be the main priorities of
his Government. We support that approach. The
problems of Somalia are closely interlinked and can
only be solved through a comprehensive effort. The
international community must be ready to support this
effort.

Security and lasting stability can only be
achieved through a genuine and broad-based political
reconciliation - a reconciliation which includes all
Somali political forces that renounce violence and are
ready to take part in a political process. In order for the
Transitional Federal Institutions to secure support and
gain credibility from the Somali people, it is essential
that the Government be able to deliver a minimum of
basic services. So far, this has hardly been possible,
partly due to the insecurity and violence.

We should be more determined in dealing with
the humanitarian crisis and the suffering in Somalia. It
may be time to consider a compact between the Somali
Transitional Federal Institutions, civil society and other
institutions and the United Nations and international
agencies, to secure service delivery to the Somali
people. Such a compact could set out principles,
commitments and good practices guidelines for the
delivery of necessary services. Transitional Federal
Institutions should also reach out to all groups who are
ready to renounce violence and to join in such a
compact. The Transitional Federal Institutions should
also make a firm commitment to stick to their mandate
in the Transitional Federal Charter and the scheduled
elections in 2009.

It is imperative to improve the security situation,
which means there is an urgent need to strengthen or
substitute the present African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) force with a more substantial
peacebuilding mission. This would also relieve
Ethiopia of its present security burden and make it
possible for them to withdraw their troops. Due to the
prevailing security situation, the international presence
in Mogadishu and surrounding areas is at best
negligible, and this, as well as the absence of a
functioning Government, is hampering the work of
humanitarian agencies.

That is why we believe it is important for the
United Nations and international agencies to increase
their presence inside Mogadishu. Such a presence is
important for service delivery and as a signal to the
Somali people that the international community cares.

To sum up, the international community must be
ready to act to alleviate the suffering of the Somali
people and to contribute to peace. We strongly support
the work of the Special Representative, and urge
support for the new Prime Minister and his priorities.
This is a critical point in time for Somalia, and it is
time for all of us to support those who work for peace
and stability in the country and in the region.

