The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mahamat for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

Today's meeting, organized by the Russian
Federation, together with the African members of
the Security Council, reaffirms the special place that
African issues occupy on the Council's agenda. Ensuring
peace and security on the continent is of the utmost
importance for the entire international community.

The African continent today is facing many
challenges. The region with the highest population
growth in the world remains unstable. Some of its
countries are facing acute political and socioeconomic
crises. Conflicts between nations and ethnic groups
remain unresolved, which is often exploited by
terrorists. There are hotspots of activity of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida and
their affiliated local groups, such as Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and other groups, are now found throughout the
continent, from Mali to Somalia.

We must not forget the tragic history of the
continent. As a result oftheir uncompromising struggle
for freedom and independence in the 1960s, African
peoples have been able to determine their own future. A

key role in the decolonization process was played by the
adoption by the General Assembly of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, at the imitative of my country.

Nevertheless, since then African States have
continued to face serious challenges to their
sovereignty. The armed intervention in Libya launched
by NATO eight years ago plunged the country into
chaos, undermined the security system in North Africa
and fuelled flows of arms and criminals throughout
the continent. Libya became a refuge and platform
for various kind of terrorism, in addition to fighters
coming from Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. The States
of the Sahara and the Sahel are also suffering. The
security of West and Central African countries, as well
as that of Southern European, is threatened. Africans
themselves, at the recently held meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council dedicated to foreign
military presence on the continent, condemned foreign
military interference in the continent's affairs and
appealed for foreign partners of Africa to respect
regional initiatives.

Recent successes in resolving crises, in spite of
everything I mentioned earlier, show how effective
efforts can be when led and undertaken by Africans
themselves. Comprehensive peace agreements have
now been signed and implemented in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. Thanks to very
brave and responsible steps taken by leaders in Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Somalia and Djibouti, the situation in the
Horn of Africa has improved. In such large countries
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria,
we have seen peaceful and democratic elections take
place. I believe that the most important fact here is
that at the core of each of these achievements was
the political will of the leaders of the African States
themselves, with the assistance of the African Union
and subregional organizations.

Against the backdrop of such progress, the
ambitious goal set six years ago to end armed conflict
in Africa is no longer beyond reach. The attainment
of that goal is being helped by the creation of the
African Standby Force within the continent's peace
and security architecture. The African Union Centre
for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development is
now operational and African Union conflict-prevention
efforts are also being enhanced by leveraging the
potential of regional bodies and the good offices of
African leaders.

At the same time, Africans still require stalwart
support from the international community, including
the Security Council. We believe that there is significant
potential to increase the interaction between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. A good opportunity for pursuing
such cooperation is provided by the regular consultative
meetings between the two Councils, the next of which
will be held next month in Addis Ababa. There is also
cooperation between the secretariats of the United
Nations and African Union, from joint missions to
conflict areas to the participation of African Union
experts in preparing reports and country reviews,
which serve as important guidelines for the Security
Council's decisions.

In our View, it is entirely justified that the Security
Council pay close attention to the issue of sustainable
financing for African Union peacekeeping operations.
We note the progress made in the replenishment of the
African Peace Fund, indicating the determination of
African leaders to assume their share of the expenses
for African peacekeeping operations. Of course, the
predictability, reliability and flexibility of funding
such operations should be enhanced, and we in the
Russian Federation are ready to work substantively on
the corresponding draft resolution to be prepared for
our consideration by the troika of African members
of the Security Council. Russia also supports other
initiatives of the African troika in the Council relating
to peace and security on the continent. We believe that
the African troika is a crucial link between our Council
and the African Union.

Russia provides assistance to uphold peace and
security in Africa in accordance with international
law, including the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, and only with the agreement of
host countries. Such assistance is aimed at building
countries' own capacities to deal with crises.

We attach great importance to providing training
programmes for peacekeepers from African and other
developing countries. This month, another course
began in the training academy of the Russian Ministry
of Internal Affairs, tailored specifically to African
policewomen. We continue to provide bilateral military
and law-enforcement training programmes and to
extend military and technical assistance. Over the past
18 months in the Central African Republic, Russian
instructors have trained more than 3,000 military
personnel for the armed forces of that sovereign State.
With the knowledge of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), we have
already supplied two batches of Russian weapons to
meet the needs of the Central African Republic, with
the final delivery arriving this month.

Effective armed forces are only one aspect of
ensuring national security. Eliminating the root
causes of conflict requires us to address the acute
socioeconomic issues of the countries of the region
and the strengthening of their State institutions. It is
particularly important to train African specialists with
a broad spectrum of expertise. Russia is expanding the
practice of providing fellowships and free training for
Africans in medicine, education, advancedtechnologies,
transport and other civilian areas of expertise.

The first Russia-Africa Summit, to be held in
Sochi in one month's time at the initiative of President
Putin, will herald a new chapter in our relationship
with the continent. We expect that the Heads of State
or Government of almost all countries of the continent
will attend, as well as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Mahamat, and the leaders
of subregional organizations. The agenda will cover
a broad range of issues, from maintaining peace and
security to socio-economic development. We expect
the Sochi Summit will contribute to the overall
normalization of the situation in the African region.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire.

