Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): I am of course very grateful, Mr. President, for
the kind words that you addressed to my country. Allow
me to also tell you how honoured we feel to be meeting
today under your presidency, as you are the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gabon, an African State whose very
practical, imaginative and energetic diplomacy forms an
integral part of the constant quest for peace and security
in Africa and throughout the world, thus providing a
vibrant example of the manner in which we should all
endeavour to serve the principles of the Charter.

After the many troubles faced by the Central African
Republic, the Bangui Agreements of January 1997
established a process for peace and national reconciliation.
The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) has supported this
process. France pays tribute to the action taken by the
President of the Gabonese Republic, Mr. Bongo,
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee. He
has constantly striven to ensure respect for the Bangui
Agreements. We also pay tribute to efforts made by the
States that have contributed troops to MISAB: Burkina
Faso, Gabon, Mali, Chad, Senegal and Togo.

Finally, we also commend the Secretariat, which has
tirelessly supported MISAB's activities. That Mission is
a quite remarkable example of preventive diplomacy,
which is the very objective of much United Nations effort
to prevent conflict and the deterioration of situations that
threaten regional or international security and stability. It
is thanks to MISAB that significant progress has been
achieved.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious nonetheless and continues to threaten
stability and security in the region. Persistent efforts must
therefore be pursued in support of national reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. Indeed, it is necessary to
prepare for the forthcoming legislative elections in
September, to restructure the security forces and to
implement vigorous measures in the economic and social
spheres. These activities can be undertaken only if

 

security is preserved and safeguarded by a peacekeeping
operation.

The Secretary-General has made recommendations for
a possible follow-up to MISAB. These recommendations
provide, inter alia, for the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation.

France supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations. That is why it will vote today in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council. This draft
resolution will, in effect, allow the Secretariat to prepare
operational proposals on which the Security Council will
decide on 16 March. We are confident that, in response to
the expectations of Africa, you, Sir, and the Secretary-
General, the Council's decision at that time will be
unanimous and positive. We feel certain that it will also be
so today.

