Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this debate and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their important briefings.

This meeting is particularly timely in view of the
draft resolution on the performance of peacekeeping
operations that we have been considering and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which Peru supports and
hopes to adopt in the General Assembly.

As troop contributors, we wish to emphasize the
importance of coordination and cooperation among
contributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretariat. We welcome the reforms being promoted in
that regard by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative. It is important
to implement and evaluate the mandates of the Council
more consistently, efficiently and effectively in support
of specific political processes and the protection of
civilians, following an inclusive and operationally
complementary approach. To that end, we recall that
resolution 2378 (2017) stipulates that data related to
the performance of peacekeeping operations should be
centralized by the Secretariat in order to improve the
corresponding analysis and evaluation, on the basis of
clear and well-identified parameters.

In that regard, we believe that support for a given
political process should follow a comprehensive
strategy coordinated with relevant actors, including
regional actors. The performance of a mission should
be evaluated in terms of the actual capacities that
exist to fulfil its mandates. That includes, among
other measures and as appropriate, the development
of operational intelligence capabilities and of exit
strategies aimed at sustained peace, coordinated with
the Government and other national actors concerned,
such as the Peacebuilding Commission and the United
Nations country team.

Peacekeeping operations must also be properly
trained to fulfil the primary responsibility to protect
civilians, and in particular the most vulnerable. That
requires a minimum training for Blue Helmets in
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including a gender approach to preventing and dealing
with sexual violence. Peru adheres to the policy of zero
tolerance for cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
We have signed the voluntary compact proposed by
the Secretary-General, and we wish to express our
recognition and support for his leadership and action
in that area.

Additionally, we stress that the necessary interaction
with the civilian population and the promotion of
preventive and inclusive approaches also require the
fuller participation of women in peace operations and
in the respective political processes. We have also
been increasing the participation of women in the six
missions in which we participate. Women represent
nearly 15 per cent of our deployed personnel and we are
working to continue to increase that number.

Peru recognizes the need for minimum performance
standards for troop contributors. To that end, a thorough
and updated knowledge of the expectations, challenges
and requirements of the respective mission is required,
as well as the corresponding operational capabilities
and training.

In view of the increasing complexity of mandates,
we underscore the need to improve mission planning
and to follow through with pledges of specialized
capabilities. We also stress the need for performance
evaluations, rather than being punitive, to be oriented
towards remedying any shortcomings detected in the
training phase and in the execution of the mandate.
In order to do so and in line with resolution 2378
(2017), we stress the importance of ensuring dynamic
and flexible support for activities on the ground by
encouraging innovation to improve implementation
and results with a view to strengthening the overall
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. From that
perspective, we believe it necessary to rethink the
current format of interaction between the Secretariat
and troop contributors with a view to generating a
more dynamic and in-depth dialogue on performance
standards, objectives and indicators.

We conclude by reaffirming our commitment to
peacekeeping operations, which, in the words of the
Secretary-General, represent a minimal investment
in the face of global military expenditure that has
the potential to multiply growth and prosperity in the
host countries.

