Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's briefing and congratulates
Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations and
Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her excellent
briefing on the humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic.

My country remains concerned about the precarious
humanitarian situation in the country despite the
efforts made by the international community since the
outbreak of the conflict eight years ago. According to
United Nations agencies, at least 50 children died in
January and February from hypothermia, malnutrition
and medical conditions, 11.7 million Syrians currently
living within the country's borders still need
humanitarian assistance and nearly 5.7 million refugees
have been registered in neighbouring countries.

That is Why my country places great hopes in the
third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of
Syria and the Region, to be held from 12 to 14 March.
The Conference should enable us to take stock of the
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
define the main priorities for 2019. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire urges the international community to continue
to support efforts to meet the basic needs and ensure
the protection of those persons in distress.

My country is deeply concerned about the persistent
reports of civilians killed or injured by air strikes and
ground fighting in eastern Deir ez-Zor. The difficult
living conditions of tens of thousands of people,
including women, children and displaced elderly
people in the region, are equally worrisome. With a
view to reversing that pernicious trend, cote d'Ivoire
urges all parties involved in military operations, both
in Deir ez-Zor and throughout Syria, to comply with
international law on the protection of civilians and
hospital infrastructure. In that regard, my country
would like to recall that obstacles to the free movement
of persons and goods, as well as violations of the rights
of displaced persons, constitute serious violations
of human dignity and are liable to prosecution under
international law.

It is also worth recalling the need to ensure safe,
prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access for people in distress, both in Rukban and
throughout Syria, in accordance with resolution 2401
(2018). Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the deployment of a second convoy to Rukban, where
about 42,000 people are living in difficult conditions.

My country is also concerned about the military
escalation in the north-west and north-east of the
country, where the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate as a result of renewed hostilities. Especially
in Idlib province, civilians are victims of human rights
violations perpetrated by armed groups.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the parties
to the conflict to uphold the ceasefire in the Idlib
demilitarized zone, ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and intensify diplomatic efforts for
a political solution to the Syrian crisis, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the complementary
Astana and Sochi processes.

