Mr. Arnault: I am grateful for this occasion to
present the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (8/2018/874).
It is a great pleasure to be able to do so in the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, and one of our closest
partners in the Colombian Government, Mr. Emilio
Jose Archila, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.

I am also pleased to inform the Council that since
the Secretary-General's report was issued, the key
mechanisms provided for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace i in particular, those
provisions on the reintegration and security of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) - have
resumed their work for the first time since the start of
the new Government. They include the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement; the National
Reintegration Council; the technical board to oversee
the security of former combatants; and the working
group on legal guarantees.

The Mission participates in several of those
mechanisms, and we welcome the spirit of cooperation
that has been prevailing in the meetings of those
bodies. We trust that spirit will be sustained in the
weeks and months to come. As the Secretary-General
has said several times, reintegration in the current
circumstances in Colombia is a very complex task, and
both sides have an important role to play in completing
it successfully. As those bodies resume their work, a
short assessment of where reintegration stands seems in
order, together with a review of the challenges ahead in
their various aspects: political participation, security,
economic opportunities and legal guarantees.

With regard to political participation - a central
aspiration of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Comun (FARC) and a driving consideration behind its
decision to negotiate an end to the conflict - we take
a positive View of the current situation. Eight of the 10
FARC representatives afforded seats in the two chambers
of Congress have assumed their responsibilities and are
contributing to the debates and the legislative activities
of these bodies. We welcome the collegial spirit that is
being displayed in Congress in spite of sharp political
differences. We also note that the financial difficulties
that undermined FARC participation in the elections at
the beginning of this year have been largely overcome.
We appreciate the fact that the efforts of President
Duque Marquez to build political consensus on policy
issues have included FARC members of Congress.

In relation to physical security, Council members
have noted from the Secretary-General's report the
stark contrast between the situation of those former
guerrillas who are under security measures provided by
the State, and those who are outside their scope. While
not incident-free, the security perimeters that protect
the designated areas where reintegration is taking place
have been effective, as have been the close protection
teams granted by the National Protection Unit of the
Ministry of the Interior to hundreds of FARC leaders
and residents of the reintegration areas. I note that the

goal in the peace agreement of training and recruiting
1,200 close protection personnel is nearing completion.
A significant number of those personnel are women - a
first in the National Protection Unit.

To address security risks outside the training and
reintegration areas, the police are providing former
members of the FARC-EP with training in self-
protection. The National Protection Unit, the security
forces and the Mission have deployed tripartite teams
to 18 departments where groups of reintegrated
combatants are present. Those teams monitor closely
the security situation in those areas and take action
as required. With the number of FARC-EP members
killed outside the Government security umbrella now
reaching 74 since the signing of the peace agreement, it
is obviously imperative that those measures soon make
a difference.

Economic reintegration remains today a subject
of serious concern. The vast majority of those in the
process of reintegration still have no clear economic
prospects beyond the monthly stipend that is to end by
August of next year. The resumed National Council on
Reintegration has therefore a huge task before it, in the
difficult circumstances of a much wider geographical
dispersion of the former members of the FARC-
EP. To succeed where the previous Council failed, it
needs a solid consensus on its approach to productive
projects, land and the proper mix of collective and
individual reintegration.

Some of the lessons learned from the past year
are shared between the Government, the FARC and
ourselves. They include the need to connect reintegration
much more directly to local development, to empower
local authorities, and to link up more systematically
with the private sector, universities and other actors
willing and able to assist with long-term reintegration.
Resources will, of course, be critical. We have taken
note that the Government's budget proposal for 2019
provides that public spending on reintegration be
maintained at the same level as last year. We hope that
Congress will uphold that proposal. I should add that the
Mission and the United Nations as a whole will continue
to do their utmost to support effective reintegration. In
that respect, I would like to acknowledge the countries
whose voluntary support has enabled the Mission
and the United Nations country team to step up their
contribution to productive projects.

In addition to the need to broaden and accelerate
economic reintegration efforts, a heightened subject of
concern at this point is the sense of legal uncertainty
that remains pervasive among former FARC-EP
members. As mentioned in the Secretary-General's
previous report (8/2018/723), that sense of uncertainty
has dogged the reintegration process over the past
couple of years owing to the controversy surrounding
the peace agreement and the protracted political, legal
and constitutional debates over the establishment of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. While the ruling
from the Constitutional Court last August upheld the
powers of the Jurisdiction, it has not removed the
persistent questioning of its role in some sectors. That
is not a situation unique to Colombia. Reconciling
peace and justice is a controversial and emotional issue
everywhere. To overcome it, the Colombian peace
process has sought to innovate by bringing together the
full guarantees of due process, victims' participation
and the benefits of restorative sanctions. That is a
promising solution to an old and difficult dilemma.

Those magistrates who bear today the heavy
responsibility of providing truth and reparation to
victims and reliable access to transitional justice
for participants in the conflict are deserving of the
respect and support of State institutions, and the full
cooperation of all persons under their jurisdiction. They
are also deserving of the support of the international
community. It is the field of conflict resolution as a
whole that will benefit when the Special Jurisdiction
succeeds. Of course, once again financial support is a
critical dimension. I welcome the fact that the funds
assigned to the system of court lawyers attached to
the Jurisdiction were just made available. We also
note that the Government has proposed a slightly
increased budget for the three bodies that make up the
system of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition,
and we hope once again that Congress will endorse
that proposal.

Unfortunately, the tragic killing of social leaders
continues. Over the weekend, in the department of
Cauca, the coordinator of a coca crop substitution
committee was killed, together with his two sons. The
fact that this leader was promoting a Government-
sponsored programme that is part of the peace
agreement illustrates the brazenness of the killers and
the pressing need to mobilize State institutions for the
prevention and prosecution of those crimes. We fully
share the sense of urgency expressed by the President,
the Attorney General, other national and departmental
authorities, as well as civil society, who subscribed in
August to the national pact for life and the protection
of social leaders and human rights defenders. As a first
step towards translating that commitment into action to
stop the killings, we look forward with anticipation to
the action plan under preparation by the Government to
implement the national pact.

Before concluding, on behalf of all the staff of
the Verification Mission in Colombia I would like
to express our deep gratitude to the Government of
Colombia, to FARC and particularly to the Council
for its support for the extension of our mandate. We
believe that we have contributed to overcoming several
of the implementation challenges the peace agreement
has faced and to preserving confidence in the future.
The new Administration has decided to take on the
great responsibility of carrying the peace process
forward. The Mission and the United Nations as a
whole are committed to continuing to do our part to
ensure success.

