Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important briefing on
expanding the role ofpolicing and peacekeeping in post-
conflict peacebuilding, Your presence here today amply
gives this meeting its due merit. I also thank Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and our police commissioners, Greg Hinds
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL),
Fred Yiga ofthe United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and Luis Miguel Carrilho of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
for their informative presentations.

As the concept note (S/2014/788, annex) prepared
by the Australian presidency reminds us, over the
past 20 years we have seen an unprecedented growth
of police components in peacekeeping and special
political missions. That is due to the changing nature
of peacekeeping, which, in the past few years, has
increasingly been facing situations where there is no
peace to keep and where mass atrocities are committed.
The role of the police has therefore become more
important and more complex as it moves away from
its traditional mission of observation to that of the
protection of civilians.

Police in peacekeeping missions are also called
upon to provide operational policing support across
the entire spectrum of policing duties, including the
protection of very important persons, the protection of
the security of key installations, escort duties, crowd
control and humanitarian assistance. That is done in
parallel with the crucial mandate of supporting host
countries, both in conflict and post-conflict settings,
in strengthening the rule of law through the rebuilding
and reform of their policing and other law enforcement
institutions. That has flowed from the recognition of
the central role that host-State policing institutions
can play in the restoration and maintenance of law and
order, security and stability in post-conflict contexts,
including in building trust between the Government
and the population, with police officers often serving
as the main interface between the Government and the
community on security issues.

As the seventh largest contributor of United Nations
police, Rwanda is well aware of those rapidly growing
demands on police components, and that operational
context has guided us in the ways we prepare our
contingents. In recognition of the importance of the
police component of peacekeeping operations, Rwanda
supported resolution 2185 (2014), which we have just
adopted and which outlines practical steps to improve
the effectiveness of police components in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as the need for policing expands in peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding environments.

We are very much aware of the importance of police
contingents in peacekeeping operations. Nonetheless, it
is important that the Council take serious note of the
letter sent by the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries to the President of the
Council recalling that United Nations policing is an
integral part of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and that the Security Council should not act in any way
to encroach on the mandate of the General Assembly,
especially the mandate of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the Fourth Committee of
the General Assembly.

As we know, a mission is best executed when using
an integrated and coordinated approach. Therefore, all
components of peacekeeping operations, mostly the
military and the police, need to be very compatible
and complementary. I have just a few comments and
questions for the heads of police components who are
here with us today, as requested in the concept note.

On UNMIL, we thank Commissioner Greg Hinds,
of course, and his entire team for their efforts and their
support to the Government of Liberia's response to
Ebola. We would be grateful to hear him speak more
on the progress in the implementation of the UNMIL
road map relating to reforming and restructuring the
Liberian police force and law-and-order institutions,
especially factoring in the Ebola outbreak. I would also
be grateful ifhe could share with us his experience with
regard to the deployment of the Liberian police force
throughout the territory of the country.

On MINUSCA, the United Nations police
has a critical role to play in protecting civilians,
re-establishing the rule of law and assisting the
transitional Government in the fight against impunity.
In that connection, I have a question for Commissioner
Carrilho. Given the challenging operating environment
in the Central African Republic, how can the Council
ensure that individual police officers and formed police
units are adequately equipped and appropriately trained
to carry out their mandate? What do they need in order
to perform their mandated tasks that they do not already
have? Does he think that deploying more specialized
protection or support units would boost MINUSCA's
efforts to protect civilians and, if so, are there certain
areas of expertise that he urgently needs to fill?

I also have a question for Commissioner Fred
Yiga. The UNMISS mandate was reinforced so as to
improve the protection of civilians and the monitoring
of human rights and to support the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities agreement. Are there best
practices that UNMISS police could share with others
in implementing that mandate? I think that question
can also be answered by other police commissioners
with respect to the best practices in their Missions.
We all know that the Government of South Sudan has
the primary responsibility to protect its people. Does
Commissioner Yiga foresee a time when UNMISS
can hand over those tasks to the South Sudanese
authorities? It is important that we find ways to build
their capacities. We were told that he recently trained
the South Sudanese police. Is there a framework that
he put in place to monitor and coach his trainees in
implementing their police duties?

I have an additional question for both
Commissioners Carrilho and Yiga. Given the need
to be able to rapidly respond to the violence in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, how are they
reinforcing coordination with the military component
of their Missions? Is the division of labour and areas
of responsibility between the military and police clear,
and do they see some overlaps?

On a final note, allow me to share Rwanda's
experience as one of the biggest contributors of
female police officers to United Nations missions. As
the Rwandan Constitution requires the appointment
of women to at least 30 per cent of the posts in
decision-making organs, a third of Rwandan police
officers are women. Therefore, we have been able
to deploy female police officers to United Nations
missions. They are fulfilling critical tasks as individual
police offers and members of formed police units in
policing communities, connecting with local women
and offering expertise in reporting and investigating
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence.

Unfortunately, not all countries have reached the
point where they can draw from large pools of qualified
female candidates ready for deployment to the field or
to United Nations Headquarters for senior directorship
posts. Perhaps relaxing some of the rigid recruitment
requirements, such as requiring 15 years of relevant
experience in some cases, would allow more member
States that would like to contribute female officers
to step up and do so. It is, of course, necessary for
member States to create incentives for women to enter
police forces, but it also requires a little creativity and
flexibility from the United Nations Secretariat, without
compromising the quality of the candidates.

