Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the start
of this solemn exercise, allow me to express my great
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, assume such enthusiasm the
lofty and esteemed responsibility of President of the
Security Council, and to reaffirm on this occasion the
support of the Senegalese delegation.

The theme that brings us together today - "Threats
to peace and international security: terrorism and
cross-border crime" - beyond its timeliness as an
urgently pressing issue, deserves our full attention
because of the particularly harmful nature of two
phenomena that transcend borders. Indeed, while
terrorism inexorably feeds on fanaticism and erroneous
ideological convictions, transnational organized crime
is the bedrock of the mafia activities that cynically seek
to destabilize States and the subsequent annihilation of
human societies.

I wish to commend the relevance and high quality
of the briefings made this morning by Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

Need I recall that terrorism, by its very
foundations, objectives and manifestations, has caused
the international community untold suffering, most
recently through the hateful criminal attack in Peshawar,
Pakistan, which my country condemns with all its force.
It is important in this respect to highlight and welcome
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 68/276,
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review and the relevance of the four pillars
that constitute its main framework. We also welcome
the adoption this morning of resolution 2195 (2014), the
first of its kind to be adopted under Chadian auspices,
on the item with which we are seized today.

This unanimous momentum in the ongoing fight
against terrorism has led terrorist organizations to
seek other sources of funding, including transnational
organized crime. Its threefold security, economic and
social impact is a scourge that seriously undermines
the foundations upon which our States are based.
We therefore welcome the resolute response of the
international community to transnational organized
crime. This has resulted in the strengthening of the
international legal framework through the adoption of
the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, and the
Palermo Convention and its three Protocols, as well
as the strengthening of the operational capacities of
States, as reflected, inter alia, by the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which, in partnership with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has assisted the countries
of the West African subregion in the fight against drug
trafficking since 2009.

As is clear from the consideration of the various
reports submitted to the Security Council, terrorism
exploits cross-border organized crime in many ways. In
this respect, the illicit trade in coal by the Al-Shabaab
militia in Somalia; the seizure of oil tankers by the
Islamic State or the Al-Nusra Front; and drug trafficking
by the Taliban or the abductions and ransom demands
conducted by several terrorist groups, including Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, eloquently illustrate this fact.
I recall that Senegal supports the call of the Security
Council in its resolution 2133 (2014) of27 January 2014,
requiring States to consider ways to prevent terrorists
from committing kidnappings or from benefitting
directly or indirectly from ransom, and to ensure that
hostages are released unharmed.

In this connection, I vigorously condemn the
numerous abuses of terrorist groups throughout the
world, especially those in the African continent, where
narco-terrorist groups seek to establish international
terrorist havens. That was the explicit purpose behind
the convening on 15 and 16 December, in Dakar, the
International Forum on Peace and Security in Africa,
with the aim of formulating concrete proposals
commensurate with the security challenges posed by
terrorism, organized crime and the traffic in humans
and weapons.

In the same vein, I note the convening in
Nouakchott on 18 December of the first summit of
countries participating in the process of strengthening
security cooperation and the operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-
Saharan region. The highly significant results achieved
at the summit clearly demonstrate the high priority
attached by the African continent to the key issue of
the fight against terrorism within the framework of a
comprehensive strategy to ensure peace and security,
the sine qua non of development.

Let us make no mistake. Tis strategy against
terrorism and transnational organized crime should,
even at the risk of being ineffective, be inclusive and
participatory. It should, in fact, lead States and peoples,
in a gesture of solidarity, to take owbership of the cause
of the fight against these two scourges by promoting a
genuine awakening of consciousness, especially among
young people. It is therefore in our interests to promote
a true culture of peace - the indispensable vehicle for
dialogue among civilizations and peoples.

In the light of all this, the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime, while they are
the primary responsibility of States, should be at
the heart of peacekeeping activities and guided by
a truly preventive strategy. I would indeed like to
convey Senegal's unshakeable will to work with other
stakeholders to build societies free from the yoke of
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as they
would be founded on the ideals of peace and justice and
guided by sustainable development.

