Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/43l) before the Council
today illustrates both the significant progress that the
international community has made since the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1265 (1999) some five
years ago and the extent to which the agreed standards
and their implementation are still at odds. The 10-point
platform presented by the Under-Secretary-General last
December is a very good basis for advancing our
efforts in that respect.

I shall limit our statement today to three points
related to the platform. They all revolve around the role
of international legal standards, a matter which seems
to us to be of particular importance at this time.

While some time ago we shared the hope
expressed by the Secretary-General that the
international community was about to enter an era of
the rule of international law, unfortunately, we must
conclude that quite the opposite has been the case and
that the standing of international law is in greater
jeopardy than ever. While that is sadly the case in
many areas, the effects of this trend are rarely ever
more devastating than in the field of the protection of
civilians. It is therefore most appropriate that the treaty
event during the upcoming session of the General
Assembly will be devoted to legal instruments relating
to the protection of civilians. However, ratification -
ideally universal - of the relevant instruments is only
a first step; more than anything else, we must reverse
the disturbing trends concerning application and
implementation that we have witnessed in the recent
past. Civilians have increasingly been bearing the brunt
of the catastrophic consequences of armed conflicts,
both internal and international, and we must not allow
a breakdown of the internationally agreed legal
standards to make their situation even more desperate.

With regard to the security of humanitarian
personnel, events of the recent past have been alarming
indeed. The emblems of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross - far from
offering the protection they used to in what seems a
distant past - have been deliberately chosen as targets
of attack. Practical measures and thoughtful political
decisions must constitute the core of the response to
these developments, and we are grateful that the
Secretariat is tackling its responsibilities in this respect
with renewed determination. At the same time, legal
protection must also be adequate and we are therefore
grateful that the report of the Secretary-General also
speaks of the need for supplementary legal measures to
expand the scope of the 1994 United Nations
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. As the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee entrusted with this task, I am hopeful that
the General Assembly will soon be in a position to
make a decision on these measures, which are overdue
indeed.

Combating impunity ranks rightly among the
topics in the 10-point platform. We support the
Secretary-General's decision to appoint a Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide as an
expression of a practical commitment to preventing any
repetition of the failure of the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, with regard to
the genocide in Rwanda 10 years ago. We also
welcome the call of the Secretary-General for universal
ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. This landmark achievement in the area
of international law allows for the effective criminal
prosecution of the perpetrators of genocide, as well as
the other core crimes over which the Court has
jurisdiction, in cases - and only in cases - where
national judiciaries fail, for reasons of inability or
unwillingness, to live up to their own responsibility to
prosecute. We also share the hope expressed in the
report that the Council will avail itself of the
competence given to it under the Rome Statute to refer
situations to the Prosecutor of the Court where the
necessary requirements for such referrals are met. This
would be a most effective expression of the
commitment of the Council to combating impunity for
the most serious crimes under international law.

If the risks that civilians are exposed to in armed
conflicts have exponentially increased in the past few
years due to their deliberate targeting, these risks are
further compounded by the active involvement of non-
State actors in such armed conflicts. Such groups must
not be allowed to operate in a legal vacuum and must
be held to fundamental standards with regard to
granting humanitarian access, as well as other
standards of international humanitarian and human
rights law. This must apply not only to armed groups in
a more traditional sense - that is, to independent
parties to conflicts - but also to the privatized military
industry, whose impact and involvement have been
growing dramatically over the past few years and will
likely continue to do so. Their presence and activities
also carry the risk of blurring the line of distinction
between civilians and military personnel, which would
entail an additional element of risk for civilian
populations. These issues must be addressed with
resolve, in both legal and practical terms; with respect
to the latter, the Security Council in particular is
challenged to address these issues effectively.

