Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Simonovic' and
Mr. Zerihoun for their briefings this morning. We have
taken note of the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the third report, dated 15 June, of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, based on the findings of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine.

My delegation expresses its deep concern over the
worsening situation in eastern Ukraine, and particularly
in Donetsk and Luhansk, following the proliferation of
weapons and a rise in the number of armed elements,
which have in turn increased the number ofkidnappings,
incidents of forced detention and torture, and crime in
that region. It has also led to a rise in the number of
messages of hatred and media propaganda campaigns
fabricated by those groups.

Jordan therefore reiterates its condemnation
of all those acts, as well as its invitation to all those
with influence in Ukraine to strive to de-escalate the
situation and to reach a solution that can re-establish
stability in eastern Ukraine and thereby guarantee the
return of internally displaced persons to their homes and

to avert a negative socioeconomic impact in Ukraine.
Jordan welcomes the progress achieved by
the Ukrainian Government in implementing the
recommendations contained in the two previous
reports. We appeal to the Government to continue
to accelerate its efforts in order to implement all the
recommendations contained in the last report. We also
welcome the commitment of the Ukrainian authorities
to implementing the points of the Geneva statement of
17 April. We reiterate the need to respect international
norms in all operations that may be launched to
re-establish the State's authority throughout Ukrainian
territory.

The democratic election of a new President in
Ukraine last month represents a ray of hope for the
Ukrainian people. Jordan pays tribute to the steps that
President Poroshenko is beginning to take in order to
ensure a return to stability in his country, starting with
the visit he made to the regions of the east of Ukraine
and his proposal for a peace plan that would put an end
to the revolt in the east. The President has also proposed
a general amnesty to separatists who elect to surrender
their weapons, as well as to open safe corridors so that
they can leave Ukraine. He is also continuing to work
to promote the rights of minorities and communities
that are not Ukrainian speakers. Those are all signs of
good will on the part of the Ukrainian authorities that
enhance the chances of achieving a peaceful solution
to the crisis.

In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community and the United Nations to combine their
efforts to ensure the success of the peace plan and to
continue with mediation and good offices in order to
end the crisis and bring about a return to stability in
Ukraine.

