Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Emergency Relief Coordinator
for his excellent presentation.

My delegation is deeply concerned by the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the conflict that has
gripped Angola for 27 years now. The information
available to us confirms that, despite the fact that some
progress has been achieved in the last few months, the
situation not only remains extremely serious for a large
percentage of the population, but has deteriorated
considerably.

One of the major challenges facing the country is
the considerable increase in the number of displaced
persons and refugees, who now exceed 4 million, or a
third of the total population. It is clear that the
Government has the primary responsibility for the
return and resettlement of internally displaced persons.
We encourage the Government to continue the
initiatives it has taken with a view to resettling some
500,000 people.

Bulgaria welcomes the efforts made to improve
the living conditions of the most-affected displaced
persons in transit and food centres, temporary sites and
refugee-hosting centres. We believe that a great deal
remains to be done in order to alleviate the suffering of
those most affected.

Another point I deem particularly important is the
need to provide easier access to people in need in many
areas of the country. Despite the concrete results
achieved in the south, the north and the central region,
the serious deterioration of the situation in 20 areas
that are difficult to access, especially in the western
provinces, remains a source of concern. The Angolan
Government must ensure access to all parts of the
country and guarantee minimum conditions of security
for humanitarian agencies, in order to consolidate the
delivery of assistance. We encourage the Government
to do more in this respect.

Bulgaria also welcomes the Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal to support the Angolan Government in
its economic recovery. We would like to emphasize
strongly that the democratization of the country is a
prerequisite for coping with Angola's serious problems.

Bulgaria commends the various humanitarian
organizations, in particular the World Food
Programme, for their efforts to alleviate the suffering
of the affected people. We solemnly appeal to UNITA
to refrain from using violence and to begin to respect
the security and integrity of humanitarian convoys and
personnel. UNITA bears the main responsibility for the
humanitarian disaster, and the international community
must continue to bring pressure to bear on it through
sanctions and other appropriate means.

We remain deeply concerned by the human rights
situation in Angola, especially with respect to areas
where military operations are taking place. It is a sad
fact that 60 per cent of Angolans do not have official
papers or identity cards. The Council must encourage
the initiatives taken by the Angolan Government aimed
at raising the awareness of the main actors in this area
and establishing concrete protection measures. The
Angolan authorities must do their utmost to put an end
to all acts of violence.

Bulgaria welcomes the progress that has been
achieved in the coordination of humanitarian
assistance. We would like to emphasize the importance
of an integrated approach in helping displaced
Angolans, and we would like also to commend the
efforts made by the Special Coordinator on internally
displaced persons.

My delegation fully agrees with the high-level
Inter-Agency Network missions' assessment of the
nature and magnitude of the assistance requirements of
internally displaced persons. We take note of the
creation of a national intersectoral commission on
demining and humanitarian assistance, and we call on
the Under-Secretary-General to devote particular
attention to the implementation of the second plan of
action.

We would like also to note encouraging signs
with respect to the participation of civil society in the
search for a solution to humanitarian problems. Given
their immense potential and their increased efforts,
religious and community groups, women's groups and
special-interest organizations are important actors that
have considerable influence and can bring pressure to
bear on the two principal parties to the conflict. They
have an important role to play in efforts to raise public
awareness of humanitarian principles and of human
rights violations. We support the efforts of the Angolan
Government to establish a mechanism to integrate
these entities into the process of political dialogue.

It is clear that the evolution of the peace process
in Angola is at the heart of the matter. I think that this
meeting represents a good opportunity to make
headway in this respect and to give it fresh momentum
by adopting appropriate measures along these lines.

