Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for the presentation and their dedicated work. Let
me also express my thanks to Ms. Hary for her
insightful presentation.

Let me start with the recent developments in
Gaza. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the recent firing
of more than 400 rockets from Gaza into Israel. Such
attacks are directed against Israel's security and cause
casualties among Israeli civilians. Hamas and the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad must stop firing rockets from
Gaza into Israel. There is no excuse for the firing of
rockets into Israel.

Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel's security. We will not be silent whenever Israel's
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.
While we stress Israel's right to self-defence and its
right to react adequately to attacks against its territory,
we are also concerned by reports about the killing of
innocent civilians in Gaza. We have taken note of the
announcement of investigations into incidents with
civilian victims by the Israel Defense Forces.

Last week's escalation in and around Gaza is
deeply concerning. It reminds us once again of the
urgent need for a sustainable long-term solution to
the humanitarian, economic and political crisis in
Gaza. As Ms. Hary illustrated in her briefing, freedom
of movement of persons and goods is an essential
aspect of any resolution of the dire humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza. We call on both Israel and
the Palestinian authorities to do their respective parts
in order to improve the situation in Gaza.

A political solution is required not only for Gaza
but for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a whole.
Germany remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters. We believe that the two-State solution is the
only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs, fulfils
Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty,
ends the occupation that began in 1967, resolves all
permanent- status issues and guarantees equal rights
for all inhabitants.

We welcome and support any initiative aimed
at reviving the peace process as long as it is based
on a commitment to a viable two-State solution as
internationally agreed and as long as it is acceptable to
both parties, Israelis and Palestinians.

We also support any attempt to restart meaningful
direct talks in negotiations between the parties with
the objective of reaching a just and lasting solution.
Forgoing the most controversial questions of the peace
process by taking them off the table or creating facts on
the ground will not, however, lead to sustainable peace.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict, as well
as other international stakeholders, to refrain from
taking unilateral measures that risk undermining the
viability of a negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the basis of the internationally
agreed parameters.

We believe that international law provides the
basis and framework for all political negotiations and
finding an agreement that is acceptable to both parties.
One ofthe main obstacles to a political settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the continued settlement activities in
the territories occupied since 1967. We reiterate our
position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories are illegal under international
law and undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-
State-solution.

The continuing expansion of settlement activity,
including the recent approval of 2,300 new housing
units in October by the Higher Planning Council
of the civil administration, and the legalization of
settlement outposts by Israel are a matter of serious
concern to us. We also remain deeply concerned about
increased demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-
owned structures across the West Bank and evictions
of Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem.

We call on Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of settlement outposts, the
confiscation of Palestinian land and evictions from,
and the demolition and seizure of, Palestinian-owned
structures. We remain extremely concerned about
repeated statements alluding to, or even announcing, an
intended annexation of areas of the occupied West Bank.
Should such statements turn into actual Government
policy or law that would, in our view, constitute a clear
violation of international law.

We strongly advise our Israeli friends and the Israeli
Government against taking any steps in that direction
that could have serious negative repercussions on the
viability of the two-State solution and the entire peace
process. We reiterate that Germany will not recognize
any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with
regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by
the parties.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), it needs to be fully implemented, not only
with regard to settlement activities but also with regard
to acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement,
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. The
increase in violence, as well as in provocative rhetoric
and actions on both sides, is deeply worrisome. We
strongly urge all sides to de-escalate, exercise restraint
and refrain from provocative rhetoric and actions.

With regard to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount, we recall the paramount importance of
maintaining the agreed status quo for keeping the peace
at those holy sites.

Before I conclude, let me also say a final word
concerning the very important issue of support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Special
Coordinator alluded to that and reminded us of the
emergency situation that we are in. UNRWA remains
indispensable to meet the basic needs of Palestinian
refugees. By providing humanitarian assistance, health
services and education, UNRWA contributes to the
stability in the region.

Germany therefore strongly supports the renewal
of UNRWA's mandate for three years. As the largest
bilateral donor, Germany remains firmly committed
to UNRWA and continues to significantly contribute
to UNRWA's budget. We encourage others to similarly
continue their financial support to the Agency's crucial
work, in particular by disbursing the funds they
have pledged.

