Mr. Moura (Brazil): Brazil has been following
with concern and apprehension the situation regarding
Iraq, fully aware of the implications that developments
related to it may have for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The implications of the current situation and the
risk of war it entails are already being felt throughout
the world, through increased uncertainty, political
divisions and jittery markets. There is no doubt that an
armed conflict will entail great costs in human,
political and economic terms. The large anti-war
manifestations we have witnessed over the weekend in
many countries, including my own, clearly show that
significant segments of opinion within those countries
view such a course of action with uneasiness and
doubt, to say the least.

We have noted the opinions already put forward
by Council members. We believe that holding an open
debate in the wake of the presentations made by Mr.
Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei on Friday, 14
February provides the wider international community
with a valuable opportunity for expressing views on an
issue that affects us all.

The chief inspectors' presentations provide us the
most recent, informative and impartial appraisals of the
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002). This report
on their work shows the progress achieved so far, the
difficulties involved and the need for immediate, active
and unconditional cooperation with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the part of the Iraqi authorities.

Brazil has consistently called for Iraq's full
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 1441 (2002), so as to ensure the
complete elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction and other proscribed weapons, and supports
further peaceful efforts within the context of the
Organization towards achieving those ends. Resolution
1441 (2002) provides a framework whose possibilities
must be thoroughly explored. These clearly involve
full, active and unconditional cooperation on the part
of the Iraqi authorities with the inspectors, greater
efficiency of the inspection regime, and the
development of verification and monitoring
mechanisms, such as those stipulated in resolution
1284 (1999). Suggestions have been put forward in this
regard by Council members, notably France, Russia
and Germany. We support the goals of these initiatives.
A peaceful solution to this crisis is possible. As there is
still hope for peace, we must insist on it.

