Mr. Brahimi: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to address today's open
debate. It is a great honour indeed and a particular
pleasure to speak during the presidency of a
distinguished President from Africa.

Our continent, Mr. President, has had more than
its fair share of conflicts. Some of those have been
resolved, and in other cases the situation has improved.
But there is no room for complacency. Far too many of
our people are being killed, tortured, harassed,
humiliated or sent into exile or internal displacement.
Much remains to be done in Africa to end conflict,
consolidate peace and create the conditions for
sustainable development.

The United Nations is doing its part. Witness the
deployment of over 100,000 peacekeepers in some 18
missions - the largest share of them on the African
continent.

Regional organizations, including the African
Union, have acquired remarkable skills in the field of
mediation. They are creatively developing their own
cooperation, amongst themselves, with civil society
and with the United Nations. A few Governments,
some non-governmental organizations and a number of
individuals have also successfully mediated conflicts
throughout the world and continue to do so.

The United Nations, meanwhile, remains the
leading actor in this field. In the course of its history, it
has achieved many successes, but it certainly can
improve further, as members of the Council and the
Secretary-General know far better than I do.

There are several principles at the heart of United
Nations mediation, all of which deserve careful
attention. Straightforward and uncontroversial as these
are, it is quite challenging to adhere to them in
practice. For example, I believe that the mediator must
understand a conflict in all its complexity before
passing judgement and taking decisions. He or she
should recognize the importance that culture, tradition,
pride and even saving face play in all phases of the
process.

In the short time available, I shall focus only on
two of those principles.

First, the mediator should include in the peace
process all the parties to the conflict without any
exception. At the Afghanistan peace talks held in Bonn
in 2001, we were under immense pressure to conclude
an agreement in just a few days, and it was not possible
to pursue a genuinely inclusive political process.
Political realities demanded that. But we also failed,
later, to reach out to many constituencies who might
have joined the political process if they had been
asked. It should have been clear to us, all along, that
those who were absent or kept away would have no
stake in the success of the agreement and would
obstruct its implementation, and that is exactly what
they have done. President Karzai and the United
Nations pleaded for an expansion of the International
Security Assistance Force, early on, fearful as they
were of how vulnerable the peace process would be to
violence waged by those excluded from it.

In Iraq, Darfur and elsewhere, and in
Afghanistan, the obstacles to a durable peace will not
be overcome by military means alone. A variety of
other tools are equally, if not more, important. These
include far more tangible economic benefits for
ordinary people and intensive, ongoing mediation with
all concerned.

It goes without saying that a mediator should
never act to placate his or her own ego, play to the
media, or prioritize the interests of external actors.
Rather, the mediator should put the concerns and
aspirations of the people - all the people - of the
country concerned at the forefront. In the case of
Afghanistan, the interests of the Afghan people should
override those of the United Nations itself, those of
NATO, those of the neighbours and those of any other
country. If the interests of the people of Afghanistan
are thus served, exclusively and properly, we will see
that everyone else's interests will be very well served
indeed.

But let there be no misunderstanding here. That a
mediation should be inclusive and involve dialogue
with all parties does not mean that any offence, by
anyone, should be condoned or ignored. The
outrageous, sickening, criminal destruction of the
Marriott Hotel in Islamabad, just a few days ago, has
been rightly condemned by the whole world. I happen
to have known some of the victims. They were the
doormen, the waiters, the cleaning ladies and other
staff of the hotel. They were poor, honest, dignified
men and women. All of them were Muslims, working
hard to provide for their families. No perpetrator of
such an act can claim to be an adherent of Islam, let
alone to be acting in its name. Attacks of that nature
are cold-blooded mass murders, period. The criminals
behind them must not go unpunished.
I will now move on to the second key principle, if
I may. The mediators' hand is significantly
strengthened when the principles and approaches he or
she adheres to in conducting the mediation are seen to
be supported by all the members of the Security
Council and the membership of this Organization as a
whole. That means, in particular, that there must be
only one channel of communication with the parties. In
mediating the post-election crisis in Kenya, Kofi
Annan insisted firmly that no one else interfere, and
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon fully supported that
approach. Kofi Annan received much support from
every quarter, but everyone accepted his lead and
responded to his requests. The result was the
remarkable success achieved against almost impossible
odds.

Impossible odds are generally faced by all
mediation efforts. Miracles do not come easily or too
often. If a political deal is reached easily and without
painful compromises by all sides, one should not ask if
it will unravel, but when. The mediator, therefore,
needs all the help he or she can get, and a United
Nations mediator in particular needs much help from
the Security Council.

That help begins with giving the mediator the
time and space he or she needs to work out solutions,
to overcome prejudices and to reconcile competing
narratives of the conflict. It means resisting pressures
to initiate competing mediating efforts and standing
firm against pre-cooked or hastily conducted
agreements that are imposed from outside or that do
not address the core issues. Often, such agreements
exclude key parties whose support is needed for the
implementation of the agreement, or who do not serve
or represent the interests of all the people of the
country concerned.

The credibility of the United Nations and the
world's faith in its relevance suffer greatly when the
mediation of certain conflicts is left unattended for
long periods of time, or ignored altogether. That is
certainly the perception in many parts of the world
with respect to the Middle East peace process and
several other conflicts. When the Security Council is
perceived to be more concerned about the suffering of
some than others, selective in the enforcement of its
own resolutions, or employing double standards, the
credibility of the United Nations as a whole is affected.
The damage to the credibility of United Nations on
some issues will adversely affect its mediation efforts
everywhere.

In conclusion, the Organization's universality, its
impartiality and its consistent adherence to the
principles enshrined in its Charter are the most
powerful weapons in a United Nations mediator's
arsenal. If you equip your mediators well, if you
support them well, then they will be that much more
likely to provide the help the victims of war demand
and achieve the peace this Council seeks.

