Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing, service,
representation of the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and stewardship of the Office
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States again reiterates its strong support for
High Representative Inzko's mandate under the Dayton
Peace Agreement as the final authority with regard to
the interpretation of the civilian implementation of the
Peace Agreement. We of course look forward to the day
when Bosnia and Herzegovina meets the objectives and
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, but let us be very clear - that day has
not yet arrived.

The United States commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's success is enormous, and our
commitment to peace there enduring. It is in that spirit
that we welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's positive
steps towards greater Euro-Atlantic integration. The
submission of its European Union (EU) membership
application in February was an important milestone, and
I would like to congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina
on that step. The United States also welcomes the
Government's full registration of 21 defence properties
within the Federation, which is a positive sign of
tangible progress to meeting Bosnia and Herzegovina's
NATO Membership Action Plan.

Despite those positive steps, continuing down the
path of Euro-Atlantic integration will require vision. It
will require political will. It will require real follow-
through on commitments, and it will require focus to
meet the conditions set by the Peace Implementation
Council. The United Statesjoins the High Representative
in his call for the registration of defence properties
within the Republika Srpska and continued registration
of additional properties within the Federation. We
also continue to encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina
to make genuine progress on the EU socioeconomic
reform agenda. As the High Representative noted,
new labour laws in both entities are important steps
towards improving the business climate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and making the country more competitive
in the global market place. However, critical work
remains to be done to enhance the rule of law, tackle
corruption and improve the overall political climate
in the country, which are steps that will benefit all of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's citizens.

Impunity and divisiveness are not acceptable. I
am particularly disturbed by the truly outrageous and
dangerously provocative decision to name a building
in honour of Radovan Karadzie and the timing of
the proclamation in advance of the ruling of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
his case. Honouring a man who has been charged with
and, days later, convicted of genocide is despicable.
Such craven political manoeuvres do a disservice to
his victims and the country and undermine the spirit
of peace and reconciliation needed for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move forward. The United States also
remains deeply concerned by politicians who seek to
erode the competencies of State-level institutions.
In the interest of greater stability and security, we
encourage the Republika Srpska National Assembly to
formally withdraw its decision to hold a referendum on
the State-level Court and Prosecutor's Office.

We look forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
and when we can say with absolute confidence that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement and is now a
peaceful, viable State irreversibly on the course for
European integration. We have seen progress, but
that day has not yet arrived. For instance, despite the
recent surge and local engagement on Mostar, political
leaders remain unwilling to make the compromises
necessary for the city to hold elections for the first time
since 2008. That same intransigence blocks progress
on other fundamental issues, such as the release of the
2013 census data, and reflects on individual leaders'
credibility with regard to Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
We encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
and all members of the international community to
support the actions and reforms needed to reach that
milestone and provide all necessary support to the High
Representative as he fulfils his mandate.

Finally, I would like to just reiterate the High
Representative's own sentiments in his report
(S/2016/395, annex) in connection with the death of
Mr. Roberts Owen. Mr. Owen gave of his own time
and energy to serve as the Presiding Arbitrator of the
Arbitral Tribunal for Dispute over the Inter-Entity
Boundary in the Brcko Area, and we are grateful for
his unwavering dedication to establishing irreversible
peace and stability through his work at Dayton and on
the Tribunal.

