The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I begin by welcoming Sacha Llorentty Soliz to the
Council for the first time in his role as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) , and Ijoin others in thanking him for his briefing.
I would also like to thank all Council members for
their remarks today. Today, I think they have all shown
that the Council is united and determined to prevent
biological, chemical and nuclear material from falling
into the hand of terrorists or other non-State actors.

Sadly, on the Council we know only too well
that is no longer a hypothetical threat. The nightmare
scenario has been seen in too many places: in Iraq,
where we have seen worrying, persistent reports of
terrorists using chemical weapons; in Syria, where the
United Nations-mandated investigation has proven that
chemical weapons have been used both by Da'esh and
by the Al-Assad regime; and now in Malaysia, where
we were all shocked by reports that VX was used to kill
Kim Jong Nam.

As those events prove, proliferation threats do not
stand still. They are constantly evolving, and we must
remain alert to new trends. We will have to be adaptable
and nimble to keep our citizens safe. Ensuring that
States have the means and resources at their disposal
to deal with those threats is the foundation of resolution
1540 (2004). It sets out how we can make ourselves more
secure by ensuring that our legislation limits the ability
to develop such weapons, by having the right controls
in place to safeguard potentially hazardous material
and by hardening our borders to stop their spread.
This is collective security. One State's resilience can
prevent the spread of a threat to others, but just as one
State can help our collective security so, too, can one
State undermine it. The current implementation rate
of 1540 measures worldwide is 48 per cent. We must
continue to work towards the full, universal fulfilment
of those obligations.

In 2017, we should maintain the momentum and
energy from the comprehensive review and ensure
that we effectively implement the taskings from
resolution 2235 (2016). We should stay abreast of
advances in science and technology that may increase
the proliferation risk, but may also present us with
opportunities to tackle the threat better, for instance
through advances in cyber, three-dimensional printing
and drones.

The Council broke new ground last year by
calling on States to adopt effective national control
lists for sensitive materials - a vital step in an
effective non-proliferation regime. We should work
collaboratively with those who have already developed
effective national control lists and support those who
are just starting out. We should continue to offer
assistance and technical support to those who need
it to implement resolution 1540 (2004) fully. Better
matching of requests for assistance to those who require
it should follow a more regional approach, as agreed by
the Council last year.

But in truth such preventative measures will count
for little if there is continued impunity for those who use
biological, chemical or nuclear material as weapons. It
is not enough just to condemn; we have to take action
whenever a weapon of mass destruction is used and we

must ensure that there are meaningful consequences
for State actors and non-State actors alike. Last month,
in response to the findings of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, I regret that a minority
of Council members blocked a draft resolution that
would have imposed measures responding to atrocities
committed in Syria. We must draw on the unity we
show on the 1540 Committee to find the consensus
needed to act against the use of such weapons.

In conclusion, it is clear that the 1540 Committee
has a huge task ahead, and Sacha Llorentty Soliz has
the full support of the United Kingdom in making as
much progress as he can.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
ofspeakers.

The meeting rose at12.15p.m.
