Mr. Hain (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir, for
your kind welcome and congratulate you on bringing us
together in open meeting on this vital subject. I am also
extremely grateful to Ambassador Fowler for his updating
briefing.

For far too long, Angola has been ravaged by
conflict, used as a proxy by the super-Powers during the
cold war and largely ignored when their priorities shifted.
The Angolan people continue to suffer enormously. Their
suffering is only briefly punctuated by false dawns of
hope provided by ultimately unsuccessful peace accords.

Angola is the worst place in the world to be a child.
Life expectancy is 42 years. There are over 3 million
internally displaced people. Millions of landmines are laid
by both sides, killing and maiming every day. The
humanitarian situation is dire. It is a country so
devastated it makes you want to cry and yet a country so
rich in resources that, with peace and good governance,
it could feed the whole of southern Africa and be a Power
for prosperity and success in a continent blighted by
poverty and failure.

We cannot allow the misery to continue. The time
has come for the international community to face up to its
obligations. It is no good putting our hands up in the

 

United Nations for sanctions against UNITA and then
taking no action while citizens in our countries make
money out of misery. That is simply hypocrisy. We must
all rigorously implement and enforce sanctions. The time
has come to stamp on the sanctions busters. That is why the
report of the Expert Panel is so vital.

We have worked very closely with Ambassador
Fowler and have fully supported his work, both financially
and operationally. I would like to congratulate him on the
drive and commitment he has brought to the Angola
sanctions Committee and to thank his country, Canada, for
the support that it has given him. His determination and the
work of his expert panels have highlighted the porous and
haphazard nature of the enforcement of sanctions against
UNITA.

The report is very important for the United Nations. It
exposes the hypocrisy of those countries - and,
sometimes, leaders - that condemn UNITA while some of
their citizens and companies supply Jonas Savimbi with the
arms, munitions, fuel and assistance without which 25 years
of murderous activities would have ended long ago.

The report names and shames some of those illegally
supplying UNITA: some African Government Ministers and
public officials, who should be ashamed of they way they
are inflicting catastrophe on their fellow Africans; many
arms dealers from Eastern Europe; and air companies and
fuel suppliers that make money out of a war that has been
privatized and is therefore less amenable to diplomatic
pressure of a conventional kind. All of these are merchants
of death. It is time for all the Governments of the world to
act against them. The United Nations must provide a lead.

The full force of law must be brought to bear on those
responsible. Britain has frozen several of Savimbi's bank
accounts. I have named a number of alleged sanctions
busters. I have passed their names to the United Nations
Angola sanctions Committee. I will continue to pass on all
such information. If we discover that any British citizens or
British-based companies are implicated, we will act against
them. We have to cut off Savimbi's means to wage war.

The private sector has a major role to play, too.
Private companies should take a lead. De Beers has done
so. I congratulate it on its initiative to stop trading in blood
diamonds from Angola. Other diamond traders should back
De Beers's commitment to a written guarantee on all
invoices that its diamonds are not fuelling wars.

The Belgian Government and industry are now
coming up with proposals on conflict diamonds - and
not before time. I hope other trading centres will follow
suit. I am sure the Israeli Government will want to do the
same about Tel Aviv. It is encouraging that Southern
African diamond-producing nations, the International
Diamond Manufacturers Association and the Diamond
High Council in Antwerp are looking at the problem of
conflict diamonds. I urge others to do so as well.

The expert panels have shone their torch into some
dark corners. We now need to turn on the light and
expose the full extent of the vile trade in UNITA
diamonds, arms, fuel and other supplies. And we must
remember that these same forces are driving equally
devastating conflicts elsewhere in Africa: in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone.

Let us not forget why we are doing this. The
Angolan Government has had significant successes
against Savimbi's war machine. That is welcome. But
military action alone will not end the conflict. The
Government cannot destroy UNITA's military capability,
just as UNITA has no possibility of winning the war.
Only a political solution can bring lasting peace. There
will have to be a negotiated peace settlement. But
Savimbi's word cannot be trusted. He has always reneged
on the peace agreements he has signed. Without him, the
war would end soon and UNITA supporters could express
their aspirations through legitimate political channels.

UNITA represents an important constituency in
Angola. I again urge UNITA to replace Savimbi as
leader. With him out of the way, and a different
leadership, UNITA can be as much a part of the solution
as it has, so sadly, been part of the problem.

The whole of Angola has been corrupted by the war.
Once-noble objectives held by the Popular Movement for
the Liberation of Angola for decent public services, a
drive against poverty and equality of opportunity were
first diverted because of the necessity to fight UNITA.
Then they were forgotten, as rich elites lined their own
pockets at the expense of their long-suffering people.
Angola desperately needs to use its wealth to spend more
on building up its skills base, social projects, public
services and infrastructure. I have had excellent meetings
to discuss this with the President of Angola and, today,
with the Foreign Minister, who is here with us. I am very
grateful for their warm invitation to visit Angola. I intend
to do so soon.

 

To win full backing from the international community,
the Angolan Government needs to ensure full transparency
and accountability, particularly in the oil account. This is
essential if Angola's immense economic potential is to be
realized. It needs also to ensure that respect for human
rights and freedom of speech flourishes. It needs to involve
all sections of civil society in that task.

The military defeats suffered by Savimbi, coupled with
renewed interest in and attention to sanctions busters, led
by this report, provides an opportunity, unprecedented in 25
years, to end this war. We have an absolute duty to grasp
it. We have it in our power to do so by making sanctions
bite. All that has been lacking so far is the political will.

Savimbi's supplies are ferried in by air, or sometimes
by road. They reach him only because they are permitted to
do so. It would not be difficult to stop this. The intelligence
capacity is there. Sanctions-busting planes and lorries are
easy to detect. Their points of origin can be identified. Let
every country cooperate to do this.

We need to ensure that the purveyors of misery are
detected by enforcing sanctions. I thank Ambassador
Fowler for enhancing our capacity to do so. We welcome
the Expert Panel's exposure of UNITA's secretive and
illegal network of middlemen and Government sponsors.
But we need to do more than naming and shaming to break
UNITA's ability to rearm. As the report makes clear, public
censure must now be followed by decisive action in the
sanctions Committee, in the Security Council, in the States
concerned and by their neighbours.

Britain looks forward to a series of mandatory United
Nations resolutions to implement the report's key
recommendations. The Security Council, meeting next
month, must take decisive action. There must be no delay
and no equivocation. The credibility of the Security Council
is at stake. The Security Council commissioned this report;
we have a duty to act upon it and to support it.

Tough decisions will be needed. Governments in some
of the countries named, including Belgium and South
Africa, have started to take action against their nationals
who are breaching sanctions. I welcome this. Unfortunately,
others are already excusing themselves or denying their
complicity. But now there is nowhere to hide. It is up to all
of us - every one of us here today - to follow through.
The Panel's report highlights the plight of the Angolan
people. We must not let them down.

