Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour
to make this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Norway. The Nordic countries would
like to thank Japan for organizing this debate.

Today's security challenges must be addressed
comprehensively and across the dividing lines between
humanitarian, development, peacebuilding and security
efforts. Famine, pandemics, violent extremism and
organized crime destabilize countries and fuel conflicts.
Increasingly, environmental degradation resulting from
climate change is also contributing to conflicts. If we
are to deal with that, we must cooperate on working to
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
fulfilling the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
implementing other major environmental agreements
and preventing conflicts over shared water resources.
We welcome the strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the World Bank. Their joint
study, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Conflict, makes a strong case for investing
in development as a way of preventing conflict, and
provides much-needed guidance on how development
interacts with other efforts to that end.

We are major partners in long-term development,
and strong supporters of the Green Climate Fund
and initiatives by the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme and others with a
particular focus on African and small island States.
We consistently promote the women and peace and
security agenda and commend the Council's important
role in establishing the normative framework for that
agenda and its implementation. Women's participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations makes such
operations more efficient and improves humanitarian
access and the ability to respond to people's needs.
Inclusive political settlements are key to peace and
development and essential for legitimacy and ownership,
and inclusivity starts with women. Our efforts must
be rooted in the communities we are striving to help
stabilize and rebuild, such as, for example, by making
better use of the positive contributions that young people
can make, as the Council called for in its resolution
2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security. In the
Colombia peace process, victims were heard, civil
society was involved and women were influential. It
is now up to us all to support the implementation of
Colombia's peace agreement.

The Nordic countries will work with all Member
States to follow up the landmark resolutions on
sustaining peace. We are among the major contributors
to the Peacebuilding Fund. For every dollar invested
in prevention, 17 are saved in post-conflict assistance.
Nevertheless, we need to do even more to provide
predictable and sustained financing.

We must place prevention at the core of the agenda
of the United Nations. The reforms initiated by the
Secretary-General are important, and we fully support
his reform agenda. Reform of the Security Council
is also needed to better reflect today's geopolitical
realities, and should include both permanent and
non-permanent seats for Africa. The Nordic countries
continue to emphasize the importance of ensuring that
small States have the opportunity to serve regularly
on the Council as elected members. We are convinced
that the peace and security challenges of today's world
require a concerted response. We need multilateral
structures, in particular the United Nations, which we
must strengthen and make more efficient.

