Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
delegation's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
commend the Mexican delegation for its dedication in
successfully guiding the Council's work, as well as for
the participation at this meeting of your country's
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I also thank your
delegation for convening this open debate and for
providing us with a second opportunity this month to
address the Council on an important issue, in this case
one that affects the most vulnerable members of
society: children.

The Council's interest in the issue of children and
armed conflict is commendable, but it should not be
relegated to the theoretical realm. The
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict must be implemented. The Council's
responsibility regarding the protection of children in
armed conflict should not be limited to monitoring the
situation as regards recruiting, arming and exploiting
minors in the camps and on the battlefield. It should
also monitor the situation with regard to children who
are not able to fully enjoy their rights or whose rights
are denied altogether - rights that have been
guaranteed to them under international law and
conventions. This includes denial of the rights to
health, education and access to humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations and humanitarian disasters. We
should therefore focus on strengthening monitoring and
reporting on serious violations of the rights of children
in armed conflict. That should also include violations
of the right of children to personal security, health and
education.

Although the international community has amply
demonstrated its concern about such serious violations,
we note the fragility of the international will in many
instances when it comes to addressing the issue of
children being deprived of education in situations of
armed conflict, including foreign occupation, despite
the fact that education is a fundamental right of the
utmost importance to children affected by conflict.
Roadblocks that prevent students from attending
schools and universities - thereby depriving them of
their legitimate right to education - result in their
falling far behind in academic achievement and
produce a culture of despair and fear among young
people, rather than the culture of hope and life that is
the primary reason for putting an end to conflict in the
long term.

The military aggression by Israeli forces in the
Gaza Strip late last year was a glaring example of the
types of violations to which children in armed conflict
situations are subjected. That aggression included the
killing of hundreds of Palestinian children at the hands
of Israeli forces, including students sheltering in
schools that were directly hit and in hospitals deprived
of urgent medical supplies. The Secretary-General
highlighted some of those grave violations in his report
(S/2009/ 158) to the Council submitted pursuant to the
presidential statement issued as document
S/PRST/2008/6.

In that spirit, Her Highness Sheikha Mozah bint
Nasser Al-Misnad, First Lady of Qatar and Consort of
His Highness the Emir of Qatar, took the initiative as
UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and Higher
Education to deplore the destruction of educational
institutions of the Gaza Strip and called on the Security
Council to develop a plan to designate schools and
educational institutions as safe havens for students and
their families and to ensure that they had access to
humanitarian services, deliveries of basic goods, and
evacuation services for the sick and wounded.
Previously, Her Highness had addressed a letter to the
Council (see S/2009/12) calling on it to assume its
responsibility and investigate crimes perpetrated by the
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, in
particular children.

We reiterate our call for the Council to
investigate the Israeli army's direct attacks on Gaza
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, so as
to determine who was responsible and bring them to
justice. In that regard, I should like to refer to the
report of the Secretary-General's Board of Inquiry into
that situation in order to emphasize the importance of
following up on it.

Finally, it is crucial that we not lose sight of the
fact that children are the most precious resource in the
building of peaceful societies. The Government of
Qatar will seek to cooperate with international partners
and international organizations in order to ensure the
right of children to education in conflict situations. The
Security Council should also renew its commitment to
international efforts aimed at protecting and promoting
the right of children to education, so as to promote
international peace and security.

