Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko for having presented the forty-
ninth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2016/395, annex) and commend
his work in assisting in the building of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State.

We take note of the successes achieved and the
challenges that lie ahead in consolidating Bosnia and
Herzegovina's statehood and the future of unity and
peace. As a declaration of principle, we reaffirm our
respect and support for the unity, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. In our
statement, we will focus on three main issues: the
general political environment, challenges to the General
Framework Agreement and non-cooperation with the
High Representative.

With regard to the general political environment,
we are encouraged by the application of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for membership of the European Union.
It is now our expectation that the political leaders will
pursue efforts to meet the conditionalities of the reform
agenda for the country's integration into the European
Union, strengthening the prospects of a united,
multi-ethnic, stable and prosperous country advancing
towards development.

We welcome the adoption of the labour legislation
as part of the reforms that the Republic was entitled to
carry out and the disclosure by the Republika Srpska
entity that the referendum on the jurisdiction of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court and Prosecutor's
Office will not go forward. However, the failure by the
authorities to reach solutions for a number of issues,
such as the European Union coordination mechanism,
the announcement of the 2013 census results and the
implementation of the decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court on Mostar, among
others, are matters of concern.

The occurrence, during the reporting period, of
a number of security-related incidents, including a
terrorist attack resulting in the killing of soldiers,
is a call to the authorities on the imperative need to
adopt and implement vigorous measures and policies
to counter terrorism, and namely to address the issue
of foreign terrorist fighters and the danger that they
represent when returning home from theatres of war.

Another matter of concern were the reactions to
the verdict of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in the first instance against Radovan
Karadzic, the war-time leader of the self-proclaimed
Republika Srpska, who was found guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and sentenced to
40 years of imprisonment, while Vojislav Seselj was
found not guilty for similar indictments. We condemn
the outrageous incidents that occurred following the
Court's decision and the ensuing security incidents that
impacted the overall security situation in the country,
undermining the fragile national reconciliation process.

Regarding challenges to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, most worrisome are the statements
made by officials of the Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats, the ruling party in the Republika Srpska,
advocating for the secession and dissolution of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State. Such statements threaten
the General Framework Agreement and the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore, they undermine
the cohesion of the multi-ethnic society being built in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of national reconciliation
at a very crucial moment of the country's life.

We fully support the affirmation made by the High
Representative that under the General Framework
Agreement, the entities have no right to secede from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country are guaranteed by
the Agreement, the Constitution and international
law. Concerning non-cooperation with the High
Representative, we deeply regret the continued attacks
on his Office, as well as the policy of Republika Srpska
authorities of denying the High Representative access
to official information and documents required to fulfil
his mandate. The work accomplished by the Office
of the High Representative in support of the peace,
security and development of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
highly commendable, and we recall that under annex 10
of the General Framework Agreement, all authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are duty-bound to full
cooperation with the High Representative, as well as
with international organizations and agencies.

In conclusion, we acknowledge the important role
played by the European Union-led military operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in supporting the country's
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment
conducive to the building of a multi-ethnic society, a
multinational State and a democratic country.

