Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

First, we would like to thank Bolivia for convening
an open debate on this relevant topic, which is more
pressing than ever. We fully agree that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security. Such threats are continuously
evolving, owing, inter alia, to rapid developments in
science, technology and international commerce. The
risk of State or non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
seeking to develop or acquiring weapons of mass
destruction is especially worrisome and, unfortunately,
we have already seen those risks materializing.

Toxic chemicals have repeatedly been used as
weapons in Syria, and new credible allegations have
been reported by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism attributed the
responsibility for the series of chemical-weapon attacks
to both the Syrian armed forces and the terrorists. The
threatening and destabilizing actions by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea represent a serious threat
to international peace and security and undermine the
global non-proliferation and disarmament regime.

We therefore need to redouble our efforts at
the national, regional and global levels to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring sensitive materials
and technologies. We believe that the key to effective
counter-proliferation is universal adherence and the
full implementation of multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties and agreements. We also
must strive to make progress towards strengthening
the existing instruments and regimes. We strongly
support the multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control treaties, such as the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. We also stand ready for the immediate
commencement and early conclusion of the negotiation
of a treaty banning the production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. We welcome the establishment of the high-
level expert preparatory group whose mandate it is to
make recommendations on substantive elements for a
future treaty.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the fundamental
pillar and a key preventive instrument for a cooperative
approach aimed at helping Member States to
develop capabilities to face evolving threats in the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I would like to reaffirm Estonia's readiness to
implement, in a proactive manner, resolution 1540
(2004), as urged in resolution 2325 (2016) and the
comprehensive review report (see S/2016/1038). We
believe that effective implementation entails effective
legal enforcement and export controls. We also attach
high importance to the existing multilateral export-
control regimes. We continue to contribute to a number
of global and regional non-proliferation initiatives,
such as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Proliferation Security Initiative.
We also continue to support resolution 1540 (2004) by
sharing our experience and knowledge in the area of the
export control of dual-use items. Every step promoting
transparency and greater responsibility contributes to
the broader capacity-building of interested States.
