Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
join other representatives in welcoming you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I should also
like to join those representatives who found the
mission worthwhile and to thank the Russian
Federation for its proposal.

It was very good for those of us who have spent a
while visiting the Balkans over several years to see the
prospects in Kosovo. I think that the prospects, the
sense of hope and the sense of a European future came
across very clearly. We thank Ambassador Verbeke for
his leadership and for having produced the report.
Through you, Mr. President, I would also like to thank
the men and women of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), NATO,
European Union (EU) and Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) missions there,
who have done so much to advance normalization on
the ground in Kosovo.

Kosovo, like the rest of the Balkans, is wholly
surrounded by the European Union. This is not only a
question of the future of Kosovo; it is also a question
of the future of Serbia, and, by extension, of the whole
region. We were saddened to hear in Belgrade so little
about Serbia's own European future, and I would like
to use this occasion to make clear that, as far as the
European Union goes, that future is very much on
offer, as it is for the whole of the Balkans region.

We believe that the report that has been produced
is balanced. I should just like to say that we do not
think that there is any equivalence between the events
of 1999 and those of 2004 - the former having been
the result of brutal repression by Government forces -
but we do acknowledge that wrongs were done in 2004
and that those wounds will take a while to heal.

We share the concerns of other colleagues about
the slow rate of returns. We would be very happy to
find a vehicle for discussing how that might be
accelerated. But I should like to say that it is not in our,
or Kosovo's, gift to force people back to their homes,
however much we might want them to go there. We do
not believe, therefore, that that in itself is a determiner
of the rate of progress on the status process or of the
outcome itself. Even if all Kosovo Serbs currently
outside Kosovo were to return, they would still be a
minority within Kosovo, no more than 10 or 12 per
cent of the total population. But, as I have said, we
would like to look for ways, along with other
representatives and other international organizations, to
accelerate that rate of return. But I think that, overall,
we share Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Riicker's assessment that obstacles to
Kosovo's further development are status-related.

We have heard much wisdom today about the fate
of a people and the Council's responsibilities in that
respect. We have a status process that has not come out
of the blue. Since 1999 and the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), the international community has been
working very hard on the Kosovo issue. In 2003 there
were direct Kosovo Serb talks on technical issues. The
Security Council has long backed a role for the
international Contact Group in the Balkans, including
in Kosovo just as in Bosnia. The Contact Group has
been working since 2003 with the United Nations as
well as with the EU and NATO. In 2004 there was
widespread agreement to move to a comprehensive
review of standards to see if the status process could be
launched. In 2005 Ambassador Kai Eide concluded that
it should, and that, once the status process was
launched, it needed to come to a timely conclusion.
Also in 2005, the Contact Group published some
guiding principles for the status Envoy's work, and
President Ahtisaari was appointed. All of those moves
were backed by the Council. Mr. Ahtisaari has
discharged his mandate to lead the status process and
to produce an outcome, and it is that that we are
considering.

I agree with the representative of China and also
with the representatives of Peru and of Panama that
status quo is not a way out and that there has been
remarkable progress on standards. But I think that we
all need to bear in mind that there is no prospect of an
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, as the
mission demonstrated. Thus each of those parties must
take its own decision, and we have heard from the
Kosovo side its declaration to implement the Ahtisaari
proposals. The Council's role is to take up its
responsibilities and to back the only viable vision for
the future of Kosovo, and to authorize the EU and
NATO to support that transition as they have supported
normalization in Kosovo to date.

The United Kingdom supports the Ahtisaari
conclusion that independence for Kosovo, under

international supervision, is the best outcome for
Kosovo and also the best outcome to advance regional
stability and, by advancing regional stability, to
accelerate the integration of the whole Balkans region
into Euro-Atlantic structures. We also support the
details of Mr. Ahtisaari's plan in that they provide for
the best functional government that Kosovo can have
while protecting minorities and cultural and other
heritage. I believe that it is well known that
Mr. Ahtisaari's provisions are the most far-reaching for
minority protection that have yet been seen in Europe.

I think that it is also worth noting another feature
of the proposals, which is the very important way that
they give a role to Serbia in helping, in a pastoral
sense, Kosovo's Serb communities in Kosovo and
thereby give Serbia reassurance that its important role
in the region is not overlooked. As part of this, Serbia
and Kosovo will form some sort of joint council to
consider minority issues. We think that that is a
far-reaching provision and one that is extremely useful
in the Kosovo context.

I should like also to state that in our View, as we
heard from President Ahtisaari in Vienna, the package
does indeed represent a compromise between the
Kosovo and the Serb sides, and we commend it to the
Council. We do not believe that other ways, such as
supervised autonomy, can actually be made to work in
practice. We do not believe that it would be right to ask
organizations such as the EU and NATO to implement
something that we believe will not work in practice,
and I think we heard that very eloquently from the EU
and also from the NATO Secretary-General.

I should like to conclude by saying that the
Contact Group began this venture together after 1999,
and we would very much like to cooperate with all
partners, including those on the Council, to bring it to a
successful conclusion. We did set ourselves last year a
deadline of the end of 2006. That deadline was not met,
largely because of negotiations on a new Government
in Serbia, but we do not believe that there is anything
now to be gained by delay. We believe that Kosovo is a
sui generic case. We pledge to work constructively
with colleagues. We are happy to look at ways of
supplementing the Ahtisaari package, particularly to
deal with minorities and internally displaced persons,
but outside the framework of that package, so that we
can indeed make more progress on the ground in
building a truly ethnic space in the Balkans and
bringing it into European-Atlantic integration.
