Ms. Delechat: I am grateful for the Council's
invitation and for the opportunity to give this briefing.
Haiti's situation has improved significantly since
2004, as others have noted. But important challenges
lie ahead. In the past five years, Haiti's has made great
strides in macroeconomic management in partnership
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but also
thanks to strong donor support and improved security
under the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Real growth in gross domestic product
turned positive again; inflation declined from 40 per
cent to less than 5 per cent today; fiscal discipline was
restored; and international reserves have increased. In
spite of the unprecedented shocks during 2008 - not
only the hurricanes but also high food prices - the
authorities were able to maintain macroeconomic
stability and remain on track under the programme
supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF). However, this was not easy, and these
hard-won gains remain very fragile.

First, an increasingly tense political situation
could complicate economic policy-making in the
period ahead. Here, I agree with the analysis of
Ambassador Annabi. In recent months, political
tensions have slowed the passage of the budget and of
economic governance measures needed to secure
important debt relief. There is also a risk that the
upcoming senate elections could complicate an already
difficult relationship between the executive and
legislative powers. Efforts will have to be made to
develop a broad political consensus around the
Government's efforts to preserve macroeconomic
stability and raise living standards for the poor.

Secondly, the global crisis is starting to affect
Haiti, mainly through trade and fiscal linkages. We
anticipate that the effect on the external current
account deficit of weaker export demand and lower
remittances will be cushioned by lower food and fuel
prices. Lower import prices have also helped bring
down inflation, but they are creating a significant
shortfall in customs revenue, estimated at about $50
million for fiscal year 2009 if no additional measures
are taken. On the financial-sector side, for the time
being, commercial banks appear to remain well
capitalized and profitable, but the quality of loan
portfolios should be monitored closely.

The Fund has stepped up its efforts to help Haiti
respond to the negative impact of the global crisis as
well as last year's hurricanes. On 11 February, the
Fund's Executive Board approved an increase of $37
million in IMF support, the second increase under the
current PRGF arrangement; the first was in response to
high food prices. Since 2006, Haiti has received a total
of $136 million in PRGF disbursements. The increase
from the Fund in February is roughly equal to the
additional post-hurricane budget support pledged by
donors, which we hope will be disbursed soon.

Haiti is also on track to receive almost $1 billion
in debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor

Countries and Multilateral Debt Relief initiatives by
the end of June. Annual debt service savings of $35
million to $40 million would free resources for
poverty-reducing expenditures. Conditions to reach the
completion point under the initiative include
improvements in health, education, domestic revenue
mobilization, debt management and governance. IMF
and World Bank staff are closely monitoring progress
in these areas and are prepared to move quickly with
the provision of debt relief to Haiti once remaining
reform measures are implemented.

Given the immense needs even before the
hurricanes, the authorities are seeking an additional
$125 million in budget support and more than $700
million in project financing at the high-level donor
conference to be held in mid-April. The new budget
support would help close a $50 million budge gap and
finance critical investment projects. The requested
project support would be allocated to priorities within
the Poverty Reduction Strategy and the post-hurricane
reconstruction programme. However, to date little
additional support has been identified, raising the risk
that the April conference will not be successful. That,
in turn, would further undermine the authorities' efforts
and is in the context of an already declining overall
budget support envelope for Haiti.

The IMF is committed to helping Haiti present its
case to the international community and will send a
delegation to the conference led by the Deputy
Managing Director. We urge the other donors to come
forward at the Washington, D.C., conference and
provide the much-needed financing. We think that
30

failure to adequately support the authorities' budget
may prevent the implementation of investment projects
essential to creating jobs, supporting growth and
raising living standards. That could risk jeopardizing
political and social stability. Haiti needs more effective
and more reliable external assistance, primarily in the
form of budget support.

Looking ahead, important challenges remain to
consolidating stabilization gains, promoting growth
and reducing poverty in the midst of the global
slowdown. Over the medium term, it will be important
to reduce structural and institutional bottlenecks, raise
domestic resources to support higher social and capital
spending, develop the financial sector and create
favourable conditions for private sector investment to
boost exports, achieve sustainable growth and reduce
poverty. The potential benefits of that approach were
highlighted in a recent report by Professor Paul Collier.
The report usefully suggests focusing interventions on
a few key sectors, including the promotion of export-
processing zones, to reap the benefits of preferential
access to the United States market.

As mentioned by the Secretary-General, there is
hope for Haiti. Renewed international partnership
along the lines of mutual accountability can help Haiti
turn the corner.

