Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation would like to express its most profound
appreciation to the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Rwanda (ICTR) for their
presentations today before the Council. We wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm our country's strong
support for the work of the Tribunals to bring to justice
the perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. Over the past 15 years, the two Tribunals
have achieved a lot, and both are drawing towards a
successful completion of their mandates.

Bearing in mind the time frame for the
completion strategies of the two Tribunals, as set out
by the Council in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004), we are very encouraged by the conclusion of
the ICTR that the Tribunal remains on track with the
majority of the projections announced in December
2007 to the Council. We take note of the ICTY's report
that all efforts are being made to complete all trials as
quickly and efficiently as possible, and that all appeals
are estimated to be concluded in 2011.
While we fully share the assessments of the
Tribunals that those estimates are subject to unforeseen
circumstances, we are also mindful of the fact that the
Council, in the aforementioned resolutions, asked the
two Tribunals to take every step in their power to stay
within their deadlines and urged all States, in particular
those of the regions concerned, to cooperate fully with
the Tribunals towards the timely completion of their
work. In that connection, my delegation welcomes all
cooperative efforts rendered by States to the Tribunals,
as shown in the reports.

Viet Nam notes with concern the number of
fugitives, including the most senior ones whose names
have been mentioned in the Council's resolutions. We
believe, however, that the international community will
not stop short of bringing those persons to justice. We
encourage the Tribunals to continue vigorously with
their efforts to decide, within the time frame of the
completion period, on any possible referral of cases of
fugitives to national jurisdictions. That would also help
the Council to decide on an appropriate residual
mechanism to ensure international trials in
non-referable cases.

In the next two and a half years, we, as members
of the international community, need to step up our
efforts to ensure that the two Tribunals receive all the
support necessary to complete their work and their
mandates, including through continued provision of
sufficient resources for retaining qualified staff
members and working out good solutions in relation to
their legacy. Assistance should also be given in
capacity-building, aimed at enhancing the capacity of
national jurisdictions to handle referred cases and
legacy issues. The Security Council, with the
assistance of its informal working group on the
International Criminal Tribunals and in close
consultation with the Tribunals, should make timely
decisions on the residual arrangements and mechanism.

Finally, let me reiterate our firm commitment to
working constructively with other members of the
Council to ensure a smooth and effective completion of
the work of the Tribunals.

