Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. The
fact that the Council is seized of the issue of small
arms and light weapons for the sixth consecutive year
is indicative of the seriousness of the matter and of the
importance that the Council attaches to it.

I wish to welcome the presence among us of the
Foreign Minister of Peru. I also thank Ms. Hoppe,
Officer-in-Charge of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs, for her excellent introduction of the report of
the Secretary-General, which was clear and
comprehensive.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. However, I
wish to stress the following points.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has contributed enormously to the unlimited
proliferation of such weapons. It is estimated that over
640 million small arms and light weapons exist
worldwide. Several million of those are illegally

possessed, either by transnational criminal
organizations or by non-State actors. That uncontrolled
propagation of small arms and light weapons results in
a total of 500,000 victims annually and constitutes a
significant threat to international peace and security.
We have witnessed their destabilizing effects on States
and, at times, even entire regions. They significantly
contribute to the intensification of conflicts, obstruct
relief programmes, undermine peace initiatives,
exacerbate human suffering and hamper economic
development.

Among all the tools of war, small arms and light
weapons are the most widespread. They are easily
available and nearly out of control. In order to check
the problem, in 2001 the United Nations adopted the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Progress has been made in
some aspects of the Programme, whereas in other areas
the situation is still stagnant. We therefore expect that a
full evaluation of its implementation will be made
during the forthcoming first review conference on the
Programme of Action.

The General Assembly's adoption in 2005 of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons constitutes a
significant step forward. It is also encouraging that,
through the same resolution in 2005, the General
Assembly authorized the convening of a group of
governmental experts, which we hope can lead to
progress towards the eventual regulation of arms
brokering. Brokers, who are currently carrying out
their work in most countries without any regulation,
are to a great extent responsible for diverting weapons
to illicit destinations, including transfers to regions of
conflict - sometimes even in violation of arms
embargoes imposed by the Security Council - or
directing arms to States where serious abuses of human
rights occur.
In order to be effective, the fight against the illicit
trade in small arms must be expanded to also include
ammunition. Without ammunition, small arms and light
weapons are useless. We cannot regulate the one
component without regulating the other.

In exercising their inherent right to self-defence,
countries need to use small arms and light weapons
legally for their armed forces and police. Nevertheless,
one cannot overlook the fact that, in some instances,
although destined for legal use, small arms and light
weapons are diverted to illegal recipients. A means to
fight that loophole in our system is the adoption of the
end-user certificate. Both the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have relevant provisions in place. We hope that that
measure can be generally adopted and applied as a
useful means to curb the illicit flow of small arms and
light weapons.

We support the Security Council's recently
increased attention to the issue of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-
combatants into their societies. The negative
humanitarian and development impact of the illicit
manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and
light weapons will be greatly reduced through the
adoption of DDR measures, which would greatly
contribute to the stabilization of conflict-torn societies.
Therefore, DDR should be introduced as an integral
part of post-conflict peace agreements and
development strategies.

Measures also have to be taken to ensure strict
compliance with United Nations embargoes and
sanctions in conflict areas. The Council should spare
no effort to stop the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, as well as to identify potential links
between their illicit trade and the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources. Zero tolerance for
smugglers must be the rule, since smuggling rekindles
conflicts through their illegal financing.

Needless to say, countries should exert restraint
when exporting to areas of conflict, even if an arms
embargo has not yet been imposed. It is our common
duty and responsibility to help regulate and control the
trade of those weapons of choice in so many conflicts
around the world.

In closing, we are in favour of adopting a relevant
draft resolution and we hope that the negotiations will
soon be completed and that the Council will be able to
adopt it.

