Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I should like
to join previous speakers in thanking High
Representative Lord Ashdown for his thorough
briefing on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also thank
him and the staff of his Office for the tireless efforts
they have been making since 2002. Finally, we wish
him and his team all the best in their future
endeavours.

The presence and work of the United Nations has
been instrumental in the reconstruction of the country's
shattered infrastructure, the institutional reform
process and the building of a multi-ethnic society.
Structural, administrative and legislative reforms have
been undertaken at a steady pace. Ownership is already
being transferred gradually to the national authorities.
The Bonn Powers tend to be employed with increased
restraint. We have now reached a stage in which the
phasing out of direct international administrative
control is recommended as a requirement for the
success of the next new phase towards a more solid
unification and the fulfilment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European aspirations.

International partners should be prepared from
now on to play a role that is increasingly advisory and
cooperative. In that regard, we are pleased with the
news coming from Brussels. We expect the European
Union to agree formally next week to open
negotiations with Bosnia and Herzegovina on a
stabilization and association agreement.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the 1995
Dayton Peace Agreement, which marked the end of the
brutal 1992-1995 war, there are suggestions that the
complex structure should be modernized, leading to the
creation of a single presidency and a State with unified
and more functional institutions that would better
represent the country and help achieve the final step
towards true integration among the Serb, Croat and
Muslim communities.

We are encouraged by the fact that negotiations
for the surrender of former Bosnian Serb General
Mladic as well as others suspected of serious violations
of international law were reported to be under way.
Although cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has
substantially improved, with the transfer of 12
indictees in 2005, the persistent failure to bring
Mladic, Karadzic and other indictees to face trial
before the ICTY is still our primary source of concern
and continues to hinder efforts towards European
integration.

The discovery in Snagovo last week of yet
another mass grave of 1995 Srebrenica massacre
victims is further proof of the seriousness of the crimes
committed and of the need to see that justice is done.
We welcome the fact that only five of those indicted
for crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain at large.

Regarding the efforts under way to bring Bosnia
and Herzegovina's institutional structure up to
European standards, we note with concern the
reluctance of Republika Srpska to accept the
fundamental European Commission principles for
police sector reform, related budgetary authority free
of all political influence, and the determination of
technical criteria for policing districts. An urgent
change of attitude on the part of its authorities is
needed. We heard today that they are undertaking
positive steps on those issues.

Modernization and economic reform remain
essential in the effort to achieve a market economy that
will spur development and job creation. More must be
done on this issue since stability depends not only on
the political panorama but also on the health of
economic indicators.

Many problems remain to be tackled, but, with
the support of the international community, and in
particular with the help of the European Union, those
challenges will be overcome.

