Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
the French presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate. Let me also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing.

Discussions on the situation in the Middle East
invariably become a sombre reminder of the spectre
of violence, turmoil and conflict that has afflicted
millions of people across the region. Nothing
epitomizes that more than the plight and suffering of
the Palestinian people. On the fiftieth anniversary of
the illegal occupation of their homeland, the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to live a life of freedom and
dignity still remain a distant and elusive ideal. The
lack of progress on the Palestinian issue has not only
betrayed the hopes and aspirations of generations of
Palestinians, it has also sowed the seeds of seemingly
endless hostility and discord in the region.

However, some aspects of the Middle East's
political landscape today offer reason for optimism.
The political reconciliation forged between Fatah and
Hamas in Cairo last week is a landmark achievement.
It not only restores political unity within Palestinian
ranks, but also provides renewed strength and vigour
to the legitimate cause of the Palestinian people.
We congratulate the Palestinians on that singular
achievement and hope that it will lead to real progress.
But that development by itself is not enough to tip
the scales of justice in favour of the long-suffering
Palestinians. The international community must renew
its resolve to sustain that positive momentum. As a first
step, the illegal and oppressive siege of Gaza by Israel
must be lifted.

A viable, independent and contiguous State of
Palestine - on the basis of internationally agreed
parameters, the pre-1967 borders and Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital i is the only sustainable guarantee for
enduring peace in the Middle East. During his recent
visit to Gaza, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
said: "I have a dream. A dream to one day see the Holy
Land with two States". Yet that vision is consistently
and brazenly being undermined by the illegal Israeli
settlements in occupied territories. As affirmed by the
Secretary-General's reports to the Security Council
pursuant to its resolution 2334 (2016), settlement
activity has in fact been stepped up. It has intensified.
In addition, the systematic practice of dispossessing
Palestinians of their homes and displacing them from
their lands and livelihoods in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, continues unabated.

Any unilateral attempts by Israel to alter or
re-engineer the existing status quo in the old city of
Jerusalem is an unacceptable provocation for billions
of Muslims around the world - it must cease. That was
highlighted again during tensions surrounding the Holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque in July. Creating alternative facts on
the ground cannot change historic realities or neutralize
or reverse the legal rights ofpeople living under foreign
occupation, in Palestine or indeed elsewhere.

A just peace in Palestine is not only a matter of
regional significance; it is a fundamental precondition
for global peace and security. A two-State solution
remains an absolute imperative. There is no "plan B".
There can be no other plan than a two-State solution for
the region.

Challenges confronting the Middle East are
complex and myriad. They are also often mutually
reinforcing and interlinked, and therefore require
greater cooperation and coordination between the
States of the region.
Pakistan reaffirms its unequivocal support to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the brotherly
people of Iraq. We are convinced that a solution to
Iraq's problems must be found within a united and
inclusive Iraqi State, while recognizing and reconciling
the interests of all Iraqi people.

On Syria, a Syrian-led and Syrian-driven process
of political reconciliation is the only pathway to lasting
peace in that country. The intra-Syrian talks are
pivotal to that end. We hope that the parties will show
the necessary flexibility and compromise to bridge
their differences.

The situation in Yemen remains grim: 15 million
people in the country lack adequate access to clean
water, sanitation and hygiene, while 7 million are faced
with the threat of famine. All of that is exacerbated by the
over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera. That demands
a surge in diplomacy as well as in humanitarian support
to the millions of people in need across the country.

In conclusion, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
noted in his address to the General Assembly this year
that "[w]e are a world in pieces. We need to be a world
at peace." (A/72/PV.3, p. 1) Our journey towards this
shared ideal for world peace and world accord can only
begin in the Middle East.

The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

