Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to
congratulate the French Council presidency on
initiating today's meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and Ambassador Greenstock for
their reports.

The issue we are dealing with today is a top
international priority, since the Sword of Damocles of
international terrorism is hanging over all of us.
Terrorism kills innocent people and is a crime. It
threatens peace and security; it threatens democracy,
development and freedom, and it scorns national and
international law and brutally attacks human rights.
That is the message the horrific terrorist attack of 11
September 2001 sent to us all. What is more, the
attacks in Djerba and Bali, and in Moscow and
Mombasa, have made it clear to us that that threat
remains unchanged.

No country is willing to live with that threat. We
must therefore join forces to counter that brutal
challenge with determination and prudence. The threat
to our citizens has gained a new dimension. It is not

possible to negotiate with terrorists such as Osama bin
Laden and his network. They must be defeated. The
terrorist network must be destroyed.

At the same time, however, we must use political,
humanitarian and economic means to root out for good
the possible causes that lead people to support
terrorism.

I would like to briefly outline three fundamental
considerations. First, international terrorism poses a
strategic threat to peace and the international order. It
is aimed at forcing us to react rashly and entangling us
in a war among civilizations. That must not be our
response. We must react in a way which weakens
terrorism. There are no easy answers to this. The fight
against international terrorism must take place at
various levels. Intelligence, police, judicial and, in
extreme cases, even military measures are
indispensable. However, crisis prevention, conflict
management, participation, poverty reduction, the
promotion of education and a dialogue among
civilizations are equally important. It is crucial to
prevent acts of terrorism, but it is even better to
prevent people from becoming terrorists.

Secondly, we can win this fight only through
intensive international cooperation. Terrorism does not
stop at borders. The impressive international coalition
against terrorism that evolved following the attacks in
New York and Washington must be preserved.

Allow me to comment here on the current
situation. We are greatly concerned that a military
strike against the regime in Baghdad would involve
considerable and unpredictable risks for the global
fight against terrorism. We have no illusions about the
brutal nature of Saddam Hussein's regime. Therefore,
we all demand that Baghdad implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions in full and without
exceptions. However, in addition to disastrous
consequences for long-term regional stability, we also
fear possible negative repercussions for the joint fight
against terrorism. These are fundamental reasons for
our rejection of military action. What we need is a
system of global cooperative security. Asymmetrical
conflicts in particular must be countered with an
international system of sanctions and verification
mechanisms. It is the United Nations that provides us
with the appropriate global framework for that.

Thirdly, our fight must always be legitimized
under international law. It must respect national and
international law, human rights and the United Nations
Charter. Human rights in particular should not be
suspended under the pretext of combating terrorism.
After all, this fight is not only about defending our
security, but also about our fundamental values -
freedom, democracy and human rights.

The United Nations reacted quickly and
resolutely to the events of 11 September 2001. Allow
me to single out the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee here. It has done impressive
work, and its Chairman deserves our recognition. In
that connection, my country is prepared to assist third
States in developing suitable measures to combat
terrorism and to coordinate that assistance with the
Committee.

We also attach great importance to the General
Assembly debates and draft convention on that issue. It
would be desirable if the Assembly were to finally
conclude its work on conventions on the
comprehensive fight against terrorism and on nuclear
terrorism.

Germany will continue to participate actively and
constructively in all efforts to fight and prevent
international terrorism. That is one of our most
important foreign and security policy objectives. We
are working towards that goal in very close cooperation
with our international partners, particularly within the
framework of the European Union.

In addition to prosecuting terrorists, we are also
particularly keen on tackling terrorism at its roots. That
includes devising potential solutions to simmering
regional conflicts, as in the examples of Afghanistan
and the Middle East. It also includes the stabilization
and the development of countries stricken by crisis
through useful assistance and cooperation.

Furthermore, we continue to pay particular
attention to the risk of terrorists gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. However, that means that
international instruments of arms control, disarmament
and nonproliferation must not, under any
circumstances, be weakened. Indeed, quite the reverse
should be the case: they must be strengthened. In that
connection, we have launched various initiatives within
the frameworks of the European Union and the Group
of 8. We also attach particular importance to dialogue
with other civilizations, particularly the Islamic world,
in that context.

Let me say once more that we cannot achieve
these goals without the international coalition against
terrorism. We must preserve and cultivate it, and it
would be best if we did so within the framework of the
United Nations. The momentum created by today's
meeting must be used. During the German presidency
of the Council, we plan to take up this issue once more
in an open debate on 20 February.

