Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, Japan extends
its congratulations to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Japan convened an open debate on peacebuilding at the
Council last April (see S/PV.6299). We are thus
heartened by the holding of this meeting, which serves
to highlight the success of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a country that has experienced the post-conflict
peacebuilding process, as well as to provide
encouragement for others currently undergoing that
process. We also appreciate the briefings by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres of Timor-Leste and Ambassador Wittig of
Germany, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).

Japan attaches a great importance to institution-
building. Based on our own experience in
reconstruction, valuing national ownership is the
primary principle of our development assistance. In
that context, discussion on the role of the Security
Council in promoting institution-building is relevant. I
would like to offer three points from Japan's
perspective.

First, the Security Council should utilize the PBC
more proactively. I shall return to this issue later.

Secondly, there is a global shortage of civilian
capacity for institution-building. There is therefore an
urgent need for fostering such capacity. In order to
facilitate the training for and the expeditious
deployment of such capability, we believe that the
Security Council must review and implement the
conclusions of the upcoming report by Mr. Guehenno
in a timely manner.

Thirdly, as the mechanism for partnership in
peacebuilding is complex and involves various
stakeholders, the Security Council must promote strong
leadership on the ground to enable United Nations
representatives and the Government concerned to work
together towards solutions, taking into account the
specificity of the situation. We also hope that the
Secretary-General will appoint strong special
representatives, giving particular consideration to
women candidates. We hope that Member States will
cooperate in submitting appropriate nominees.

Concerning the PBC, the Security Council should
tap further into its potential. We believe that will
contribute significantly to the Council's decision-
making process.

First, the PBC has been holding consultations on
some countries on the agenda more frequently than the
Security Council itself, including with the participation
of the countries concerned and international
organizations. Building a stronger link between the
deliberations at the two bodies will contribute to
providing solutions to various peacebuilding issues.
Last year, Japan facilitated the holding of an informal
dialogue of the Council with the PBC. The Security
Council should consider holding such informal
dialogues on a more regular basis, which will also
contribute to better relationships with host countries.

Secondly, the PBC can be used as a forum for
discussing exit strategies for peacekeeping missions.
Liberia could serve as a test case in that regard when
determining whether we can arrive at a successful exit
for peacekeeping mission in order to handover to
peacebuilding partners. We also heard from the
representative of Timor-Leste today that his country
needs a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
assistance from development partners. In that context,
it is worthwhile to consider placing a country on the
agenda of the PBC in order to provide more effective
international support in the transition phase. The PBC
could increase the number of countries on its agenda
and seek to determine the best strategies to assist post-
conflict countries based on lessons learned.

Thirdly, the PBC is also a valuable forum for
raising international awareness and mobilizing
resources. With that in mind, Japan intends to add
approximately $13 million to the Peacebuilding Fund.
We hope to utilize the Fund to more effectively fill the
gap between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We urge
other countries to contribute to the Fund as well.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan's
appreciation for the holding of today's meeting focused
on institution-building, which is a fundamental element

of the peacebuilding process. Japan will continue to
contribute actively in this field, including through
exploring the expanded utility of the PBC.

