Mr. Rostow (United States of America): Let me
first thank President Meron, President Mose,
Prosecutor Del Ponte and Prosecutor Jallow for their
reports and presentations.

Like Judge Meron and Prosecutor Del Ponte, we
also are conscious that this year marks the tenth
anniversary of the genocidal massacre in Srebrenica. It
also marks the tenth anniversary of the signing of the
Dayton accords.

The United States applauds and strongly supports
the work of both Tribunals. We are pleased by
increased operational efficiency, although of course we
are always open to new ideas for additional
improvements.

This Council has endorsed and continues to
support the Tribunals' Completion Strategies. The
international community needs to provide assistance so
that credible domestic trials of low- and mid-level
accused can go forward. The United States is
committed to providing such assistance. In addition, of
course, the international community also needs to fulfil
its obligation to help bring to justice the remaining
notorious defendants - Karadzic, Mladic, Gotovina
and Kabuga - and others who are at large. In that
regard, we especially call on Serbia and Montenegro,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo and
Kenya to help bring those defendants to The Hague and
Arusha, respectively.

We applaud the recent actions by Serbia and
Montenegro and the Republika Srpska to improve
cooperation with the Yugoslav Tribunal, while
continuing to insist that they help bring Karadzic and
Mladic to justice.

We call on the Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda to end all ties to war crimes
defendants and to inform the Rwanda Tribunal about
where such defendants can be found.

We have noted the request of President Meron
with respect to a new courtroom and additional ad
litem judges, and we await with interest a detailed
request that includes a demonstration of how those
additional resources will improve the Court's
efficiency and the implementation of the Completion
Strategy.

