Mr. Motoc: I have the honour to brief, in turn,
the Security Council on progress achieved by the 1540
Committee in its work since 26 April 2005 and to
introduce the Committee's second programme of work,
for the period 1 July to 30 September 2005.

I shall speak first of the examination of national
reports. At the first joint briefing, which took place on
25 April 2005, I informed the Security Council that the
1540 Committee had entered the substantive stage of
its work and had begun examining national reports
with a View to monitoring States' implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee, with the
support of its experts, has already examined more than
50 national reports, as indicated in the first programme
of work. All information contained in the first national
reports examined by the Committee has been
summarized in the form of a matrix that reflects
provisions of the resolution. Additional information
identified by the Committee in the official public data
provided by States to the United Nations, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other
international organizations on steps they have taken in
the areas covered by resolution 1540 (2004) has also
been included in the matrix.
On the basis of this examination, and for the
purpose of completing its knowledge of the steps States
have taken, or intend to take, in responding to the
obligations set forth in resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee is reaching out to reporting States with a
view to soliciting additional information or to seeking
clarification in areas covered by their first reports. The
letters requesting additional information and/or
clarification have been addressed to the Missions in
New York. In the spirit of transparency, the Committee
decided to share the matrix with reporting States.

The Committee is determined to pursue the
examination of first national reports in an accelerated
manner. Our work is now supported by a group of eight
experts, and I am confident that the goal of completing
the examination of first-round country reports could be
attained by October 2005. Based on additional
information that we hope will be provided by States in
response to the Committee's letters and matrices, the
Committee will continue to monitor and facilitate the
efforts undertaken by all States to implement resolution
1540 (2004).

Insofar as reporting is concerned, by April 2006
the Committee will have to provide sufficient
information to enable the Security Council to assess
the progress States have made in implementing the
resolution. The Committee can properly fulfil its
mandate if all States report to it, as the Council has
called upon them to do. Without information the
Committee will not be able to present the Council a
comprehensive picture regarding measures put in place
or planned by all States to implement the provisions of
the resolution.

As of today, 118 States have submitted reports to
the Committee. We welcome the fact that the majority
of United Nations Member States have presented
information about their domestic non-proliferation
provisions, including their contributions to
international cooperation in this field. However, 74
Member States have yet to report.

I would like to take this opportunity to renew my
call upon those that have not yet done so to submit
their reports without delay. We recognize that some
States may encounter administrative difficulties in
reporting. Nevertheless, we would be grateful if they
could so inform the Committee, which would facilitate
assistance to them in complying with the reporting
requirements.

Other States might consider that they have
nothing to report, because they possess neither
weapons of mass destruction nor the capacity to
develop such weapons or related materials. However,
there are other ways in which non-State actors might
seek to exploit their territories, by using them for the
transit of goods, for the financing of illegal activities or
as a base to broker the sale of goods related to weapons
of mass destruction in other countries.

Recent events have shown that no one is shielded
from those threats. States should be aware that unless
they meet their obligations in full by enacting and
enforcing national, legal and regulatory measures and
by committing themselves to international cooperation
on non-proliferation, their territories could be exploited
in the worst possible way.

We realize that fully implementing the provisions

of resolution 1540 (2004) in many States is a long-term
project, but the Committee is fully committed to
supporting that work, which must start now. A full
report to the Committee can kick-start the process of
assistance. As Chairman of the 1540 Committee, I will
continue to raise the issue of further reporting through
the outreach activities that the Committee intends to
conduct in the near future. We will continue to talk to
all countries that have yet to report. The Committee is
also considering the possibility of reaching out to
Member States through international and regional
organizations. Regional seminars and workshops aimed
at raising awareness of the problem worldwide and
facilitating further reporting are also envisaged. I am
very encouraged that the issue of improving reporting
performance and late submissions will be considered in
a coordinated manner by our committees.

In considering national reports, the 1540
Committee has already identified both needs and offers
of assistance. We are encouraged by the fact that many
countries are already helping by providing expertise
and advice to Member States lacking the knowledge,
the experience or the resources to implement resolution
1540 (2004).

In addition, the offers of assistance contained in
the first national reports were summarized and
presented to all States. The Committee indicated the
areas in which assistance could be provided by a
specific country, as well as the way in which contacts
for assistance could be established on a bilateral basis.
The Committee will continue to develop its work in
this area, including the possibility of acting as a
clearing house on the issue of assistance. We stand
ready to consider all requests from States seeking help
in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and to
facilitate contacts with donor countries and
organizations. As an additional measure, the
Committee has appointed a coordinator among the
experts, who will manage assistance-related issues with
the support of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs.

Full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
all States is a long-term objective that, obviously, goes
beyond the current mandate of the Committee. It will
require continuous efforts at the national, regional and
international levels on capacity-building and
assistance, as well as monitoring and measuring the
progress made by States in implementing the
resolution. I am confident that the Security Council
will consider how best to ensure that the work of the
Committee makes an enduring contribution to non-
proliferation.

With respect to interaction with international
organizations, the Committee has continued its
interaction with the IAEA and the OPCW on ways in
which those organizations can support our work and
contribute to the process of implementing resolution
1540 (2004). As the process of examining national
reports continues, the Committee will interact and
cooperate as appropriate with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations in
order to facilitate the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Working relationships with those
organizations are being developed as appropriate.

In the same vein, the 1540 Committee will
maintain close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, as envisaged in resolution 1566
(2004) and in the 25 April 2005 statement by the
President of the Security Council (S/PRST/2005/16).
The Committee's experts will work closely with the
experts of the other committees, making every effort to
maximize synergies among the experts of all the
committees.

Transparency will remain a hallmark of the work
of the 1540 Committee. The Chairman and the Vice-
Chairmen will reach out on a regular basis to United
Nations Member States. That will include work with
the United Nations media, including through joint
briefings with the Chairs of the CTC and the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Committee. The 1540
Committee will continue to update its dedicated
website, as an additional source of information on
issues related to resolution 1540 (2004). A separate
entry on assistance will soon be added to that website.

The Committee will also continue its practice of
informing organizations outside the United Nations
about our work through attendance at international,
regional and subregional meetings and conferences. I
will make full use of those opportunities to address, in
particular, the issues of further reporting and
assistance. As I did last April, I now call on all
Member States to designate contact points for
resolution 1540 (2004) both in New York and in their
capitals and to make direct contact with the
Committee's members and its experts on matters
related to that resolution.

On behalf of the Committee, I look forward to the
cooperation of all States as the Committee goes
forward with its work in the months ahead.

