Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): This
meeting of the Security Council is taking place at an
extremely grave and sensitive time, when the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, are the target
of the most serious Israeli practices since last year's
provocation at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The sharp
deterioration in the situation of the Palestinian people
has reached a frightening level.

Despite its responsibility for international peace
and security, the Security Council has not been able
fully to shoulder that responsibility. That has sent the
wrong message to the Israeli authorities and has made
it possible for them to continue their practices against
the Palestinian people, their holy sites, their property
and their economic infrastructure. Today's meeting
reflects the urgent need - long promoted by the
international community - to put an end to this
serious escalation, which, owing to the presence of
Israeli occupying troops, has been transformed into a
policy of reacting to events rather than fully respecting
international norms with a view to ending the cycle of
violence.

The Israeli Government is facing off against the
Palestinian people and deliberately and systematically
taking retaliatory measures that run counter to the
most basic human values and the norms of international
law - not to mention human dignity and human
rights - as reflected in the report of Ms. Mary
Robinson, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The Israeli Government refuses to
abide by Security Council resolutions or by
international law, not to speak of agreements entered
into during the peace process, from Madrid to Sharm
el-Sheikh. Its current policy reveals its true colours;
that policy is to appear to be a Victim in a constant self-
defensive posture. How can we accept such a
deception, when the goal of the Israeli war machine has
been to use every means, including internationally
prohibited weapons, to strike Palestinian cities and
people, and to starve the Palestinians, confiscate their
property, violate their rights, desecrate their holy places
and even occupy Orient House in occupied Jerusalem
along with other Palestinian institutions with legal
standing under agreements signed by both parties.

Israel's arrogance has increased to the point
where it is now carrying out a policy of physically
liquidating Palestinian officials at a time when the
Palestinian people is engaged in forms of resistance
that fully accord with international law. The goal is to
usurp the internationally recognized legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people and to pursue the occupation of
its territory.

Now, the Security Council and the international
community at large must react to the highly dangerous
situation in the area. The Council must take firm action
to put an end once and for all to dilatory, ambiguous
Israeli policies aimed at circumventing Council
resolutions and agreements signed between the
Palestinians and the Israeli Government. The Council must
put pressure on Israel to choose dialogue and peace.

Irrespective of the magnitude of Israel's war
machine and the scale of its arrogance, the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians will not simply fade away.
Israel's policy of dominating the Palestinian people and
thwarting its aspirations will not succeed. The
sacrifices made daily by the Palestinian people bear
witness to the fact that it is determined to pursue its
legitimate struggle to create an independent State on its
own territory, with Jerusalem as its capital.

My delegation once again affirms that peace is
the only way. There must be respect for negotiations in
line with international legitimacy if the Middle East is
to break the downward spiral of violence that bears
such great risk and that could spin out of control if we
wait too long to take action.

At its special Cairo meeting and at the 2001 Arab
Summit Conference, the League of Arab States voiced
its unswerving support for peace as a strategic option.
The Palestinian people is committed to the peace
option and to the resumption of negotiations at the
point where they left off, on the basis of international
legitimacy and recognition of all norms and principles
on the basis of which the peace process was founded at
Madrid in 1991. In the face of this dilemma, the
international community must adopt a non-selective
approach. All of us - especially the permanent
members of the Security Council - must abide by
existing resolutions in order to find a just solution to
the Palestinian problem, and must no longer permit the
Israeli side to evade its obligations.

At the Cairo and Amman Arab Summit
Conferences, President Ben Ali called for protection
for the Palestinian people. This was called for also at
the recent Genoa meeting of the Group of Eight. In the
light of the Israeli Government's policies, protecting
the Palestinian people is now imperative. We must send
international observers to protect Palestinian civilians,
to whom the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, applies. We repeat our demand for a
meeting of the High Contracting Parties of that
Convention to make the occupying Power, Israel, face
up to its obligations vis-a-vis Palestinian civilians.

We should adopt all the important
recommendations devised by the Mitchell Committee
in Sharm el-Sheikh. They could bring the cycle of
violence to an end, put an end to the policy of
settlements, and provide protection for the Palestinian
people. We must also emphasize the need to set up a
monitoring mechanism in order to implement the
Mitchell recommendations properly, as well as the
recommendations of the G-8 group in order to create a
climate favourable to the resumption of negotiations.

The occupation of Orient House and numerous
other Palestinian institutions having legal status and
subject to the Palestinian Authority is an important and
serious setback in the process.

There can be no fair, comprehensive and
equitable peace in the region without the creation of a
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, or
without the withdrawal of Israel from the Golan
Heights and the occupied Lebanese territories. My
delegation underscores the importance for the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, to take up its responsibilities in order to
protect the life and legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people and to prevent any further risks in the region
that are a threat to peace and security.

