Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. J an Kubis, Special Representative
of Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his excellent
briefing, and expresses its appreciation for the work
that he has accomplished since 2015. As his mandate
draws to an end, it is an agreeable duty for us to express
our gratitude and admiration to him and his entire
UNAMI team.

Following the successful holding of parliamentary
elections on 12 May, the Iraqi Council ofRepresentatives
freely elected Mr. Barham Salih as President of the
Republic on 10 October. The appointment of Mr. Adil
Abdul-Mahdi as Prime Minister will allow the timely
formation ofa Government that will address, inter alia,
security issues, including the threat that the Islamic
State continues to pose in Iraq. Moreover, the official
visit by President Salih to Kuwait on 10 November
led to discussions on strengthening relations between
the two States. Similarly, the outcome of the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq,
organized under the auspices of the United Nations,
Iraq and Kuwait, is likely to further consolidate such
cooperation in the region.

Cote d'lvoire hopes that the new Government,
which is the product of various consultations, will
create conditions conducive to genuine reconciliation
among the Iraqi people and lasting stability, while
respecting unity and sociopolitical and ethnic diversity.
The Government must spare no effort to meet its many
challenges, which will include, among other things,
finding sustainable solutions to the issue ofthe dignified
return of internally displaced persons by providing them
with basic administrative and social services, while
ramping up the reconstruction of conflict-affected
areas and ensuring women's equal representation in
institutions and decision-making structures.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the constructive dialogue
between Iraq's central Government and the authorities
of the Kurdistan autonomous region, which is aimed
at finding a peaceful solution to the dispute arising
from the 25 September 2017 referendum on Kurdistan's
self-determination. The dialogue initiative has enabled
the Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to reopen for
international flights. My country hopes that the next
meetings between the Prime Minister of Iraq and
Mr. Nechirvan Barzani, Prime Minister ofthe Kurdistan
region, will finally enable them to settle the question of
the contested internal borders and the status of Kirkuk
province, as well as the management of oil and gas and
the revenue from those resources.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Government of Iraq and the international community
to prosecute the perpetrators of serious crimes. We
also welcome the visit to Iraq on 30 April by the
needs assessment mission of the Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh, as
well as the appointment on 31 May of Mr. Karim Asad
Ahmad Khan to head the Investigative Team, pursuant
to the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution
2379 (2017). The recent discovery of 200 mass graves
containing thousands of bodies in areas previously
under the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is convincing evidence of the urgent need for
the Investigative Team to intensify its work on the
ground and create a national database similar to those
established in Bosnia and Rwanda in order to identify
the victims of such barbarity as soon as possible.

My country urges the international community
to continue focusing sustained attention on the
reconstruction efforts undertaken by Iraq's central
authorities with regard to implementing its security-
sector reform programme, so that the country can
maintain professional defence and security forces
that are committed to respecting the rule of law and
human rights.

