Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, as well as
today's briefers, and we are grateful to the Indonesian
presidency for organizing today's debate on the
protection of civilians. We also welcome the Ministers
with us in the Council today.

As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council's addition of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict to its agenda, we continue
to see conflict and violence endangering civilians. The
Secretary-General's 2019 report on the protection of
civilians (S/2019/373) paints a dire picture. The United
States strongly believes that the full implementation
of international humanitarian law by all parties to
a conflict is essential to the protection of civilians,
but we also know that the laws of war are not always
universally observed, and that often has grave
consequences. We agree that Member States can and
should do more to protect civilians. And while it is
critical to acknowledge and focus on war's tragic
impact on civilians, it is also vital to recognize when
harm has been successfully avoided and understand
how that is achieved. Many countries, including the
United States, have rigorous programmes in their armed
forces for implementing protections for civilians under
international humanitarian law. Recommendations that
we identified during a study of civilian casualties in
2018 are being used to improve existing policies and
practices. The United States has been sharing and
building on good practices, including bilaterally and
during coalition operations. We encourage others to do
the same.

Globally, mass displacement and attacks on civilians
have become all too common, and attacks on the very
medical and humanitarian personnel working tirelessly
to alleviate suffering and save lives are a hallmark of
many conflicts. In Syria, civilians have suffered during
the eight-year conflict at the hands of a Government
that blatantly disregards their lives, including through
the horrific use of chemical weapons and indiscriminate
weapons such as barrel bombs in urban settings. And
I must point out that the White Helmets, contrary to
Russia's repeated attempts at vilification, continue to
heroically assist Syrian civilians attacked by their own
Government, attacks that we know Russia chooses
to ignore.

In Burma, more than 1.1 million civilians have
been driven from their homes by the military and
security services. Nearly 1 million languish in refugee
camps in Bangladesh. Ongoing fighting in Rakhine,
Shan and Kachin states continues to harm and displace
people, many of whom desperately need humanitarian
assistance. In South Sudan, the lack of safe, rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access means that people
starve and children suffer needlessly. More than
200,000 South Sudanese have fled to protection-of-
civilian sites knowing that they were not safe at home.
Their fears have been borne out in the blatant use of
sexual and gender-based Violence against women going
about their daily lives. We must hold the perpetrators
accountable and ensure justice for the victims.

It is critically important that humanitarian actors
have unhindered access to populations in need, and they
should be commended for their work to protect civilians
in the most challenging of circumstances. We support
the centrality of protection and continue to support
humanitarian organizations in strengthening their
protection efforts, particularly to expand community-
based protection that draws on the capacities of local
populations and partners.

Peacekeeping has become central to the protection
of civilians in conflict. With more than 95 per cent
of United Nations peacekeepers now operating under
mandates to protect civilians, the protection of civilians
is at the heart of modern peacekeeping. Unfortunately,
we still see far too many instances of peacekeepers
failing to take necessary action to protect civilians. To
address these shortcomings, we support the Secretary-
General's efforts to institutionalize a culture of
performance in which only the highest-performing
troops and police are deployed. We look forward to the
continued implementation of the Secretary-General's
performance policy framework and his commitment
to creating a system that ensures accountability. The
United States stands firmly behind the commitment to
enhancing performance in the protection of civilians
and encourages all Member States to do the same
by supporting the Kigali Principles, which were
designed to help peacekeepers effectively implement
their civilian-protection mandates. We also welcome
the forthcoming publication of the revised United
Nations policy on the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping, especially the integration of the
addendum on accountability. Significantly improving
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping requires
identifying standards, systematically evaluating
records and ensuring accountability for performance.

We also know that increasing women's full, equal
and meaningful participation in peacekeeping improves
operational effectiveness and a mission's ability to fulfil
protection-of-civilian mandates. We support efforts to
reduce barriers to women's participation and promote
their safety in peace operations.

It is not enough to be outraged by the accounts
we hear of the horrors inflicted on civilians trapped
in conflicts that they did not create. We must commit
to protecting civilians by turning rhetoric into
tangible action. The international community should
consistently bring attention to the protection of civilians
and develop responses for it.

