The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Dominican Republic.

The Dominican Republic would like to thank
Mr. Mohamed Chambas, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel and
Head of United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS), for his excellent briefing. We are
grateful for the important work that UNOWAS is doing
to support the consolidation of peace and democratic
governance in the region.

With regard to the political situation, we want to
commend the peoples of West Africa and the Sahel
for their conduct of free and democratic electoral
processes that have enabled stability to be maintained
in the region despite the difficulties arising from its
complex security and political challenges. We urge the
countries that will be participating in the next cycle
of elections to work to minimize tensions and manage
their differences with a View to ensuring peaceful
elections. In that context, we commend UNOWAS
efforts to promote dialogue between the parties so as to
fulfil their political agreements.

We are concerned about the security problems in
the region, especially the growing numbers of attacks on
civilians and soldiers by extremist groups, relapses into
violence between communities and piracy, among other
things, all of which lead to the loss of lives, violations
and abuses of human rights, displaced populations and
the destruction ofproperty, as has already been pointed
out today. This situation, which is exacerbated by
external factors, has meant that some 24 million people
in the region are in need of humanitarian aid. We urge
the international community to redouble its efforts to
implement the necessary mechanisms for protecting
those who are most vulnerable. The Dominican
Republic firmly condemns the sexual violence,
corporal punishment and arbitrary detention to which
women are subjected by terrorist groups, and we urge
that efforts continue to be made to adopt appropriate
legislative frameworks to eradicate and prevent such
abuses. We deplore the fact that despite the progress
that has been made, the representation of women in
high-level public positions in the region is minimal. We
believe that the launch of the Women's Platform of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the adoption of a road
map for the Platform's activities represent a positive
step in this direction. However, we should continue to
redouble efforts to increase women's empowerment and
political inclusion.

We also urge UNOWAS to continue supporting
processes for security-sector reform, and we call
on the region to maintain an integrated approach
to combating insecurity. Controlling the spread of
conflicts to neighbouring countries and ensuring that
the perpetrators of crimes are brought to justice is
crucial to achieving lasting peace in the region. The
quest for solutions to cross-cutting threats to peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel should focus on
joint initiatives such as the operationalization of the
Mano River Union cross-border security strategy and
other related projects. In that regard, we commend
the meeting of the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Economic Community of West
African States for its contribution to reaffirming their
commitments to cooperating on efforts to deal with
their regions' shared challenges.

The Dominican Republic is concerned about the
effects of natural disasters and extreme conditions
related to climate change in West Africa and the Sahel,
including floods, droughts and prolonged periods
of famine, which is to a great extent responsible for
undermining the means of subsistence available to
the people of the region, and which leads to a struggle
for survival and mass population displacements. In
that regard, in its presidential statement of 10 August
(S/PRST/2018/16), the Security Council acknowledged
the adverse effects of climate change, environmental
change and natural disasters in the region of West
Africa and the Sahel. We encourage UNOWAS and
the international community to continue their efforts
to overcome this great challenge at a time when we
are welcoming the conclusion of the first stage of the
analysis of the options available for tackling it from a
conflict-prevention perspective.

In conclusion, despite the great challenges facing
this region, we urge UNOWAS to continue working
together with regional and international partners to
implement joint solutions to ensure peace and stability,
stimulate sustainable and inclusive economic growth
and establish the conditions necessary for a better life.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
