Mr. Chergui (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the
brotherly State of Kuwait, for all that you have been
doing to restore and maintain peace and security around
the world. I also thank you for the invitation to address
the Security Council and participate in this afternoon's
meeting to provide the Council with an update on the
situation in Burundi.

(Spoke in French)

The African Union remains committed to restoring
peace and security in Burundi. Since the crisis broke
out in 2015, the African Union has been firmly
convinced that only an inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue can lead to a lasting solution to the political
crisis. It is with that understanding that the African
Union has stood staunchly behind the mediation efforts
of the East African Community, led by His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda, and
the facilitator of the inter-Burundian political dialogue,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of Tanzania.
I would like to publicly thank both of them today for
all they have done to support the Burundian parties in
finding a consensus-based and peaceful solution to the
situation that prevails in their country and to agree on a
road map for the holding of credible elections in 2020.

Nevertheless, despite the mediation efforts, the
inter-Burundian dialogue, the fifth round of which took
place in October 2018 and was considered a failure,
has not made any progress. Faced with that situation,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, sent a letter to President Museveni
and the leaders of the region, who act as guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
in which he expressed his regret and serious concern
at the ongoing deadlock in the inclusive dialogue,
which was jeopardizing the gains under the Arusha
Agreement. The Chairperson underscored the historic
responsibility borne by the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement at this critical juncture in the history of
Burundi and encouraged them to redouble their efforts
to encourage the Burundian parties to overcome the
challenges and safeguard the gains achieved in terms of
security and reconciliation.

There is no alternative: the inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue must resume as quickly as possible, as it is
undoubtedly the only way to promote and strengthen
national cohesion and thereby make it possible to
re-establish an enhanced climate of trust and pave the
way for renewal in Burundi.

With regard to the presidential elections, there
is a pressing need to speed up the putting in place of
conditions that would favour the holding of free and
transparent elections in a peaceful climate, leading to
a brighter future for the Burundian people. In other
words, the elections in 2020 should not be a source of
further division among the people of Burundi.

As Council members are aware, at the Nouakchott
summit in July 2018, the Heads of State and of
Government of the African Union welcomed the
announcement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that he
would not seek re-election in 2020. They also called
upon the African Union Commission to support the
Burundian Government and all political parties to help
them to work together to ensure that the upcoming
elections take place smoothly.

Against that backdrop, I led a listening mission to
Burundi from 5 to 7 November 2018 to explore the best
ways by which the African Union could assist Burundi,
especially in preparing for the elections scheduled for
2020. In that regard, we welcome the measures adopted

by the Burundian Government to begin preparing
for the elections, in particular the establishment, on
31 August 2018, of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, in line with the Burundian electoral code.
I think it is also worth noting that the opposition parties
have complained of arbitrary arrests of their members
and of steps being taken to hinder their political
activities on the ground. Burundi is in need of measures
to be taken to ensure calm and, as 2020 approaches, to
ensure that the political climate does not become too
fragile and that we can guarantee inclusivity, which
will be so essential for the smooth holding of elections.
It is crucial that speedy progress be made in those areas,
as Burundi faces other new challenges.

In terms of governance, despite a notable decrease
in the levels of violence, in particular in the capital,
Bujumbura, we are still receiving reports of ongoing
cases of human rights violations in the country's
provinces.

On the humanitarian front, the plight of refugees
and internally displaced persons remains a source of
concern. The voluntary repatriation organized for
Burundian refugees currently abroad in the subregion
and other countries of the continent continues. The
number of refugees repatriated from Tanzania and
Uganda in 2017 stood at 13,176. It had dropped to 9,825
by April 2019. It is worth recalling that the majority
of those repatriated between September 2017 and April
2019 entered the country from Tanzania, with a smaller
number coming from Uganda, and are residing in all 18
provinces the country.

The situation on the economic front remains
precarious, while combating poverty as part of the
national development plan requires urgent attention.

We reiterate our determination to continue to
support all efforts aimed at finding a lasting and
consensus-based solution to the situation at this critical
juncture, so as to assist Burundi in organizing free and
transparent elections. It is in that context that the Peace
and Security Council called upon the African Union
Commission, jointly with the East African Commission
and in coordination with the United Nations and all
the relevant partners, to agree to additional efforts
that could further support Burundi in the search for
lasting peace and security and increased reconciliation,
in particular through peaceful, inclusive and credible
elections in 2020. We are exploring the possibility of
reconvening the group of guarantor countries under the
2005 Arusha Agreement.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without paying
tribute to President Michel Kafando for his commitment
and close cooperation with the African Union.

At the very beginning of the year, we looked on
with admiration at the peaceful transfer of power in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The people of
Burundi also have the absolute right to hope for the
same and to consolidate stability in that region of the
continent, which has been so sorely tested.

