Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan and
congratulate the Government of Turkey for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his most recent report on Afghanistan
(S/2010/463) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Today's meeting comes at a crucial time for
Afghanistan, just over three months after the Kabul
Conference and less than two weeks since the holding
of our parliamentary elections. I am pleased to meet
with the Security Council today to discuss the current
situation in my country and shed light on the strategy
we will pursue to end violence and achieve lasting
peace and security.

I want to begin by saying a few words about our
recent elections, which gave Afghans another chance to
shape their future and consolidate our young
democracy.

Millions of Afghans from all segments of society
braved intimidations and threats of attacks, including
assassination, to cast their vote. By doing so, Afghans
reaffirmed their steadfast commitment to democracy
and self-determination. The unprecedented number of
young candidates and voters illustrates the degree to
which democracy is taking root in Afghan society.
Further, the significant increase in women's
participation is testament to the further empowerment
of women in Afghan political life.

Our elections were a major victory for democracy
in Afghanistan. Let me take this opportunity to convey
our gratitude to the United Nations and other partners
for providing financial and technical support for the
elections.

Just three months ago, Afghanistan and our
international partners gathered at the international
Kabul Conference to renew our partnership for lasting
peace, security and stability. Together, we adopted the
"Kabul Process", which focuses on increased Afghan
leadership across the board. We also presented our 23
national priority programmes, including the national
security policy and our national reconciliation
initiative, all of which were endorsed by the
international community.

Going forward, Afghanistan will pursue a
comprehensive strategy to implement the outcome of
the London and Kabul Conferences. We will work
towards gradual leadership in all State affairs, in
particular, security, development and governance. Our
objective is clear: a gradual transfer of responsibilities
towards self-reliance in ensuring social and economic
opportunities for all Afghans and enforcing the rule of
law throughout the country.

In the area of security, we will work to build the
size, capacity and operational capability of
Afghanistan's national security forces. In so doing, we
will meet a vital precondition for taking the lead in
combat operations in volatile provinces by 2011 and
for independently meeting our security obligations by
2014, with international forces offering back-up
support. I want to reiterate the importance, for
achieving this goal, of sustained international support
for the training, resourcing and equipping of the
Afghan national security forces.

Moreover, we have committed to a
comprehensive social and economic agenda to improve
the lives of all Afghans and achieve a sustainable
Afghan economy. In particular, we are giving special
focus to agricultural development, rural rehabilitation,
human resource development and economic and
infrastructure development to generate employment
opportunities and meet the immediate needs of our
people. I seize this opportunity to convey
Afghanistan's thanks and appreciation for the
international community's support and assistance.

Meanwhile, it is should be noted that Afghanistan
will not be able to attain its development goals without
greater responsibility for its finances. Afghans must
have a greater decision-making role in their own
development. We welcome the international
community's decision to channel 50 per cent of donor
assistance through our national budget by January
2012. That will lead to greater transparency and
efficiency in the utilization of development assistance
coming from donor countries.

At the same time, we have embarked on a
reinvigorated effort to combat corruption and
strengthen governance at all levels. Afghans are well
aware of the detrimental effect of the menace of
corruption and weak governance on the dignity, image
and prosperity of our country. We are fully committed
to effectively and resolutely ridding our society of
corruption.

In less than two months, Afghanistan and its
NATO partners will gather at the NATO Summit in
Lisbon to crystallize our joint strategy for the transition
to Afghan leadership in security matters in the country
in the coming years. We will update our international
partners on our progress in building our security forces
and discuss remaining challenges to that effect.

For the transition to succeed, we first have to find
a solution to Afghanistan's ongoing security problem.
Afghanistan has endured violence for more than 30
years. Almost 10 years after the start of our joint
efforts to stabilize Afghanistan, security remains a
problem. We have prioritized ending violence and
providing Afghans with what has eluded them for
decades: the chance to live in peace and security.

There will be no peace unless military efforts are
complemented by a robust and comprehensive outreach
initiative. That is why President Karzai launched a
reintegration and reconciliation initiative to ensure an
honourable place in society for members of the armed
opposition who are willing to surrender their arms,
renounce violence, accept our constitution, return to
normal life and embrace international human rights.

We recently established the High Peace Council
to oversee the implementation of reintegration and
reconciliation. The High Council is now operational
and will meet regularly. In addition, we welcome the
Security Council's review and updating of the
Consolidated List created pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) as important for implementing our peace
initiative. In this regard, we look forward to additional
updates, as additional de-listing requests are made.

Terrorism poses a grave threat to the security and
stability of our region and beyond. In this regard, we
remain concerned with the continued presence in our
region of safe havens and sanctuaries where terrorists
receive recruitment, training and logistical support.

It is ever more evident that addressing the
challenges facing Afghanistan and our region -
including terrorism, extremism and the production and
trafficking of narcotic drugs - will not be possible
without meaningful cooperation at the regional level.
For our part, Afghanistan remains fully committed to a
sincere and effective dialogue with Pakistan and other
regional countries in favour of the security and
prosperity of our region.

Just recently, together with the Government of
Pakistan, we signed the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit
Trade Agreement aimed at increasing bilateral trade
and generating employment opportunities. Moreover,
the signing of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India gas pipeline project and the conclusion of the
feasibility study for the Central Asia-South Asia
project for transfer of energy in the region are
milestones for the development and prosperity of our
region. We are confident that these projects will benefit
security and stability in Afghanistan and the region and
strengthen mutual trust and confidence.

Afghanistan is confident that by pursuing our
comprehensive national agenda for security,
development and governance, and by implementing our
reintegration and reconciliation initiative, we will
succeed in stabilizing Afghanistan and preventing the
enemies of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan from
regaining control of our country.

Nine and half years since the beginning of our
partnership with the international community to defeat
terrorism and achieve a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, we have come a long way. We attribute
our achievements to the sacrifices of the Afghan people
and the troops of our partner countries. A transition to
increased Afghan responsibility and ownership will be
our main priority over the coming years. We expect our
international partners to remain by us with fortitude
and commitment to ensure the successful conclusion of
that transition.

