I make this statement on behalf of Belgium and Germany, the humanitarian co-penholders. We would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. In July, civil society briefer Amany Qaddour asked us, the Security Council, to share the risk humanitarian aid workers are exposed to - the risk of displacement, violence, insecurity and, I may add, infectious diseases - and not to simply pass it down to those who already absorbed so much and in many cases sacrificed their lives in the process (S/2020/758, annex II). One week ago we remembered these victims on World Humanitarian Day. Syria, sadly, is at the top of the list of the deadliest places for humanitarian workers. We bow our head to those who gave their lives fulfilling humanitarian duties - but do we follow Ms. Qaddour's recommendation? Do we live up to humanitarian expectations, for instance, delivering aid via the most direct routes? In his most recent bimonthly report, the Secretary-General gave a first assessment of the consequences of the closure of Bab Al-Salam: "The first cross-border aid delivery dispatched to northern Aleppo via Bab Al-Hawa under the new resolution was subject to the anticipated challenges, resulting ina more costly, higher risk, less timely and, ultimately, less effective humanitarian response." (S/2020/813, para. 51) And in this first convoy, only seven trucks experienced neither the impact of combat activities nor harsh winter conditions on poor roads. Warehouses are still full because enough inventory had been stocked beforehand, but this will change. The numbers of trucks will have to increase significantly and the challenges and risks will grow further. The number of Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance and protection is growing. Years of war, mismanagement and oppression, now exacerbated by the economic crisis in neighbouring Lebanon, have aggravated the economic crisis in Syria. This has led to an additional 1.4 million people becoming food insecure over the past six months, while the most recent projections estimate that another 2 million are at risk of becoming food insecure: the total number could exceed 11 million soon. Furthermore, the spread of the coronavirus disease across the country is increasing exponentially. Testing capacities remain very low, so most cases may go unnoticed. The numbers we hear about may only represent the tip of the iceberg. The destruction of health facilities and the shortage of health workers dramatically imperil any response. All this indicates that more, not less, humanitarian access is needed, today and tomorrow. The countries that lobbied against cross-border access have to engage actively to improve crossline access. Consistent, safe and unimpeded access is urgently needed - and not only a spectacular one-time delivery via costly and time- consuming routes, such as Erbil- Damascus- Qamishli. What is needed is distribution to all people and health-care facilities, and not the regime deciding who is worthy of receiving aid and who is not. As of the end of August 2020, we have to acknowledge that cross-line assistance to the north-west is still not working and that many health stations in the north-east are still lacking most basic goods. As humanitarian co-penholders we stress again that the closing of Al-Yarubiyah in January and the closing of Bab Al-Salam last month contradict humanitarian logic. We have pushed as much as we could to find a solution guided by the humanitarian imperative and to keep those crossings open. The burden of responsibility lies with those countries that have systematically limited humanitarian access through the cross-border modality. We hope that they carefully listen to the consequences just described by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We hope that they will also try to contribute to diminishing the humanitarian impact of having closed those crossings. The Allouk water station is another example of how humanitarian arguments are defied. Ramesh Rajasingham just explained the latest problems. There is simply no excuse for denying access to water to millions of men, women and children. Doing this during the hot summer months and in the middle of a pandemic is even more inhumane. We ask all parties who bear responsibility to find a sustainable solution and to guarantee a constant supply of water for the region. Protection issues sadly persist not only for those in arbitrary detention or who are still missing, but also for those who have become victims of air or ground offensives. The numbers have significantly increased over the past months. We call on all parties to maximize restraint and consider the humanitarian repercussions of military actions. We condemn the recent attacks of terrorist groups. Let me again underline that any response should comply with obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. Finally, only a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can put Syria back on track towards peace. So the news this morning that the talks in Geneva could resume was very good.
