Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110) presented by
Mr. Modibo Toure, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), and the briefing by Ambassador Mauro
Vieira of Brazil in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

There has been no significant progress or visible
improvement in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, where
the general instability seems almost impervious to
change, thereby jeopardizing the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, which is unquestionably
the fundamental framework for a peaceful solution
to the crisis and for achieving sustainable and lasting
peace there. In our View, the negative effects are likely
to exacerbate matters if the parties cannot definitively
condemn sectarian interests and contribute effectively
to the mediation efforts and good offices of the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Bolivia firmly repudiates any action that could
destabilize or jeopardize the ongoing dialogue and
reconciliation process that has been established with
the participation of all the parties concerned.

We urge that the agreements be definitively
consolidated in line with the inclusive national dialogue,
which would enable Government members, the political
parties represented in the National Assembly and every
sector of civil society to arrive at a consensus and
implement the agreements constructively through a
legitimate commitment to achieving a lasting political
and social solution whose sole aim is benefiting the
people of Guinea-Bissau, in strict respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We acknowledge the active participation of
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and its Mission in Guinea-
Bissau, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and UNIOGBIS,
through its Special Representative, and their ongoing
efforts to achieve a rapprochement between the
conflicting parties. We believe that UNIOGBIS's work,
focused on initiatives aimed at creating opportunities
for dialogue and facilitating cooperation in the security
and political sectors with the goal of forming an
inclusive Government, must be reinforced. It will be
crucial to increase the Office's capacity to use peaceful
means to deal with the crisis if it is to have more
effective and efficient results. We therefore support the
recommendation in the Secretary-General's report that
the mission's mandate be renewed for another year.

We also commend the work being done by the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, appropriately chaired by Brazil, and
we emphasize the importance of strengthening
its coordination, information exchange and active
collaboration with the Security Council, in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. We continue to encourage the
initiative of the Women's Forum for Peace. The efforts
of women in Guinea-Bissau to achieve a political
solution shows that a gender perspective and female
participation in mediation and dialogue at all levels
are essential.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate once
again that in a time of political, institutional and social
crisis, ensuring the welfare of the population and
especially its most vulnerable sectors should be the
overriding interest guiding Guinea-Bissau on a path to
permanent stability.

