The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/332, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for
West Africa.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction continued progress in the overall
peace and security situation in West Africa. The
Council especially welcomes positive
developments in the areas of post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding, as well as
improvements in governance and rule of law.

"The Security Council, however, notes with
deep concern the resurgence of unconstitutional
changes of government, undemocratic seizures of
power, and, recalling the statement of its
President dated 5 May 2009, stresses again the
importance of expeditiously restoring
constitutional order including through open and
transparent elections.

"The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and recalls that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.

"The Council welcomes the continuing
important efforts of ECOWAS, in synergy with
the African Union, the United Nations and the
wider international community, consistent with
Security Council resolutions and decisions, to
settle conflicts and promote human rights,
democracy, rule of law and constitutional order in
West Africa.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concerns over the fact that the progress achieved
remains fragile. The Council is concerned in
particular by growing or emerging threats to
security in West Africa, notably terrorist activities
in the Sahel band, maritime insecurity in the Gulf
of Guinea, and illicit drug trafficking, which pose
a threat to regional stability with possible impact
on international security.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of addressing the illicit drug
trafficking and criminal activities by an approach
of shared responsibility, and encourages the
efforts by West African States to combat illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime, especially
through the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan on
illicit drug trafficking and organized crime. The
Council welcomes West African States' continued
leadership in implementing this Plan of Action
and UNOWA's role in support of the
implementation of this Regional Plan of Action,
and takes note of the proposal to strengthen its
capacity.

"The Security Council also commends the
joint action of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), UNOWA, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and INTERPOL
to help implement the ECOWAS Plan of Action
against illicit drug trafficking and organized
crime, and underlines the importance for them to
continue to strengthen their partnership on these
issues. It also commends national and
international partners such as the European Union
for their support to ECOWAS in the fight against
drug trafficking in West Africa.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance to take into account a comprehensive
strategy of conflict resolution and crisis
prevention while addressing the cross-border
issues and the regional challenges. The Council
supports the regional efforts to curb the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
to achieve the security sector reform.
09-39968

"The Security Council expresses its concern
on the impact of the global economic crisis on
West African economies, since the region is
already confronted with development challenges
such as rising food insecurity, climate change
adaptation and mitigation, and youth
unemployment. The Council encourages
continued engagement of financial institutions
and development partners to mitigate the adverse
effects of the decline in economic growth and
other destabilizing factors in West Africa.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the important role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the United Nations Office for
West Africa in promoting and strengthening a
09-39968

the

regional and integrated approach to cross-border
issues, as well as helping consolidate peace and
security, democracy and the rule of law, and
requests the Secretary-General, through his
Special Representative, to continue to develop
further the active cooperation existing between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2009/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
