Ms. Blais (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to start by thanking the United Kingdom for
convening this important debate. Let me also thank
the Secretary-General, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem from the PAIMAN Alumni
Trust for their thought-provoking briefing today.

I also want to extend my heartfelt gratitude to civil
society actors and human rights defenders around the
world for their courage in pursuing peaceful solutions
to conflict. I am referring to people like Chantal Bilulu,
a Congolese human rights defender who was recently
in Ottawa to launch Women of Courage, a project to
empower women peacebuilders at the grass-roots levels
in Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Philippines, South Sudan and the West Bank.

The briefers today have spoken eloquently about
the vital role that mediation processes play in conflict
resolution and prevention. I would like to pick up on
the issue of including women and youth, and express
Canada's full agreement with the call by the United
Kingdom and others for an increase in the number of
women mediators. A growing body ofresearch provides
evidence that, when women's groups strongly influence
peace negotiations, an agreement is much more likely to
be reached, while when women's groups are not involved
or have minimal influence, the chance of parties
reaching a peace agreement diminishes considerably.
The involvement of women's groups is also associated
with much higher rates of implementation once an
agreement is reached.

(spoke in English)
The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society are already doing
excellent work to involve women in mediation at the
local level. Canada is proud to be supporting three such
initiatives

The first is in Burundi, where women have
historically played an important role as agents of
peace. Canada is a donor to the Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, which has done exemplary work
in mediation and peaceful dispute settlement. In
partnership with UN-Women, the Fund established a
nationwide network of women mediators who organize
local-level dialogues, work with provincial and local
authorities and organize community dialogues. In only
two years, the Fund has enabled hundreds of women
mediators to mediate thousands of local conflicts, often
preventing disputes from erupting into armed hostilities.

In the second initiative, Canada has been funding
efforts to intense the engagement of women, youth and
churches in support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD)-led peace process in South
Sudan. We are also sponsoring a gender advisor within
IGAD whose task is to ensure that women's views
are shared and incorporated in the peace talks. The
constructive role of women, youth and churches has
made an important contribution to the peace agreement
that was signed in June. Incidentally, this was one of
the topics discussed last month by young people from
across Canada who gathered in Edmonton, Alberta, for
the South Sudan Youth of Canada Conference.

In the third instance, the extraordinary work
that Peace Ambassadors are doing in Mali is another
example of youth- and women-led initiatives that are
driving peaceful change in conflict-affected areas.
Peace campaigns, such as those organized by the
non-governmental organization Search for Common
Ground, are using radio as a tool to ensure the
transmission of accurate, constructive and conflict-
sensitive information about women's needs and rights
to the general public and local authorities.

Those initiatives illustrate what effective conflict
mediation looks like on the ground, day to day. It takes
the form of community peace dialogues, early-warning
monitoring, information dissemination and dispelling
false rumours, and active political engagement. From
Colombiato Yemen, fromAfghanistan to Guinea-Bissau,
mediation and dialogue efforts that include women and
youth have succeeded in reaching breakthroughs that
would not have otherwise been possible.
The United Nations has made major strides in
strengthening inclusive mediation, such as through
the establishment of a gender-balanced High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation, the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame' to ensure greater participation by women in
Libya's national dialogue process, and the efforts of
Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, to ensure
that the perspectives of women of all political stripes
are incorporated into the Geneva process.

However, despite this wealth of examples, prejudice
and intimidation too often deter women and youth from
participating in peace processes. If we want to achieve
meaningful and sustainable conflict resolution, we
must continue to work together - with United Nations
agencies, regional organizations and civil society
partners - to systematically and meaningfully engage
and empower women and youth so that they can be the
architects of lasting peace.

