Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I too welcome the Security Council's return to its traditional Chamber and the fact that its first meeting here concerns Mali. I hope that the situation will continue to improve and that this Chamber will be filled with representatives of Member States actively participating in the Council's work. I warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession of your country to the presidency of the Security Council for this month of October 2020 and express to the sisterly delegation of the Republic of the Niger and Ambassador Abarry our deep appreciation for their work guiding the Council last month. I would also like to convey the deep gratitude of the people of Mali to the Security Council, Secretary- General Antonio Guterres, all countries contributing troops to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and all partner organizations and friendly countries for their tireless efforts to help Mali to recover and stabilize. The Government of Mali takes note of the report of the Secretary-General under consideration (S/2020/952) and I thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Mali, for his outstanding briefing and updates on the latest developments in Mali. I also took careful note of the messages, appeals and comments of Council members. I pledge that I will faithfully convey them to the transitional authorities of Mali. I would now like to share some comments and observations on the report of the Secretary-General and the latest developments in Mali. As the Secretary-General's report so aptly notes and as reflected in many statements made today, the period under review was marked by socioeconomic problems and socio-political unrest in Mali, linked to the deterioration of the security situation in the country and governance issues and further aggravated by a post-electoral crisis following legislative elections. The numerous popular demonstrations that resulted from it were brought to an end by a military intervention, on 18 August, which sanctioned the resignation of the President of the Republic, preceded by the resignation of the Government and the dissolution of the National Assembly. Thus, the Comite national pour le salut du peuple was born, which immediately undertook consultations with all Malian stakeholders in order to agree, together, on the architecture and modalities of the transition in Mali. It was within this framework that national consultations were held from 10 to 12 September in Bamako, which enabled representatives of all components of the country to make an uncompromising diagnosis of the shortcomings of our democratic system, with a view to achieving the political and institutional reforms necessary for the overhaul of the Malian State. At the end of this participatory and inclusive process, the charter and road map for the transition were adopted. The main missions assigned to the transition relate to the restoration and strengthening of security throughout the national territory; the recovery of the State and the creation of the basic conditions for its re-establishment; the promotion of good governance; an overhaul of the education system; the adoption of a social stability pact; the launch of political, institutional, electoral and administrative reforms; the organization of general elections in order to pass power on to the legitimate authorities; and the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the Algiers process. The transition charter also specifies the bodies responsible for bringing the transition to fruition. Thus, in accordance with the charter, an inclusive electoral college proceeded to the designation on 21 September of Mr. Bah N'Daw as President of the Transition and Head of State, and of Mr. Assimi Goita as Vice-President. The President and Vice-President of the Transition were sworn in on 25 September. Subsequently, the President of the Transition and Head of State appointed Mr. Moctar Ouane as Prime Minister of the Transition and Head of Government. The Government, which comprises 25 members representing a range of national viewpoints, was formed on 5 October. I must underline here the notable entry into the Government of four representatives of movements signatories to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including two representatives of the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and two of the Platform coalition of armed groups. In the same vein, a 121-member national transitional council will soon be set up comprising stakeholders from all strata of Malian society. We have made considerable advances in a short period of time with a view to addressing the concerns that the Council has raised. Only a short time after the coup d'etat, we have a transitional President, a Prime Minister, a Government and a road map that must implemented over the 18 months of the transition. With respect to bringing about peace in the country, I can confirm the freeing yesterday of civilian and military personalities who had been arrested and detained in connection with the events of 18 August. Given the current context in Mali, it seems to me very important to reassure once again all our partners that our national authorities remain determined to respect all national and international commitments to which Mali has freely subscribed, in accordance with the principle of State continuity. In that regard, I would like here unambiguously to reiterate the determination of the transitional authorities to continue relentlessly with the diligent implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The investiture speech of the President of the Transition is proof of this, and the presence, as I noted earlier, in the Government of representatives of the signatory movements to the Agreement is a very clear indication of the will of the Malian parties to pay particular attention to that central question. In addition, the transitional authorities of the Transition have also made a commitment to ensure respect for human rights throughout the national territory, in particular in the context of the fight against terrorism, in accordance with Mali's international commitments, including by the Malian Defence and Security Forces. We cannot fail to mention here the regional dimension of instability in the Sahel. The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force has now reached a fairly encouraging level of operationalization, and the results obtained are quite significant. Next month we will have the opportunity to share details on the Joint Force with the Council. However, the Force still needs to see the fulfilment of the promises of support made by the G-5 Sahel partners in order to help consolidate the work done by the Force on the ground. I would like here to echo the call made by the Secretary-General and the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel in favour of a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and of the predictable and sustainable funding of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, including through the United Nations. Mali's sustainable stabilization process is at a critical juncture. This is a decisive period for peace and stability in Mali and in the Sahel. Success in that area depends first of all on the sacred union of Malian forces to save our country, and I can assure the Council that the transitional authorities are fully committed to laying the foundations for the rebuilding of Mali. I must also state emphatically that the success achieved in this crucial period also depends on the level of international support for exiting the crisis. I take this opportunity to express the warm thanks of the transition and the people of Mali to the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS for the tireless efforts they have deployed to support Mali in exiting the crisis. Its efforts have been pivotal, and our peoplewill never forget them. I also welcome the lifting of the ECOWAS sanctions, a very positive step for the Malian people. I also thank the African Union, the European Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the International Organization of la Francophonie and all of our bilateral partners that have supported us during this particularly difficult time. I also commend the outstanding work done on the ground by the women and men of MINUSMA since 2013, working alongside us and under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, under conditions that I know are not easy, even extremely difficult and often dangerous, far from family and country. I reiterate the gratitude of the transitional authorities and the people of Mali to French-led Operation Barkhane, to the countries contributing troops to MINUSMA and to all bilateral and multilateral partners for their continuing support aimed at a definitive settlement of the Malian crisis. I would conclude by paying a particularly strong tribute to all of the victims - I repeat, all the victims - of the Malian crisis, be they civilian or military, foreign or Malian, killed in the line of duty. The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
