Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I also wish to thank
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne for their
valuable and informative briefings.

This debate is most timely, as the implementation of
reform requires the greatest possible exchange of Views
on the part of the entire United Nations membership in
seeking mechanisms that are commensurate with the
nature of the challenges that the Security Council must
face today ifit is to fully carry out its mandate.

The first issue we would like to highlight is the
need to continue to explore mechanisms that will lead
to the formal adoption of the rules of procedure of the
Security Council. We trust that today's dialogue will be
constructive and advance that effort.

We also cannot ignore the fact that the adoption
of resolutions and decision-making within the Council
requires broad and complex debate. Nevertheless,
if the Council is to be more effective in taking more
integrated and inclusive decisions, we must ensure that
interested Member States participate in preliminary
debates so that those resolutions are adopted in their
entirety and take such considerations into account.

My delegation is of the View that such participation
with sufficient time prior to the adoption of resolutions
would greatly encourage the entire membership to
contribute to and fully support the work of the Security
Council. It would also enable progress in the goal of
ensuring more transparent working methods in this
organ. It would make more sense to convene an open
debate before the date of adoption of the respective
Council decision, which would allow the necessary
time to reflect upon the points of view presented by the
Council members.

Colombia deems it very worthwhile to offer more
informal opportunities to States that are not members of
the Council to interact both with the Council and with
the subsidiary bodies, for example the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We wish to highlight that one of
the priorities of Colombia in its capacity as Chair of the
PBC for 2019 is the strengthening of the Commission's
advisory role to the Security Council. The Commission
has seen the relevance of that advisory role increase,
particularly with regard to country-specific issues, and
the Security Council has been increasingly requesting
the advice of the Commission. That is a positive trend,
and we wish to strengthen even further the relationship
between the Council and the Commission.

Additional briefings, interactive meetings and
events that encourage that methodology are just some of
the complementary tools that would be very beneficial
for that purpose. Consequently, for my delegation, a
top-tier, high-priority issue is the institutionalization
of the Council's practice of holding frequent and
informative informal meetings on the issues under
discussion by the Council and subsidiary bodies that
States that are not members of the Council can attend.
This morning we heard statements reiterating the need
for that mechanism, with the purpose of reinforcing
the principle of representativeness within the Council,
moving forward in line with the aspiration of the
entire membership to be better reflected in decisions.
The use of the veto power and aspects of the regional
composition of the Council are matters requiring
continued dialogue. However, the Council can also
take the initiative to allay the concerns of the States
Members of the Organization by implementing more
inclusive working methods, such as those that have
been mentioned.

Secondly, we think it is necessary to increase the
quality and analytical content of the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly. The
report is an integral part of the responsibilities of the
Council, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which is why it should not be treated as a
procedural matter, in which decisions and agenda items
are referenced. Rather, it should incorporate greater
detail on the tenor of the discussions that are held and
the results achieved based on the resolutions adopted,
with a view to adding value to the considerations and
observations of the General Assembly regarding the
actions of the Security Council.

Ensuring greater and improved access to
information through informative briefings addressed
to all interested parties, including regional and
subregional organizations, would be very significant
and provide essential elements for the Council, in the
light of its democratic nature. Increasing the number of
open-format Security Council meetings and keeping to
a minimum the number of closed or private meetings,
in the understanding that the latter should be the
exception and not the rule, is an option that should be
taken into account for the definitive rules of procedure
of the Council.

Facilitating timely access on an equal footing by
those States that are not members ofthe Security Council
to draft resolutions and draft presidential statements,
as well as to other documents issued by the Security
Council, is a step that should not be overlooked.

In the light of the aforementioned and against
the backdrop of the need to take steps towards the
consolidation of the rules of procedure of this body,
Colombia is of the View that all of these provisions
would serve to strengthen the role of the Security
Council as a body that responds to the aspirations of
all the States Member of the Organization, which
are being voiced in increasingly insistent ways for
a more transparent, democratic, representative and
systematically accountable body.

The Security Council is a very valuable body in
the broader architecture that underpins multilateralism,
and it cannot be left behind with respect to the
implementation of the aforementioned measures. That
is the View of my delegation and of many others. This
is a body that carries great weight and inspires others
as the epicentre of dialogue and understanding among
nations. For that reason, the time is right to be more
strategic, concrete and pragmatic in living up to the
mandate that has been conferred upon this body.

