Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The international community is following with
deep concern the situation that has arisen in recent weeks
in the north of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, where
large-scale fighting is continuing. Disregarding the
aspirations of the Afghan people for the restoration of
peace and the preservation of the integrity of the country,
the Taliban have undertaken yet another attempt by force of
arms to extend their control over the entire territory of
Afghanistan. The will of the international community has
thereby been ignored and its efforts to establish an inter-
Afghan negotiating process brought to nought.

A new phase of the civil war is destabilizing the
situation in the entire region of Central Asia and beyond it.
It creates a direct threat to the southern borders of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Such a course is
fraught with the most serious consequences for international
peace and security. The military expansion of the Taliban
movement in the northern region of Afghanistan is being
carried out with direct external assistance and the
involvement of military personnel in planning and logistical
support for Taliban operations, as well as directly in
military participation.

This support, rendered despite the repeated appeals of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General for it to
cease, only further fans the flames of dangerous military
confrontation. Foreign interference in the Afghan conflict
must cease. Attempts to conceal the truth about such
interference or obliquely to justify it by references to the
past history of Afghanistan are simply not understood by
the international community.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned over
reports coming in from the territories seized by the Taliban
about ethnic- and religious-based persecution, ethnically
motivated acts of forced displacement of large segments of
the population and violations of international conventions
relating to the treatment of prisoners of war and of the
rights of persons not involved in combat.
Russia is shocked at attacks on United Nations
personnel in the territory controlled by the Taliban,
including the killing of Afghan staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme in Jalalabad,
and the Military Adviser to the United Nations Special
Mission in Kabul. We demand that the necessary
investigation be carried out and that the Taliban enact
necessary measures to ensure secure conditions for the
activities of international staff which would enable them
to return to Afghanistan in the near future and to continue
their work there.

Russia strongly condemns the seizure by the Taliban
forces of the Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic
of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and the abduction of the staff of
the Consulate-General and other Iranian nationals. We
join our voice to the calls for the immediate release of the
Iranian nationals and their unimpeded and safe exit from
the territory of Afghanistan.

Actions of this kind are further confirmation of the
Taliban's total scorn for civilized standards of conduct and
disrespect for the basic tenets of international law. They
run counter to the age-old traditions and culture of the
noble Afghan people.

We note with concern that the continuation of the
Afghan conflict creates an environment conducive to
international terrorism and to the illegal production of and
trafficking in drugs.

In Afghanistan, particularly in the territories
controlled by the Taliban, violations of basic human rights
are continuing, particularly those of women and girls. We
call upon all States to respect the cultural and historical
legacy of Afghanistan and to use all their influence in the
country to convince the Afghan side of the need to
respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
its citizens.

Convinced that there can be no military solution to
the Afghan conflict, the Russian Federation strongly
supports efforts aimed at a political settlement in
Afghanistan that responds to the interests of all Afghans.
We support the efforts of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and advocate the continued active
role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in the
settlement of the conflict.

 

Russian representatives have consistently pursued this
policy in their contacts with the parties to the conflict, both
with the northern alliance and with the Taliban. Our
position is that such contacts should make the parties to the
conflict aware that the expansion of controlled territories by
military means will lead neither to a lasting peace in
Afghanistan nor to international recognition of those who
use such methods.

A comprehensive settlement of the conflict is possible
only through establishing a government in Afghanistan that
is made up of Afghans themselves and that balances the
interests of all segments of the Afghan population,
including the representatives of the major political and
military forces. We are prepared to cooperate with such a
government so that the Afghan economy can be quickly
restored and peace and stability can be established in the
region and in the country.

All these considerations have been reflected in the
draft resolution to be adopted today by the Security
Council. The draft resolution also contains guidelines that
should help focus international efforts on the priorities of
fostering a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we should like to thank all those who
have contributed to the reaching of agreement on the draft
resolution, which reflects a consensus of the members of
the Security Council.

