Mr. Gopinathan (India): Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, Permanent Representative, would have very
much liked to have delivered the statement made by us
under this item on 29 March. He was indisposed that
evening, and as he is out of town today he has
authorized me to make the statement on his behalf.

I would like to begin by expressing our
delegation's deep appreciation at seeing you, Sir,
preside over the deliberations of the Security Council
this month. We wish you every success in your
presidency and assure you of the fullest cooperation of
our delegation. We would also like to thank the
delegation of Norway for the effective manner in which
it guided the work of the Council in March.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made in the Council earlier today by Ambassador
Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South Africa, in
his capacity as Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement. We had already intervened in the Council
debate on this item during the emergency session
convened on 29 March. Our statement today seeks only
to provide additional elements with regard to our
position on the crisis in the Middle East.

The Honourable Jaswant Singh, External Affairs
Minister of India, has spoken to President Yasser
Arafat and Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister Shimon Peres of Israel during the last two
days. Expressing India's deep distress at the recent
events, he called upon both to implement Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002), which enjoins both
parties to a meaningful ceasefire and withdrawal, the
immediate cessation of all acts of violence and full
cooperation with United States Special Envoy Zinni.

Minister Jaswant Singh told Deputy Prime
Minister Peres that by incarcerating President Arafat
by virtually imprisoning him, Israel was compounding
difficulties, rather than lessening them, making the task
of bringing peace that much more difficult. The
External Affairs Minister conveyed to President Arafat
that India considered him the symbol of Palestinian
nationhood and was concerned about his safety and
well-being. The situation needed to be contained and
controlled. Already a large number of innocent
civilians on both sides had been killed, and this needed
to be stopped. The situation was distressing and it was
not acceptable that it had come to such a pass. India
stood by the people of Palestine in their hour of need.
The External Affairs Minister conveyed to both
President Arafat and Deputy Prime Minister Peres that
India stood ready to do anything to bring peace back to
West Asia.

President Arafat's Special Envoy, Hani al-Hassan,
called on Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee this
morning in New Delhi. President Arafat conveyed his
appreciation for India's consistent support to him and
to the Palestinian cause and the Palestinian people.
Prime Minister Vajpayee expressed concern about
President Arafat's health and well-being. He stressed
that India is deeply troubled at the current situation and
stands ready to do whatever it can to work for peace in
the region.

In conclusion, I would like to quote from Jaswant
Singh's statement in Shanghai on 1 April, during his
recent Visit to China. Referring to the situation in the
Middle East, the External Affairs Minister said:

"President Arafat represents the authority of the
Palestinian people. To subject President Arafat to
this treatment is to denude the Palestinians of the
sense of their nationhood. This must stop. What
must also stop are acts of terrorism. Violence
begetting violence is not an answer. United
Nations Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
enjoins Israel and Palestine to maintain peace.
That is mandatory. Equally, all other agreements
in this regard, the Tenet plan, the Mitchell Report,
United Nations Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and land for peace can
bring the peace process on the raise. This is not
just a concern for the Middle East, but is a much
larger global concern."

To this I would only add the immediate and
effective implementation of resolution 1402 (2002),
adopted by the Council in the early hours of the
morning of 30 March. We call upon the Security
Council to work together with the parties concerned in
order to bring an end to violence and work towards the
immediate resumption of dialogue and negotiations so
as to achieve lasting peace and security for all in the
region.

