Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the United States for having taken the initiative to
convene this special debate on an issue that is of concern
to all of us. I thank the Secretary-General; Dr. David
Nabarro, United Nations System Senior Coordinator
for Ebola Virus Disease; and the Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Margaret
Chan, for their briefings, and Mr. Jackson Niamah of
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) for his testimony on
the ground.

Luxembourg pays tribute to the heroic commitment
of MSF volunteers and of the thousands of health-care
workers, national and international, in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea and throughout West Africa. They must
be given every possible guarantee for their own safety.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.

Luxembourg shares the deep concern about the
exponential growth of the Ebola epidemic. It is no
longer a simple humanitarian emergency, but, rather,
a multidimensional crisis that threatens institutions,
societies and the economies of the countries affected
by the epidemic and of West Africa as a whole. As
a response, we need a general mobilization of the
international community. Resolution 2177 (2014),
which we have just adopted at the initiative of the
United States and which Luxembourg had the honour
to co-sponsor, reflects the commitment of the Security
Council to address this threat to peace and security.
To stop the Ebola epidemic, we must use all
means - public and private, civil and military - at
our disposal. The United Nations has a key role to play
in coordinating this global effort. That is the reason
for the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, which has just been announced by the
Secretary-General. We fully support the launching of
the Mission as soon as possible.

The Mission must, on the one hand, support the
efforts of the countries stricken by the epidemic to
contain it, and must also, on the other, assist countries
in the region that are not yet affected by the Ebola virus
to prevent its outbreak. This health-promoting United
Nations Mission will also coordinate and channel the
contributions made by all.

For its part, in addition to the contributions it has
already made through the European Union, Luxembourg
has participated in the following undertakings: the
WHO regional response programme to the Ebola virus,
the MSF treatment protection programme, the World
Food Programme special operation aimed at providing
humanitarian air service in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and an initiative to fight Ebola in cooperation
with Lagos University Teaching Hospital.

In view of the High-level Meeting to be convened
by the Secretary-General on 25 September, we
are considering the possibility of making further
contributions, in close consultation with the countries
of West Africa and the United Nations.

Acting quickly to stop the Ebola virus must go hand
in hand with long-term efforts aimed at preventing the
recurrence of such a crisis in future. We must face up
to the structural challenges that condemn the greater
part of the citizens of West Africa to live in poverty and
precarity and that increase their vulnerability to shocks
such as the Ebola epidemic.

The Peacebuilding Commission will have a role
to play in this context by supporting the strengthening
of accountable and effective State institutions. The
Guinea configuration of the Commission, over which
I have the honour of presiding, is listening closely to
the authorities of the Republic of Guinea to review
peacebuilding priorities in the light of the current crisis,
and we are ready to work with our colleagues from the
Liberia and Sierra Leone configurations to strengthen
the regional approach in this context.

