Mr. Annabi: Since we last briefed the Security
Council on 12 January, the situation in Sierra Leone has
remained relatively stable, although there have been a
number of serious incidents, to which I will refer in this
briefing.

As members of the Council are aware, in the letter
of 23 December addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Secretary-General, as well as in his
subsequent report to the Council of 11 January, the
Secretary-General informed the Council that the
Government of Nigeria had decided to repatriate its troops
participating in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone.

On 13 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria wrote to the Secretary-General indicating that his
Government was

"prepared to suspend for 90 days the withdrawal of
those forces deemed necessary to maintain security
in Sierra Leone if they can be re-flagged as United
Nations peacekeeping troops".

In anticipation of the adoption of the draft resolution that
would expand the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), we have initiated negotiations with a high-
level Nigerian delegation headed by the Chief of Staff of
the Nigerian Armed Forces, Major-General Malu, which
in fact started in Freetown today. The purpose of these
talks is to discuss the modalities for the incorporation of
additional Nigerian troops and equipment into UNAMSIL.
As of today, there are reportedly 5,500 ECOMOG troops
remaining in Sierra Leone, mostly concentrated in and
around Freetown peninsula.

Turning now to UNAMSIL'S deployment, Council
members will remember that, in view of the withdrawal
of Nigerian troops from several key locations in Sierra
Leone at the end of December last year, UNAMSIL had
to accelerate its own deployment, despite the substantial
risks in doing so, to Makeni, Magburaka, Kenema and
Dam. At present, United Nations troops are also
deployed in the Freetown peninsula, at Lungi airport and
its vicinity, Papel and Tasso Islands, Port Loko, Lunsar,
Masiaka, Rogberi and Mano Junction. A quick-reaction
company from India, as well as a guard and
administrative company and an engineer company, are
also deployed in and around Freetown. In addition, a
reconnaissance is underway in the area of Kailahun in
preparation for the deployment of the Indian battalion to
that area.

 

The total strength of the military component of
UNAMSIL currently stands at 4,830 personnel, including
232 military observers. It should be noted, however, that
some battalions that have joined UNAMSIL lack essential
equipment, which of course affects their operational
capabilities. It should also be noted that during the course
of last month there were several incidents in which
UNAMSIL peacekeepers were confronted by rebel
elements, but did not respond, in our view, in a satisfactory
manner. This is of course a matter of particular concern to
us here at Headquarters, but also to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, and
to the Force Commander, Major-General Jetley. The matter
was extensively addressed and discussed at the troop
contributors' meeting, which was held on Friday of last
week, and on Friday the Military Adviser also held a
separate meeting to discuss these issues with the
representatives of the major troop contributors. At the
same time, the Special Representative and the Force
Commander have been consulting on the ground with all
the contingent commanders to impress on them the need to
apply UNAMSIL's rules of engagement resolutely, and the
need to apply them strictly, in accordance with the
mandates entrusted to UNAMSIL by the Security Council.
Simultaneously, the Special Representative is working with
Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma in order to put an
end to the recent attempts by rebel elements to restrict
UNAMSIL's freedom of movement, and in order to secure
the return of the weapons and equipment that have been
seized from United Nations troops by these rebel elements.

The security situation in the country, I have to say,
remains difficult, with a continued high level of ambushes,
lawlessness and banditry in a number of areas. Continued
attempts to restrict the freedom of movement of United
Nations personnel in rebel-held areas are also, as I just
mentioned, a source of major concern. While Freetown and
Lungi remained relatively calm, there was in recent weeks
a discernible increase in rebel-related activity, in particular
along the Port Loko-Lungi road. In Port Loko itself,
following a grenade explosion in a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) camp, the security
situation has remained tense. Ceasefire violations have also
been reported in the areas of Occra Hills, Pepe] Island and
Masiaka. In addition, UNAMSIL has reported tension at
Daru and Segbwema as a result of movements by armed
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) elements.

On the other hand, since we last briefed the Council,
more than 60 child soldiers have been released by ex-Sierra
Leone Army (SLA) rebel commanders at Occra Hills.

As regards the disarmament process, it has continued
to be slow, except for in the Port Loko area, where a
large number of additional combatants were disarmed
recently. As of 3 February - the end of last week -
7,616 ex-combatants had been disarmed. There continue
to be incidents in which ex-combatants arrive at DDR
sites with no weapons or with only hand grenades. It
should be noted that at a recent Joint Monitoring
Commission meeting, held in Freetown, rebel
representatives claimed that the RUF leadership had not
allowed their commanders to surrender their weapons.
Such ambivalence on the part of the rebel leaders of
course raises questions regarding their readiness to
cooperate in good faith with the DDR process and to
implement their commitments under the Lome
Agreement.

In the meantime, there have been indications that
President Kabbah, Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul
Koroma may issue a press release proposing 29 February
as the deadline for the end of the disarmament process.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
believes - and we agree of course - that any deadline
for disarmament should be realistic. He is currently
discussing this issue with the President and the other
parties concerned.

Regarding the human rights situation, on 20 and 21
January two United Nations human rights assessment
missions were conducted in Port Loko and Kabala. In
Port Loko, most human rights abuses appear to be
perpetrated by ex-SLA elements from the Occra Hills
area. There are almost daily reports from this area of
looting, burning of houses, harassment and abductions of
civilians, as well as of sexual abuse and individual
abductions.

In the meantime, in Kabala, incidents of harassment,
abduction and rape somewhat subsided last month.
However, the civilian population continues to be harassed
by ex-SLA combatants roaming the area in search of food
and shelter. In RUF-dominated areas around Alikalia, the
continued imposition of so-called taxation is having an
effect on local food availability.

There has been some progress with regard to the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The Attorney-General and the Minister of
Justice of Sierra Leone on 2 February informed the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that the
draft statute to establish the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission had been finalized. It is expected that the

 

draft statute will be circulated to the Cabinet shortly, with
a view to its adoption by Parliament, hopefully later this
month. At the same time, UNAMSIL and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
continue to assist the Government in its preparations for the
establishment of the Human Rights Commission.

As regards the humanitarian situation, plans for the
rapid expansion of humanitarian operations inside the
country, starting with Makeni, continue to be delayed by
insecurity. A comprehensive inter-agency humanitarian
assessment mission to those areas was postponed until this
week due to rebel activity. In Kabala, humanitarian
workers also continue to be harassed by disarmed
combatants. As a result, despite the efforts of United
Nations agencies, humanitarian activities in the northern
and eastern parts of the country remain limited.

The World Bank, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme have just completed a high-level
mission to Sierra Leone to explore operational responses
aimed at strengthening the linkage between humanitarian
assistance and early reconstruction and development.
Preliminary consultations to this effect with members of the
humanitarian community are scheduled to take place shortly
in Geneva.

Finally, a word about recent political developments.
On 24 January, the second meeting of the Joint
Implementation Committee was held in Freetown. This
meeting confirmed the commitment of ECOWAS to remain
fully involved in the peace process. The current Chairman
of ECOWAS, President Konare of Mali, has announced his
intention to undertake - together with President Kabbah,
Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma - visits to the
provinces of Sierra Leone, in order to try to give a fresh
impetus to the DDR process. President Konare also
appointed a Special Envoy for Sierra Leone to ensure
effective coordination between ECOWAS and other partners
in the peace process.

The implementation of the Lorne Agreement, however,
remains difficult. On 20 January, while addressing RUF
commanders in Makeni, Foday Sankoh instructed them not
to allow the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.
The Special Representative, Mr. Adeniji, reacted to this
with a strongly worded public statement, which in turn led
Foday Sankoh to state that his comments had been
misunderstood.

On 23 January, Foday Sankoh, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Commission of the Management of
Strategic Resources, National Reconstruction and
Development (CMRRD), announced a moratorium on all
mining activities, as well as the cancellation of existing
mining licenses issued before 24 January. This
announcement was publicly supported by the Government.
Some parliamentarians, however, have voiced their
uneasiness with this decision. In this connection, it
should be noted that neither the CMRRD nor the
Commission for the Consolidation of Peace are yet
operational, and the Government is currently consulting
with Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma on how to expedite the
work of these institutions. In the meantime, Mr. Koroma
officially resigned from the Sierra Leone Army on 28
January, apparently to be able to pursue his goals through
political means, while Mr. Sankoh publicly alluded to the
possibility of running for the presidency in the elections
to be conducted next year.

In conclusion, we feel that it would be important for
regional leaders and Security Council members, whether
individually or collectively, to continue to engage all
parties in this process to impress upon them the need to
fulfil their commitments under the Lome Agreement and
to cooperate fully with UNAMSIL in the implementation
of its mandate. In this connection, President Konare's
proactive approach towards the peace settlement in Sierra
Leone is a very encouraging development. The proposed
joint visit of President Konare, President Kabbah,
Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma to the provinces also
highlights the urgent need to extend State administration
throughout the country.

It is hoped that the establishment of a credible
UNAMSIL presence in strategic locations throughout
Sierra Leone, including in and around Kailahun, will
facilitate that process. We and the Special Representative
are actively working towards that end. At the same time,
it would also be important to pursue and strengthen the
ongoing bilateral and multilateral efforts regarding the
training of the Sierra Leonean military and civilian police
in order to advance the implementation of the Lome
Agreement.

