Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her briefing on her Office's work pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) to seek accountability for
atrocity crimes committed in Libya.

As we have said many times before in these
briefings, those responsible for crimes committed
during the 2011 revolution must be held to account. The
Security Council unanimously referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court to guarantee
that the atrocities of the Al-Qadhafi regime would not
go unpunished and that those Victims would receive a
measure ofjustice.

Today we reiterate our demand for accountability.
We have called for Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to be
brought to The Hague to stand trial for crimes against
humanity for the murder and persecution of hundreds
of civilians in 2011. We note that the International
Criminal Court has also issued an arrest warrant
for AI-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, the former head
of Libya's notorious Internal Security Agency, in
connection with the alleged torture and other serious
crimes against individuals perceived to be enemies of
the Al-Qadhafi regime.

Turning to more recent events, the United States
continues to have grave concerns about the human rights
situation in Libya. We have noted the International
Criminal Court's arrest warrant for Major Al-Werfalli,
who has been accused of unlawful killings. We remain
deeply concerned by those allegations and reiterate our
calls for the relevant Libyan authorities to ensure that
Al-Werfalli is held accountable for alleged crimes, in

accordance with international law.

We are also horrified by the appalling reports of
human trafficking in an alleged slave market in Libya.
We commend the Government of National Accord's
condemnation of slavery and welcome its ongoing
investigation into reports of abuse of migrants. We
urge the Government of National Accord to accelerate
its efforts to hold those responsible to account and
cooperate closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to assist migrants and
improve their living conditions.

The United States supports ongoing efforts to
identify and designate individuals and entities that
threaten the peace, stability or security of Libya,
including through the commission of serious human
rights abuses and violations. In particular, designations
of those who engage in migrant smuggling or human
trafficking are an important part of the international
effort to promote accountability in Libya. To counter
those and other abuses in the long-term, Libya must
first overcome its political impasse in order to achieve a
stable, unified Government capable of ending impunity,
defeating terrorism, safeguarding the rule of law and
providing security and prosperity for all Libyans.

To that end, we continue to support United Nations
Special Representative Salame as he works to advance
political reconciliation and help Libya prepare for free
and fair elections by the end of the year that are credible
and conducted in a peaceful manner. We look forward
to the continued collaboration with our international
partners, including through the work and attention of
the Security Council and the Human Rights Council, to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous Libya.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
States concerns regarding the ICC's activity with
respect to the situation in Afghanistan, including our
long-standing and continuing principled objection
to any ICC investigation or other activity concerning
United States personnel absent United States consent or
a Security Council referral.

