Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union, and I would like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.

Seventy years have passed since the creation of
the United Nations, and yet millions continue to suffer
from the scourge of war, the number ofpeople displaced
has reached unprecedented levels and the scope of our
humanitarian crises is catastrophic. That is not because
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations are
deficient, but because we have failed to uphold what
we pledged to the generations to come. It is therefore
indeed high time for the international community
to stand up firmly for the principles enshrined in the
Charter. Only through respect for international law,
including obligations arising from treaties, can we
maintain peace and security, provide for the protection
of human rights and create the conditions for social
progress and larger freedoms.

We are deeply distressed by the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in the
Middle East. 1 would like to reiterate Georgia's strong
condemnation of every despicable act of terrorism and
violence against civilian populations. Terrorist groups
such as Da'esh threaten not just the nations of the Middle
East but every country across the globe, large or small,
primarily because such groups erode the political and
legal foundations of the international system.

Contrary to expectations in the early 1990s, Europe
today is neither free from confrontation nor at peace.
Regional security is being deliberately challenged by
Russia's ongoing aggression against Georgia. In its bid
to change the geopolitical situation in the so-called
near-abroad, including Ukraine, the Russian Federation
has gone as far as to redraw European borders by using
aggression, occupation and annexation, at the cost
of the lives of many innocent people along the way.
Another testament to that fact is the situation in the
occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia.
The aggression against my country that started in
the early 1990s culminated in 2008 in a full-scale
invasion, followed by illegal recognition - by only
three countries - of the so-called independence of the
occupied regions.

For its part, Georgia has continued to dedicate itself
to a peaceful and constructive approach. We have been
consistently committed to diplomacy and a peaceful
resolution of the conflict with the Russian Federation.
We greatly value the international discussions in Geneva
and will continue our constructive participation in that
key format, established for the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008, in good faith.
Over the past few years, we have redoubled our efforts
to normalize relations with Moscow in order to create
an environment conducive to confidence-building and
conflict resolution.

The results, however, have been limited to
economic and humanitarian areas. Despite our
constructive approach, the Russian Federation has
concluded dozens of so-called treaties and agreements
with the occupation regimes, which provide a pretext
for its continued illegal military presence. It has signed
so-called comprehensive alliance treaties, providing
for full mergers in every public domain and the open
delegation of all powers to the Russian Federation,
and installed barbed-wire fences and other artificial
obstacles along the occupation line that divides families
and communities. That chain of events reflects a policy
aimed at the de facto annexation of Georgia's regions.

The recently adopted so-called laws regulating
the status of foreigners and entry into the regions
constitute yet another discriminatory act against ethnic
Georgians, restricting their fundamental rights and
freedoms and further isolating the occupied regions of
Georgia. Pursuant to those laws, a new wave ofso-called
passportization is being carried out that will further
deteriorate conditions for the Georgian population
living in the Gali district, who will not be eligible
for the proper identity documents and will therefore
face hardships regarding their property rights, their
rights to work, their freedom of movement across the
occupation line and residence. This dangerous process
can potentially become the grounds for another wave of
ethnic cleansing against Georgians.

In conclusion, let me once again stress that
Georgia remains a strong advocate of the principles
of international law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. We all should take more tangible and resolute
steps towards the realization of our common goals of
achieving world peace and strengthening international
security.

