Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame, the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Ms. Sharief for their briefings.

When we talk about Libya today, so many of the
problems we face go back to one key issue: respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. This conflict
began when the Libyan people rejected the Al-Qadhafi
regime's decades of oppression and tyranny. That brutal
dictatorship left Libya with weak institutions, which
gave political spoilers, criminal gangs and terrorists a
chance to exploit Libya for their own purposes. After
organizing a revolution to demand a more stable, unified
and prosperous future for all, the Libyan people have
yet to achieve that fundamental goal. That is why the
United States stands firmly behind the efforts of Special
Representative Salame and behind implementation of
the United Nations action plan.

As we have said many times before, political
dialogue and reconciliation is the only way forward.
There is no alternative to the United Nations process.
There is a window of opportunity right now for
Council members to push for new momentum in the
political process, and that is where we must focus all
of our efforts.

The recent video of Afghan migrants being sold
into slavery shows the dire consequences of allowing
Libya's security vacuum to continue. It was a profoundly
disturbing sight. The existence of slave markets
anywhere in the world must offend the conscience of
every decent human being. These heinous abuses of
human rights must come to an end.

We appreciate that Libya's Government of National
Accord swiftly condemned slavery in all forms and
made a commitment to investigate and hold those
responsible to account. Such an investigation should
proceed quickly and transparently. An untold number
of migrants continue to be detained in camps outside of
Government control, where their captors assault them
and deprive them of food.

This ongoing crisis shows just how urgent it is
to support Libyan efforts to stabilize the country.
The Libyan people deserve a Government able to
provide basic services, enforce the rule of law and
guarantee security, including the protection of the
most vulnerable. The United States is committed to
the humane treatment and protection of migrants and
refugees. We strongly support the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) in their work to improve conditions for migrants
in Libya and to help those with claims to protection.

Since 2011, we have contributed generously to these
organizations to address this regional crisis, including
more than $150 million to ease suffering in Libya,
including support for refugees, vulnerable migrants
and the internally displaced.

But there is much more work to do. We appreciate
Libya's cooperation with UNHCR and the IOM. and
urge them to deepen this collaboration. As the Security
Council, we can look for opportunities to identify and
designate for sanctions the individuals and criminal
networks responsible for the human rights abuses
aimed at migrants. The United States will also continue
its efforts with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and other United Nations agencies to
strengthen Libyan police and security institutions, and
we urge others to join us.

Libya's wealth and natural resources are also at risk.
These are resources that should be protected and used to
benefit all Libyans. But political spoilers and criminal
gangs are diverting these assets for themselves. The
United States strongly condemns these actions. We are
especially concerned about fuel-smuggling, and we will
continue to press the Security Council to sanction any
vessels involved in such criminal activities. We expect
all States Members ofthe United Nations to fully comply
with their obligations regarding ship designations.

Stepping up sanctions enforcement would be
another step towards disrupting the criminal networks
that contribute to the instability in Libya. While the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has been weakened
in Libya, the threat of terrorism is very real. Libya must
not be a safe haven for terrorists to plot attacks, and
terrorist groups must be defeated to secure a peaceful
future for the Libyan people.
The only viable solution to these security, economic
and migration challenges is a political solution to the
current crisis. The United States is committed to a
strong, unified Libya, which is why President Trump
hosted Libyan Prime Minister Faiez Mustafa Serraj
in Washington, DC, recently. The United States
commends Prime Minister Serraj's leadership and
the efforts of the Government of National Accord to
support a political solution.

There is no room here for political spoilers. The
United States will oppose attempts to impose a military
solution to this political crisis, which would further
undermine Libya's stability. Those who pursue a
military solution will wind up helping terrorist groups
that thrive on instability. The only legitimate path to
power is through free and fair elections. We welcome
the recent progress with voter registration in Libya,
including significant numbers of youth and women who
have already signed up to vote.

The United States is providing assistance to
Libya's High National Electoral Commission to help
prepare as well. To build on this progress, the House
of Representatives must uphold its commitment to pass
laws for a constitutional referendum and for elections
this year, in consultation with the High State Council.

As the Libyans prepare for elections, we support
United Nations efforts to promote more effective and
accountable governance for this transitional period.
All Libyan parties should engage constructively
with the United Nations to strengthen the Libyan
Political Agreement.

The Security Council has affirmed that the Libyan
Political Agreement must remain the framework for the
political process throughout the country's transitional
period. The fact is that after decades oftyranny followed
by years of fighting and chaos, the Libyan people
deserve a better future. Libya's political leaders must
set aside their personal agendas and come together for
the sake of peace. The Libyan people deserve a stable,
unified, democratic Government with institutions that
are capable of stamping out the abuses of criminal
networks and non-State militias.

The door to a more peaceful Libya is open through
engagement with the United Nations political process.
The United States urges all parties in Libya to seize this
opportunity without further delay.

