Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to the United
Kingdom for having organized this debate and to the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement, as well
as to Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar.

I express our deepest sympathies and condolences
to the people and Government of Afghanistan over the
two most recent terrorist attacks on 1 and 8 March,
carried out by the Taliban and Da'esh, respectively.

According to the latest Secretary-General report
(S/2017/189), the overall security situation continued
to worsen throughout 2016 and into 2017 with 23,700
security incidents - an increase of nearly 5 per
cent compared to 2015 and the highest number ever
recorded by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). At the same time, we note that
the number of such incidents in 2015 - an increase
of 22 percent over 2014 - was the highest level since
the United Nations started recording security incidents.
This has been a very disturbing trend since 2001.

Today, the Afghan National Unity Government
is at the forefront of the fight against terrorism. The
sustained support of the international community
is needed more than ever to support the Government
in its fight against terrorism and extremism, as well
as to address its security, political, economic and
development challenges.

In my previous statements, I warned about the
emergence of Da'esh and its affiliates in Afghanistan.
The terrorist attack on 23 July and the most recent
organized terrorist attack on the Kabul hospital last
Wednesday, 8 March, are clear indications concerning
that emerging security threat for Afghanistan and
the region.

Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting; we stand ready to work
constructively with the Afghan authorities. We welcome
any Government progress towards peace and hope that
an Afghan-owned and -led peace process brings about
lasting and comprehensive peace in the country and the
region. Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour, since security
in Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security
at our borders and in the region.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and economic development
and stability in the region. The trilateral Chabahar
agreement between Iran, India and Afghanistan on
the development of the Chabahar port, which gives
Afghanistan access to world markets through the
open seas, and the Khaf-Herat railway are two major
transit projects under way. Those projects have the
capacity to change the regional economic prospects of
Afghanistan. We invite all interested regional actors to
consider participating in them.

For the past 37 years, Iran hosted no less than
3 million Afghan nationals at any given point. They have
access to most of the subsidized services available to
Iranian nationals, including basic commodities, public
transportation, public health and public education.
We continue to provide them with social services and
educate nearly 400,000 undocumented Afghan students
with minimum burden-sharing assistance from the
international community.

Repatriation of Afghans from Iran remains steady
but continues to represent the lowest recorded returnee
rate since the establishment of the voluntary return
programme in 2002. We welcome all efforts aimed at
helping to overcome the main reintegration challenges
faced by returnees and to formulate a comprehensive
voluntary repatriation and reintegration strategy.
Success in voluntary repatriation depends first and
foremost on providing for the basic needs of repatriated
refugees in Afghanistan, which underscores the need for
greater international support. A stronger, coordinated
approach between the Government, donors and the
United Nations, and an overall strategy for addressing
the combined needs of displaced persons and returnees
are crucial in order to make the repatriation of Afghan
refugees more successful.
In conclusion, we support UNAMA as well as United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in
the final report of the Tripartite Review Commission
on the United Nations in Afghanistan.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the resolve of the
people and the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to continue their support for the fraternal people
and Government of Afghanistan as they move through
this difficult period of their history towards a stable,
safe and prosperous Afghanistan, and on the eve of
their New Year, I wish them a happy Nowruz.

