Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): I would first like to
thank the Italian presidency for organizing today's
open debate.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union on behalf
of its member countries.

Trafficking in persons is a grave human rights
violation and a highly lucrative form of transnational
organized crime, with huge human, social and
economic implications, and it requires a concerted
global response. The problem is further exacerbated by
conflicts and the resulting large movements of refugees
and migrants, who often become easy targets for
various forms of exploitation. Bulgaria emphasizes the
importance of accelerating international cooperation to
eliminate human trafficking through a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and cross-border approach. Better
cooperation should be established among countries of
origin, transit and destination on information-sharing
and on victim identification, support and reintegration.

Bulgaria reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, which, along with resolution 2331 (2016), constitute
a solid foundation of international law in this area. We
would like to highlight the importance of resolution
2388 (2017), on the trafficking of persons in conflict
situations, adopted today by the Council. We welcome
the special emphasis that the new resolution puts
on the protection of children and its strong language
on children's rights, which is a key priority for the
Government of Bulgaria. Bulgaria was a pioneer among
European countries in enacting specific anti-trafficking
legislation as long ago as 2003, and our legal and
institutional framework for combating trafficking in
persons is one of the most comprehensive in existence.

Bulgaria has criminalized trafficking in persons
and introduced more severe punishment for crimes
involving children. Our legislation includes provisions
to ensure that victims of trafficking are not penalized
for being forcibly involved in unlawful activities. We
have also established a national referral mechanism
for supporting trafficked persons, with the aim of
strengthening respect for the human rights of victims
of trafficking by providing them with unconditional
support and protection, based on the principle of
non-discrimination.

Bulgaria's national anti-trafficking strategy for
the period from 2017 to 2021 follows a victim-centred,
human rights-based, gender-specific and child-focused
approach. Our national commission for combating
trafficking in human beings, which coordinates State
policy in this priority area, provides assistance to
victims of trafficking in Government-funded shelters
across the country. We established a specialized shelter
for children earlier this year in order to improve the
protection of child victims of trafficking by providing
them with specially designed integrated services
that include psychological, social, medical and legal
support, assistance and social reintegration.

In the past few years, Bulgaria has increased its
capacity to ensure the rights of victims of trafficking,
with a special focus on children, and its participation
in international efforts to fight this crime. Special
measures are being taken to raise public awareness,
particularly among children, in partnership with local
authorities, civil society and youth volunteers.

