The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I thank the Ambassador of Spain for the briefing
he has just given us on the quarterly activities of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on sanctions against Iran. As this is his first
briefing as Chair of the Committee to the Security
Council, I wish to congratulate him for the speed
and the seriousness with which he took charge of that
Committee, which deals with a very sensitive issue, and
wish him and his team my best wishes for success.

Since the adoption of the Joint Plan of Action in
November 2013, which was extended a year later, the
E3+3 and Iran entered intensive discussions aimed at
achieving, before the end of June 2015, a comprehensive
agreement that would establish the exclusively
peaceful purpose of Iran's nuclear programme. The
negotiations between the six countries and Iran are now
in a decisive phase. Our position has been consistent
throughout the discussions. Iran has every right to
develop energy nuclear for civilian purposes, but under
no circumstances should it have access to nuclear
weapons. All our demands during the negotiations are
based on that principle. It is a simple position based on
our rejection of nuclear proliferation.

In past weeks, the discussions between the six and
Iran enabled progress to be made, but such progress
remains, to date, insufficient. Despite the many
proposals by the E3+3, differences with Iran remain,
in particular on research and development and the
settlement of the question of sanctions. Iran must
now make tough choices if it truly wants to restore
the confidence of the international community. With
our partners in the group of six, we are determined
to reach a good agreement, that is to say a robust and
solid agreement that would establish and guarantee in
the long term the exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran's
nuclear programme.

Cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) is, in this respect, an essential part
of the resolution of the proliferation crisis with Iran.
The IAEA has confirmed a few days ago that Iran is
respecting, at this stage, its obligations related to the
Joint Plan of Action of November 2013. However, the
most recent report of the IAEA General Director on
the implementation of safeguards in Iran states that,
with respect to the possible military dimensions of
Iran's nuclear programme, cooperation with Iran is at
a standstill, having not seen any progress since August
2014. The IAEA Director General confirmed that
yesterday in Washington, D. C.
Therefore, Iran has not proposed new practical
measures, and, with respect to the existing approved
measures in the framework of cooperation of May
2014, Iran has given no explanation for the initiation
of high explosives and neutron transport calculations.
That situation is of concern. The resolution of all issues
related to the possible military dimensions of Iran's
nuclear programme is a key element for restoring
confidence and therefore for the long-term agreement
that we all want.

Finally, the Chair's report rightly points out that
the measures contained in the Security Council's
resolutions regarding Iran remain in full force pending
a comprehensive settlement of the Iranian proliferation
crisis and of any changes that the Security Council may
decide on. Until then, the Sanctions Committee should
continue to fulfil its responsibilities, and I thank the
Panel of Experts for continuing to support it in that
task.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 4pm.
