Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Jeremic' of
Serbia and Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo to the
Security Council today. I would also like to welcome
Special Representative Zannier to the Council and
thank him for his briefing.

The United States commends the Special
Representative for the work the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has
carried out under his leadership, including UNMIK's
successful reconfiguration.

Today, I would like to underscore three key
points. First, the United States welcomes what the
Secretary-General has called a new phase for UNMIK.
The full deployment of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has enabled UNMIK
to reconfigure itself and reduce its responsibilities. We
fully support this transition, which makes EULEX the
primary international presence for rule of law issues in
Kosovo. We welcome EULEX's expanding role in
Kosovo, especially in the north of the country. As the
Secretary-General states, UNMIK has now refocused
its efforts in facilitating practical cooperation among
all communities in Kosovo, and we note that both
Belgrade and Pristina have adopted pragmatic
approaches in resolving some of their outstanding
issues.

Special Representative Zannier noted that
UNMIK continues to facilitate Kosovo's participation
in some international forums. We thank UNMIK for
this assistance where it is necessary, but also note that
Kosovo plays an independent role in a large number of
international organizations and initiatives and should
be allowed to play its role independently in the
international community.

Secondly, we commend the Government of
Kosovo for continuing to carry out its commitments
under the Ahtisaari plan. The municipal elections
scheduled to be held in 36 municipalities on
15 November 2009 will represent a significant
milestone for Kosovo. These elections are the first to
include new municipalities under the decentralization
process outlined in the Ahtisaari plan. These new
municipalities enable Kosovo Serbs to have a
significantly stronger voice in local issues, and we are
encouraged that 41 of the 76 parties or lists registered
to participate in the elections represent Serb and other
minority communities.

The United States strongly encourages all of
Kosovo's citizens to participate in the upcoming
elections, and we hope that others in the international
community will voice their support for their
participation as well. We regret that Foreign Minister
Jeremic' has said today that the Government of Serbia
will not support the participation of Kosovo Serbs in
these elections.

We also call on Belgrade and Pristina to
encourage and facilitate the engagement of all ethnic
groups in Kosovo's institutions. We urge an end to
support for parallel structures, which diminish
coordination and cooperation between the Government
and those in need and undermine the roles of the
responsible Kosovo authorities.

Kosovo continues to face significant challenges
in addressing the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. To be successful, the Governments
of Kosovo and Serbia must continue to sustain efforts
to facilitate these returns. The agreement reached
earlier this year to reopen offices of the Kosovo
Property Agency in Serbia was a major step forward.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General notes that the
security situation remains relatively calm in Kosovo.
Because of improved security, NATO decided to
downsize its peacekeepers to a deterrent presence. But
recent security incidents in northern Kosovo highlight
the sensitivities and tensions inherent in building a
multi-ethnic society after a conflict. We welcome the
return to work of most Kosovo Serb police officers and
the appointment of an ethnic Serb police officer to the
position of Deputy General Director of Kosovo Police.
Both are positive developments that will improve
relations among Kosovo's communities.

The United States condemns the recent vandalism
of UNMIK vehicles, but applauds Kosovo's handling
of the incident, including the later arrest and
prosecution of the perpetrators. These incidents and
others, such as the confrontations over housing
reconstruction by Kosovo Albanian returnees in
northern Kosovo this summer, underscore the need for
strengthened police cooperation and security for
returning displaced persons.

Kosovo has made tremendous progress in the
decade since the passage of resolution 1244 (1999).
Sixty-two countries have now recognized Kosovo as an
independent State. Kosovo has just joined the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and the
country has shown that it is serious about its
commitment to be a stable friendly member of the
community of nations. Kosovo and other countries
coming out of conflict in the Western Balkans deserve
our continued support. For our part, the United States
will continue to support the integration of all of the
countries in the Western Balkans, including Kosovo
and Serbia, into European institutions and Euro-
Atlantic structures.

