Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing today, as well as for his
activities undertaken as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his statement.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

The international community's attention is turned
towards late 2014, when Afghanistan will assume full
responsibility for its territory and its sovereignty. The
process leading to the full transfer or handover to the
Afghan forces for security is strewn of obstacles, but
a decisive stride forward was taken this week with the
Government's taking control of security in all districts
of Afghanistan.

Beyond security matters, today's discussion is an
opportunity to take a look at the political dimensions
of the transition process. I should like to focus my
statements on three major challenges to be tackled to
ensure a successful political transition.

The first challenge is the presidential and
provincial elections of 5 April 2014, when it will be
vital for the successful political transition that the
legitimacy of the election results not be questioned.
This means ensuring credible and transparent elections
that are open to everyone. That is why we call on
the Afghan Government to implement an adequate
electoral framework as quickly as possible, including
the adoption of an electoral law, the appointment of
the head of the Independent Election Commission, the
establishment of an impartial body for the management
of complaints, and guaranteeing the independence
of the Commission. It also means guaranteeing the
participation of women in the elections in line with
the commitments undertaken a year ago in the agreed
Tokyo Framework.

Another decisive step forward is national
reconciliation. If it is to succeed, the peace process
must be borne on the shoulders of Afghans themselves
because only inter-Afghan reconciliation will pave
the way for a sustainable end to violence. We note
the announcement made on 18 June in Doha on the
opening of a Taliban office, and we hope that this will
be a platform for peace negotiations and a democratic
Afghanistan. Aware that inter-Afghan reconciliation
also depends on the support of neighbours, we recall
the important role of regional players in ensuring a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

The third challenge is in the area of human rights.
The stability of Afghan society will also hinge on the
extent to which the fundamental rights of civilians
are upheld. Important measures have been taken in
that regard, but much remains to be done. Greater
commitment was undertaken in Tokyo last year and
recalled in resolution 2096 (2013) on the the full
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. The Afghan Government is
responsible for upholding this commitment.

We also share the strong concern of the Secretary-
General regarding the 25-per cent rise in civilian
casualties during the reporting period. We most firmly
condemn indiscriminate attacks perpetrated against
civilians.

As 2014 approaches, many tasks remain to be
completed, but Afghanistan has one major advantage
in meeting its challenges - the youthfulness of its
population, of whom 65 per cent is under 25 years.
This human capital must be nurtured and protected. In
particular with respect to children, we believe that the
ongoing support of the United Nations and the Afghan
Government is necessary to reviving the dynamic
created on 30 January 2011 with the signing of the
action plan against the recruitment and use of children
in the Afghan security forces.
In that context, it is most important that UNAMA
keep its Office for the Protection of Children open
in order to effectively help the Afghan authorities in
implementing the action plan and generally speaking
in the efforts to protect children, as well as to allocate
the necessary capacities and expertise in line with the
provisions of resolution 2096 (2013).

In conclusion, Iwould like to express my delegation's
strong support for United Nations efforts to help the
Afghan Government in combating the increasing
poppy cultivation. The efforts required of the Afghan
Government need the international community's firm
backing. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular must remain committed in that regard.

