Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Before addressing the subject that brings us
here today, allow me, Mr. President, to thank the
Permanent Representative of Senegal for his warm
congratulations, his words of praise and his wishes for
success addressed to His Excellency Mr. Francois Fall,
who was recently promoted to the post of Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Guinea. I would like to assure him that his brotherly
message will be fully and faithfully passed on.

After a brief period of calm, which gave us a
glimmer of hope, the Middle East region has
unfortunately sunk once again into the habitual cycle of
violence that we have known for so long.

In recent days, we have witnessed, on the one
hand, a resumption of suicide bombing attacks on
Israeli targets and, on the other, the forcible
reoccupation of Palestinian cities. This phenomenon,
driven by the reciprocal desire for revenge, is
undoubtedly a sign of a resurgence of the old demons
of hatred and misunderstanding.

Faced with this new escalation, the Security
Council, the guardian of peace, must urgently assume
its rightful responsibilities in order to prevent a deadly
war and, beyond that, a destabilization ofthe region.

This is the time to stress the need for the
international community to give greater consideration
to what it must do to cause the Israeli and Palestinian
parties to exercise more restraint and to make them
understand, once and for all, that peace cannot take
root in the soil of suspicion and resentment.

The parties, rather than holding tenaciously to
rigid and intransigent positions, should envisage their
relations from a broad, political viewpoint combining
the desire for security and the right to existence.
Therefore, beyond the need to implement Council
resolutions, and distancing ourselves from the
customary rhetoric, it is up to us to explore together
new, bolder, consensual ways to remove the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples from the storm in which they have
been immersed for decades.

In this context, my delegation welcomes and
encourages the efforts of the "quartet", of the G-8 and
of other influential actors of the international
community to bring the protagonists to reason and thus
to create a peaceful climate favourable to the
resumption of negotiations - the only way to a fair
and lasting peace.

We are convinced that those efforts, combined
with a regional dynamic in which all concerned parties
without exception should participate, would ease
tensions, rekindle the flame of hope and create a space
of understanding and harmony benefiting the Middle
East as a whole.

