Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the briefing by Mr. Pedersen. We acknowledge his
intense work with a view to establishing a constructive
dialogue and relations built on trust with the key actors,
while gaining detailed knowledge of their positions. We
are familiar with his exemplary qualifications, wish
him every success in navigating the delicate task ahead
of him and reiterate our full support.

Given the impact of the Syrian conflict on the
country's population, regional stability and the
credibility of the Security Council, we reaffirm the
urgent need to move forward the inclusive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations. The
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) must continue to guide our work. We stress
the importance for all parties to engage constructively
in finding a political solution, while looking towards
the future and showing flexibility and national unity so
as to build the trust needed to promote reconciliation.
That essential positive spirit must be immediately
reflected in efforts to draft a new constitution laying
the political and institutional foundations for achieving
sustainable peace in Syria.

We hope that the constitutional committee will be
convened in Geneva as soon as possible. To that end, we
believe that it is necessary for the parties to continue to
work on measures fostering an improved environment
of understanding, including the release of detainees,
the identification of missing persons and the transfer
human remains. We welcome the progress that has been
made in this area under the Astana agreement, and we
encourage further substantive developments.

We also stress the need to avoid any escalation of
the conflict that would undermine the prospects for
reaching a political settlement. Maintaining respect
for the Idlib agreement, brokered by Turkey and the
Russian Federation, is of fundamental importance in
those circumstances. We welcome the willingness of
both countries to seek peaceful solutions to the issue of
terrorism, which is particularly acute in north-western
Syria. Another major challenge concerns addressing
the grave situation faced by millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which entails not only
the availability of financial resources, but mustering
the political to guarantee them a voluntary, safe
and dignified return under internationally accepted
parameters. The property rights of those persons must
not be abrogated in any way.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru's full commitment
to preserving the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Syria. Accordingly, any de-escalation or other
measures, including the presence of foreign forces to
combat terrorism, must always be temporary.

