Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): First of all,
I would like to express my deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your devoted efforts in organizing
today's open debate. Let me also extend my sincere
thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive briefing.

During the final weeks of 2013 and the beginning
of the new year, critical developments have transpired
in the Middle East at a steady pace. Some are positive,
giving us cause for cautious optimism, while others
present uncertainties and concerns. The great Syrian
poet Adonis once wrote, "To whom do these distances
belong that separated us and that now bind us?" Indeed,
disagreements and differences among us are the very
origin of the challenges we face. At the same time,
such differences also highlight our interconnectedness
and push us towards a renewed resolve to address the
problems before us.

We welcome the second Geneva Conference on
Syria, to be convened later this week. As a participant,
the Republic of Korea will play its due part in order
to achieve meaningful progress. We would like to
commend the efforts made by all parties who made the
conference possible.

In nearly three years of fighting, the conflict has
resulted in more than 120,000 deaths, 2.3 million
refugees and 6.5 million internally displaced persons.
Comprehensive and action-oriented peace talks are now
an absolute necessity, and an unconditional ceasefire
and expanded humanitarian access are urgently needed.

From now on, every second is of infinite value,
and we must seize the moment to stop further human
suffering. Recently, there has been a brutal campaign
waged by the Syrian Government with the use of heavy
weapons, such as barrel bombs, in densely populated
areas. We condemn such attacks and urge the Syrian
Government to halt that indiscriminate killing. Clashes
between predominantly foreign Al-Qaida-affiliated
groups and local opposition forces are also a matter of
deep concern. We are deeply troubled by the reports
of massacres, mass graves and forced religious
conversions.

On the other side of recent developments, we welcome
the continued progress made in the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). We commend the joint efforts
by the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to eliminate Syria's
chemical weapons, even in the face of an incredibly
challenging environment. Together with the outcome of
the humanitarian aid donor conference held in Kuwait
last week, those are good signs that ourjoint efforts are
making progress. I sincerely hope that such efforts will
provide the basis for the success of the second Geneva
Conference.

Another worrying example of the spillover from
the Syrian conflict is the recent attacks against the
city of Fallujah in Iraq, which were perpetrated by the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. The Republic of
Korea is deeply concerned about the increased human
losses and the worsening humanitarian situation in that
area. We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue
its close cooperation with local leaders to fight back
the extremist militia. We hope that Iraq will achieve
lasting peace and stability through an inclusive political
process and reconciliation.

The escalating violence in Lebanon is also of
serious concern to many of us in the Chamber. The
Republic of Korea strongly condemns the recent spate
of terrorist attacks in Beirut and Hermel. The attack
on the Iranian Embassy in Beirut, the assassination of
the former Minister Mohamad Chatah and the targeted
attacks on civilians in south Beirut are all a reflection
of the continued spillover from the Syrian conflict into
Lebanon. The Korean Government urges all parties
in Lebanon to respect the disassociation policy and to
refrain from any involvement in the Syrian crisis, in
accordance with their commitments as set out in the
Baabda Declaration.

The Republic of Korea also extends its support
to the United Nations-backed Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, which convened last week in The Hague. We
hope that the perpetrators of the 2005 terrorist attack
that killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 21
others will be brought to justice. We view the Special
Tribunal as a historic opportunity to combat impunity
in Lebanon.

It is an indisputable fact of life that the prompt
and long-overdue settlement of the Middle East peace
process constitutes a foundation for peace and stability
in the entire Middle East region. In that regard, the
Korean Government commends Israel and Palestine
for remaining committed to peace negotiations, and
notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the
United States Government to make progress in the right
direction. We believe that working towards an agreed
framework that establishes concrete guidelines to
deal with the core issues will lead to the much-needed
breakthrough in the ongoing peace talks.

At the same time, we sincerely hope that the
continued settlement activities and the demolition of
Palestinian buildings will come to an end. We condemn
the continued rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza, which
threaten the fragile peace. It is also important that
security in the West Bank improve in order to foster
the necessary confidence and enable the negotiations
to move forward.

We all know that, in today's ever interconnected
world, no single country can enjoy peace and stability
in separation from the rest of the world. That is why the
international community must work together in dealing
with regional conflicts. The Republic of Korea would
therefore like to emphasize the importance of sustained
efforts to promote peace and stability in the Middle
East. In that regard, it is imperative that the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, play
its due role, serving to forge a united voice.

