Mr. Yamamoto: The National Unity Government
marked its second anniversary with a continued effort
towards advancing its reform agenda and enhancing
public services. Despite security challenges and some
political volatility, I continue to see opportunities
and hope in Afghanistan. The Afghan Government
demonstrated unity at the recent Warsaw Summit and
at the Brussels Conference, while stressing its shared
commitment to security, development and reform
priorities. Afghan leaders have continued working to
overcome their differences in order to advance the
Government's reform agenda. The message from the
international community sent at the highest level was
clear: Afghanistan will not stand alone. The significant
international financial commitments, in both security
and development terms, allow Afghanistan to achieve
greater stability and self-reliance.

I welcome the reconstitution of the electoral
management bodies, which must advance electoral
reforms and preparations for elections. It is essential to
restore public confidence in the democratic process in
Afghanistan, which provides an important opportunity
to take steps in that direction. The commencement of
prosecutions by the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre
shows the Government's seriousness in tackling
corruption. The Citizens Charter was adopted to enable
a more systematic approach to eradicate poverty and
provide services to the people of Afghanistan.

Afghan citizens are returning home in record
numbers. In the past six months alone, the country
has received hundreds of thousands of returnees, from
both Pakistan and Iran. While those returnees are
being welcomed back to Afghanistan, they face an
uncertain future, alongside the internally displaced
persons, including half a million newly displaced just
this year. Over 1.5 million people are on the move
this year. It is likely that the coming year will likely
see similar numbers of people. The sheer scale of
that population movement will necessarily bring with
it strains and pressure on the economy and on social
services and could further swell the number of those
seeking employment.

I welcome the swift response of the international
community to the United Nations appeal for the provision
ofimmediate lifesaving assistance for displaced persons
and returnees. I also wish to acknowledge the work that
is being undertaken by the Government to put in place
programmes that will enable both displaced persons
and returnees to integrate into the economy and with
their host communities.

The longer-term needs of integration must be
addressed with urgency if we are to prevent more people
sinking into absolute poverty. The scale of return will
require further international support and flexibility in
the use of existing funding mechanisms. Meanwhile,
we must make greater efforts to ensure due recognition
of the voluntary nature of return, and for the process of
return to be undertaken with dignity and respect.

Refugees return to Afghanistan with hopes. Despite
all the efforts by the international community and the
Government, a better future is not possible without
peace. In 2016, thousands and thousands of Afghans
have been killed in the conflict, and tens of thousands
more have been wounded. Such human suffering and
tragedy are unacceptable. The conflict also erodes the
living conditions of people and deprives the country
of opportunities for development and growth. This
year, we saw a decrease of approximately 50 per cent
in economic investment, which is needed to achieve
a sustainable future. The international commitments
for development will not be able to deliver their full
potential in the absence of peace. Financial resources
that are spent on the conflict could be utilized for the
economic prosperity of Afghanistan.

We all know that the conflict in Afghanistan has no
military solution. Once again, I call upon the Taliban to
commit to direct talks with the Afghan Government,
without preconditions. The Taliban leadership must
reconsider the notion that their objectives can be
achieved only on the battlefield. At stake is the
future of the Afghan people and the country. Are the
differences really irreconcilable? Are compromise and
accommodation really not possible?

All Afghans must come together and work through
their problems and find ways to accommodate their
differences, for their own joint future. There are issues
of mutual interests and high priorities to all parties,
such as lessening the number of civilian casualties.
Identifying such common interests could be a starting
point for dialogue. The vast majority ofAfghans believe
that their country should be a sovereign, united, Islamic
country, free from interference by any foreign Powers.
That basic agreement on fundamental principles should
make it possible to reach a peace agreement, as long as
countries in the region are prepared to play their part in
a positive, supportive way.

It takes courage to enter into a peace process. It is
not an admission of defeat. It is a recognition of reality.
An endless war will ruin the country and harm its
people. The only path to a meaningful peace is through
an intra-Afghan dialogue. The eventual process must
be inclusive, involving Afghans from every stratum of
society, including women and young people. Women in

particular can play a crucial role in helping to shape a
lasting peace.

The peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami shows
that the Government is prepared to negotiate on key
issues such as the release of prisoners, the lifting of
sanctions and the group's integration into the political
life of Afghanistan. The fact that the agreement was
reached is a demonstration of its serious intentions,
and its successful implementation should address any
remaining doubts and help to unite Afghans, and could
pave the way for further peace agreements. I welcome
the Government's assurances that the rights of Afghans,
including victims of gross violations of human rights,
will not be compromised in the implementation of the
peace agreement.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan are not in
the interest of Afghanistan alone; other countries in
the region will also benefit on both the security and
economic fronts. I am encouraged by their active efforts
to assist Afghanistan with its social, economic and
human-resources development. Impressive investments
are being made in regional infrastructure development.
The progress in that area was reflected in the outcome
of the sixth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in
Amritsar, where we also saw the countries of the region
concur on improving cooperation on their counter-
terrorism efforts. But can we not collaborate and
cooperate more in order to put an end to the conflict
and long-standing human suffering in Afghanistan?
I urge every country of the region to ask itself what
else it can do to help create an environment conducive
to peace in Afghanistan and the region. There are
many possible areas of cooperation and steps that they
can take to improve the prospects for peace, such as
increased consultations, exchanges of information and
people-to-people contacts.

I am encouraged by the positive messages of
support for an Afghan-led peace process from the
countries of the region, and I look forward to seeing
them produce positive results. We, the United Nations,
remain committed to working for peace in Afghanistan
in cooperation with all concerned.

