The Secretary-General: I thank the Italian
presidency for convening this meeting.

The word "Mediterranean" literally means
"in the middle of the Earth". Figuratively, too, the
Mediterranean has found itself, since time immemorial,
at the confluence of civilizations, cultures, religions,
trade and migration. Developments in the region
continue to shape the history and politics of the world.
The Mediterranean Sea provides immense economic
resources, such as hydrocarbons and fish stocks, and
invaluable trade routes. However, its benefits depend
on stability and cooperation.

Indeed, the situation in the Mediterranean
illustrates that peace and security are inseparable from
democratic, economic and social progress, and from
the advancement of gender, youth, minority and human
rights. Events over the past few years in the region have
forcefully - and painfully - made that clear.

Today the Mediterranean faces serious challenges
on multiple fronts: the illicit trade in narcotics, weapons
and petroleum products; large movements of refugees
and migrants, who are preyed upon by human smugglers
and traffickers; and maritime piracy. The narcotics
trade is also generating deadly spillover effects, such
as increased drug use and health crises.

In parts of the region, fragility is being exacerbated
by systematic violations of human rights and violence
against women and girls. The Mediterranean is also
suffering from severe environmental degradation and
natural-resource constraints. In recent years, food
scarcity and sharp rises in prices have led to social and
political unrest. Long-festering regional wounds and
sectarian divides have been made worse by atrocity
crimes, terrorism, attempts to annihilate minorities, the
plundering of cultural heritage, forced displacement
and the use of chemical weapons.

Libya's stability is vital for the region. Yet, after
years of prolonged transition, the country's institutions
remain deeply divided. The United Nations is committed
to helping the Libyan people reach an inclusive
political settlement. Instability in the Sahel region
has contributed to an increase in irregular migration
towards Europe. The United Nations will continue to
support the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-S Sahel) and the G-5 Joint Force, including through
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

Achieving peace between Israelis and Palestinians
is also critical. The United Nations remains committed
to providing all possible support towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting resolution of the conflict
through the two-State solution. A comprehensive
political settlement in Cyprus would also mitigate
political tensions in the region.

Da'esh will continue to thrive unless the deep
political roots of the Syrian conflict are resolved
through a credible and comprehensive political process,
as foreseen under resolution 2254 (2015). The security
gains against terrorist groups in Libya, Iraq and
elsewhere may prove reversible if we do not accelerate
reconstruction and economic recovery.

I commend refugee host countries for their
generosity. There is a clear need to address the drivers
of displacement. We must also address the worrisome
increase in xenophobia and discrimination against
refugees, migrants and minorities. That is a shared
global responsibility. It is essential to re-establish the
integrity of the refugee-protection regime on both sides
of the Mediterranean and to increase resettlement and
relocation programmes. Trafficking in human beings
should not be isolated from trafficking in cultural
property, drugs, weapons and oil, which benefit
militias, terrorists and armed groups.

The Libya sanctions regime restricts the movement
of arms and related material into and out of Libya.
The Panels of Experts on Libya and the Sudan have
been investigating the financing of armed groups.
Along with the newly re-established Mali sanctions
regime, I hope that those tools will be useful in
supporting Governments and regions working towards
peaceful transitions.
All too often, responses to security challenges in
the Mediterranean are undertaken largely or solely
through traditional security arrangements or ad hoc
solutions. Such approaches carry the risk of prolonging
unacceptable status quos or worsening situations if
not backed by efforts to address the underlying root
causes. Our efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development have an important role to
play in that regard.

The Mediterranean is a global junction of mutually
enriching cultures, societies and economies. Yet
violence and hatred are threatening that dynamism,
to the detriment of the entire world. We should do our
utmost to resolve the worst crises of the region, so that
it can then continue to contribute its best. I count on
countries in the Mediterranean and beyond to reaffirm
their proud tradition of openness and solidarity.

