Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia is an active participant in the
international climate process. At all of its stages, we
have consistently advocated and continue to advocate
the consolidation of the efforts of all countries without
exception in this area.

In 2003, in Moscow, upon the initiative of
President Putin, a world conference on climate change
was held, which made a significant contribution to
analyzing how to develop international cooperation in
the area of climate. It was actually the decision of
Russia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol that enabled that
important instrument to enter into force.

According to the fourth national report submitted
by the Russian Federation in 2006 to the secretariat of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the total volume of greenhouse gas emissions
in Russia in 2004 dropped by 29.9 per cent compared
to the base year 1990. These reduced emissions in
Russia helped to a great extent to reduce the man-made
impact on the global climate by significantly offsetting
the increase in greenhouse gas emissions in the
developed countries during this period.

Russia intends to carry out the quantitative
commitments it undertook under the Kyoto Protocol up
to 2012. To achieve this goal, we have all of the
necessary instruments, including the appropriate
normative legal basis. We think that it is crucial that
decisions on future international actions in the area of
climate be taken on the basis of comprehensive
scientific research with the involvement of leading
national and international organizations and agencies.

Here, I would like to make an appeal to avoid
panicking and overdramatizing the situation, which
does not help us reach long-term comprehensive
agreements in this area. We believe that the world
community must actively continue to work out
measures to reduce the negative impact of man's
activities on the global climate.

For full consideration of the problem of climate
change in all of its aspects, including the analysis of
new challenges and threats in this area, appropriate
international forums and formats exist, such as the
Conference of the Parties of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the

Conference of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, the
World Meteorological Organization, the United
Nations General Assembly and the United Nations
Commission on Sustainable Development.

The United Nations Security Council, for its part,
should only deal with the consideration of questions
that directly relate to its mandate.

