Sir Emyr Jones-Parry (United Kingdom):
Today's resolution marks a defining moment for Iraq.
The Security Council has powerfully endorsed the
formation of a sovereign interim Government, which
by 30 June will assume full responsibility and authority
for governing Iraq. It is a crucial phase in Iraq's
transition to full democracy. The resolution gives this
Government the best possible start as it leads Iraq out
of occupation and proves itself to the Iraqi people
through its actions.

The promise is great: a stable, federal,
democratic, pluralistic and unified Iraq in which there
is full respect for human rights, a stark contrast to the
past. Thanks to the tireless efforts of Lakhdar Brahimi
and his team, the Iraqi people now have a competent,
professional and broad-based Government that can help
them realize that goal.

We appreciate the constructive discussions that
have marked these negotiations and have contributed to
the resolution unanimously adopted today. In
particular, I want to underline the productive
consultations with the incoming Iraqi interim
Government. The people of Iraq were rightly our most
important constituency.

The resolution makes an important contribution
to Iraq's development. As well as endorsing the
formation of the interim Government, it sets a clear
path for the future political process, which will end
with elections on the basis of a constitution approved
by the Iraqi people. It gives the United Nations a
leading role, as circumstances permit, to assist the Iraqi
people in that process. It encourages the international
community to assist Iraq's reconstruction, including by
working towards a sustainable reduction of Iraq's debt
burden. Also, on the basis of the Iraqi Government's
request for the multinational force to remain in Iraq,
the resolution authorizes its continued presence. The
sovereign Government will be able to require a review
of that multinational force or its termination. The
resolution, including the annexed letters, also sets out
the full partnership between the Iraqi Government and
the multinational force.

That relationship between the Iraqi Government
and the multinational force was undeniably the most
complex issue in this negotiation. The resulting
arrangements, stemming from discussion with the
incoming interim Government, make clear that the
Iraqi security forces, including armed forces, will be
responsible to Iraqi ministers. An Iraqi-led forum will
set the broad Iraqi security policy framework. National,
regional and local coordination mechanisms will ensure
unified command for those operations to which the
Iraqi Government commits its troops. It will be for the
Iraqi Government to make that commitment. The aim
will be agreement on the full range of fundamental
security and policy issues, including policy on
sensitive operations.

The United Kingdom, as a member of the
multinational force, stands ready to participate fully in
these arrangements. We are committed to playing our
part towards building security and stability in Iraq for
as long as needed and as long as the Iraqi Government
wishes. We are also determined to support Iraqi efforts
to progressively take on responsibility for their own
security.

The Iraqi Government and the Iraqi people will
need our support as they take forward an inclusive
political process, rebuild their economy and work to
restore security, defeating those who would rather
throw Iraq into violence and chaos. As Lakhdar
Brahimi said yesterday:

"Iraq needs the clear and united support of its
neighbours. Iraq needs the generosity of its
creditors. Iraq needs the patient, strong and
sustained support of this body, the Security
Council, and that of the United Nations as a
whole" (S/PV.4984, p. 9).

I hope this resolution will mark not only the full
reassertion of Iraqi sovereignty but also a renewed
determination on the part of all members of the
international community to assist the Iraqi people and
Government as they work towards the successful future
which they deserve.

