Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would have preferred to speak after hearing
the statement of the representative of Afghanistan; in
our View, hearing from the country that is the subject
of this morning's debate would have been most
valuable. For that reason, our statement will not
include comments on or reactions to his statement, as
we would have wished.

I thank Mr. Guehenno for his briefing this
morning and welcome the recent appointment of
Mr. Kai Eide as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). Our thanks go to Mr. Tom Koenigs for his
endeavours during his two years in that post.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. The
deterioration in the security situation and in the fight
against the drug industry, as well as the perhaps
insufficient progress in the implementation of the
Afghanistan Compact, call for this new consideration
of what action is needed and of the international
community's commitment to support that action.

For more than six years the United Nations has
been striving to ensure that Afghanistan would discard
the perverse logic of war, build representative and
inclusive political institutions and firmly embark on
the path of economic growth and social development.
But we see clear disturbing signs that the road ahead is
strewn with obstacles. First of all, the most recent of
the rather frequent unrest and disturbances reveal
problems regarding the building of legitimate
democratic institutions. To that, we must add a climate
of growing insecurity, as seen in the more than 180
terrorist attacks that took place in 2007 and in the
nearly 30 that have occurred so far this year. This
situation clearly undermines efforts to succeed in the
physical and social reconstruction of the country. I
cannot fail to mention the cultivation, production and
trafficking of opium, which compromise the security,
development and governance of Afghanistan.

Only a sustained international effort can prevent
difficult days ahead for Afghanistan, and that will not
be easy. Compliance with the objectives of the
Afghanistan Compact is the primary responsibility of
the Afghan Government, but also requires the
unconditional support of the international community.
We therefore agree with the Secretary-General when he
writes in his report that

"To meet the security challenge and
stabilize Afghanistan, a common approach is
needed that integrates security, governance, rule
of law, human rights and social and economic
development." (S/2008/159, para. 66)

That is why Costa Rica attaches particular
importance to the role to be played by UNAMA in
assisting the Afghan Government with respect to
security sector reform. The construction of the State
depends largely on the strength of the institutions
involved in that sector. We further understand that the
strengthening of the Government will depend largely
on the trust it is able to inspire in its citizens. We
therefore welcome the measures being taken to address
corruption. We stress the need to invest further in
activities linked to development, in particular at the
local level. Only thus can we strengthen the system to
meet the noble objectives enshrined in the Afghanistan
Compact.

I wish to conclude by referring to the third
component of the Compact - governance, and in
particular human rights. The reports submitted to the
international community of persons being condemned
to death for exercising their right to free expression, as
well as of torture and arbitrary detention, are a source
of deep concern to us. For Costa Rica, the fundamental
role that a human-rights based approach plays in the
promotion of stability and development is clear. No
sustainable security, responsible governance or full
development can be built on the bases of abuse and
intolerance.

We understand that UNAMA's mandate is
sufficiently comprehensive and suited to help the
Government of Afghanistan to meet its obligations in
that area, and we expect the Government to make an
effective commitment to promoting action in that
respect.
