Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I would like to
start by thanking the French presidency of the Security
Council for inviting us to take part in this meeting.
We also thank all Council members for the adoption
of resolution 2127 (2013), and all the countries that
sponsored it, which comes at an opportune time. We
are delighted by the coordination and cooperation
among us and by the participation of our three African
members of the Council in this process together with
the other Council members.

This meeting is being held at a time when the
situation in the Central African Republic is continuing
to deteriorate. This very morning new incidents
occurred in the city of Bangui, highlighting, as if it
were necessary, the precarious nature of the situation
and the untold suffering that has been inflicted on the
civilian population.

It is more urgent than ever that the international
community mobilize to deal with the situation. It is a
matter of both protecting civilian populations that can
no longer bear it and avoiding the outright collapse of
what remains of the country's State structures, which
would have incalculable consequences for peace,
security and regional stability.

The adoption today of resolution 2127 (2013) is a
crucial step in the formulation of a comprehensive and
coordinated response by the international community to
the ongoing deterioration of the situation. By authorizing
the deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA)
and calling for adequate international support for
the Mission, the Security Council is reinforcing and
strengthening the joint efforts of the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). We feel we have the full trust of
the Security Council and even greater international
legitimacy to pursue and intensify the work we have
begun.

I note that the resolution covers many other aspects
that range from the ongoing transition * the basic
principles of which are, appropriately, recalled - to
the protection and promotion of human rights; the rule
of law; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
security sector reform; and the protection of natural
resources. In sum, it articulates a comprehensive
approach to the situation, one that should allow us to
meet the challenges of the day with the urgency required
by the situation on the ground.

I also note the decision to impose an arms embargo
and the Council's intention of taking targeted measures
against individuals who undermine peace and security
in the Central African Republic. Those measures are
welcome and they are a strong signal to all those who
commit atrocities against civilian populations and
undermine the efforts to stabilize the situation.

Let me express the satisfaction of the African Union
upon the adoption ofresolution 2127 (2013). I would also
like to express our appreciation to all Council members
for their commitment to and support for the efforts of
Africa. I especially thank the French delegation, which
coordinated the drafting of the resolution, for the work
it has accomplished.

As the Council members know, the African Union
has always called for a flexible, innovative and forward-
looking partnership with the United Nations, especially
the Security Council. In so doing, we are acutely aware
of the complexity of the challenges to peace and security
that we are facing and of the need for coordinated
international action to deal with those challenges. Such
partnership presupposes close consultations among
all stakeholders in order to facilitate a broad unity of
vision and possible action and to take full advantage
of the comparative strengths of the different parties, as
well as to maximize the impact of our efforts on the
ground.

From that standpoint, I welcome the way we have
worked together throughout the process leading to
the adoption of resolution 2127 (2013). We were able,
without prejudice to the responsibilities of the Security
Council, to share our views with Council members,
make suggestions in the formulation of a number of
provisions in the text, and indicate how we wanted to
be supported. We must build on that progress and on
the consultations that have preceded other resolutions
of the Council, in particular those concerning Somalia,
in order to work better together.

For our part, in close coordination with ECCAS, we
are addressing problem of ensuring a successful transfer
of authority between the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) and
MISCA on 19 December. That process is ongoing and
unfolding in favourable conditions. A multidisciplinary
team of officials from the AU Commission, with the
support of a number of our partners, is en route to
Bangui to meet with the MICOPAX leadership and the
Secretary General of ECCAS and engae in practical
discussions on the modalities of the transfer. The
multidisciplinary team will have the job of establishing
the general management of MISCA.

Further, as Council members know, the African
Union Commission has proceeded to appoint, together
with ECCAS, the key officials of MISCA, including
the Special Representative of the President of the
Commission and the Head of MISCA, General Jean-
Marie Mokoko of the Republic of the Congo. The heads
of the military and police components of MISCA have
also been appointed. The Commission is now urgently
proceeding to recruit civilian personnel to serve in
MISCA. The AU will be present in Bangui to relieve
MICOPAX and get MISCA on the right track.

The African Union is resolved to ensure that we
scrupulously implement the MISCA mandate and do so
with the support of the leadership of ECCAS, which
is already making sustained efforts to deploy troops
on the ground. Those troops are the central core of the
military component ofMISCA. The ECCAS leadership,
which supports MISCA's mandate, has expressly asked
the African Union to pursue efforts to obtain a robust
mandate for the Mission from the Security Council,
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The African Union would therefore like to
implement the mandate of MISCA in an aggressive
manner, in the spirit of the expectations expressed by
the leadership of ECCAS. Similarly, in accordance
with the mandate, we will immediately give particular
attention to the humanitarian situation, which remains
very troubling throughout the country, including the
protection of civilian populations.

In the theatre of operations, MISCA intends to
conduct its activities in coordination with all other
international actors already involved in the efforts
to restore security and peace in the Central African
Republic, in particular, the French detachment in Boali
and our initiative for regional cooperation to eliminate
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA); indeed, with very
modest means but with the determined support of the
United States of America, MISCA has managed to
reduce the LRA's ability to do harm. The initiative
continues to pursue its activities.

France has committed to strengthening its
detachment in the Central African Republic. We
welcome that laudable effort with great satisfaction. I
would therefore like, before the Council, to express the

thanks of the Africa Union to France for its commitment
in the Central African Republic following its unequalled
efforts in dealing with the situation in Mali.

It is appropriate for me, on behalf of the African
Union, to thank all our partners who have taken an
active role alongside the AU and ECCAS to put an
end violence in the Central African Republic and
to build sustainable peace in the country. We also
thank the European Union for its invaluable financial
contribution, which will allow us to play a role in
Central African Republic. We also offer our gratitude
to the United States of America for its involvement in
and contribution to the action of MISCA.

I would call on all non-African partners to join in
our collective effort to break the cycle of crises in the
Central African Republic. I would also call for African
solidarity and that of States members of the African
Union in coming together at the side of a fraternal State
going through difficulties.

