Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
to wish you every success in managing its work for the
month of September. We also wish to thank Poland for
its distinguished presidency of the Council during the
month of August.

At the outset, I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, for his briefing. We assure him of our full
support. We also wish to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for his briefing. We also
wish to thank Ms. Marwa Mohamed, Head of Advocacy
and Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in Libya, for
her briefing.

I wish to focus in my statement on two topics,
namely, field and political developments and
humanitarian developments. Concerning the former
topic, we welcome the commitment of the warring
Libyan parties to the first step of Mr. Salame's plan,
which calls for respecting the humanitarian truce
that was initiated on the occasion of Bid Al-Adha
Al-Mubarak, which helped to significantly limit acts of
violence. We hope that we will be able to build upon it
in order to adopt confidence-building measures for a
ceasefire. At the same time, we hope that the Libyan
parties will tangibly respond to the three-step proposal
of the Special Representative, including holding of
international and national meetings that would lead to
strengthening efforts towards resuming the political
process based on dialogue. That would result in ending
the institutional division and reaching lasting security
and stability as part of the comprehensive democratic
process through transparent and credible presidential
and parliamentary elections based upon Paris, Palermo
and Abu Dhabi understandings.

To achieve that goal, the Security Council must
remind all Member States to comply with their
commitments according to the relevant Security Council
resolutions that established the sanctions regime,
foremost of which is arms embargo imposed with
regard to Libya. In his briefing, Mr. Salame regrettably
mentioned that there had been non-compliance
with some of the sanctions, which have proved
ineffective since the outbreak of the conflict in April.
Non-compliance with Security Council resolutions
will lead to grave consequences, and Libya could
not be an active participant in international forums.
Emphasis should also be placed on restoring the rule of
law throughout the country by strengthening the State
and its role in building unified security institutions
as well as curbing control by armed groups and their
intervention in sovereign institutions.

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
information contained in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/682) regarding an influx of foreign fighters
to Libyan soil and their participation in the ongoing
conflict there. That will lead to an increased risk of
spreading of terrorist hotbeds and entrenching their
destructive activities. The increased attacks recently
by the terrorist group Da'esh have clearly demonstrated
this growing challenge against the security and stability
of Libya and the region.

Concerning the humanitarian developments, we
have mentioned before that the daily humanitarian
suffering of the brotherly Libyan people as a result of
increased armed confrontations has reached the most
vulnerable, namely, illegal migrants in the detention
centres. We express our support for the proposal of
the Special Representative to release those migrants
while providing them with safe shelters until their
asylum applications are ready, or until they receive
repatriation support.

We appeal to the warring Libyans parties to
exercise self-restraint, respect human rights law as well
as international humanitarian law and to stop targeting
civilians and civilian institutions. They must allow
humanitarian agencies and humanitarian workers to
safely reach affected areas in order to deliver assistance
to those in need.

