Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council from Bamako, where I arrived the
day before yesterday for the sad occasion of a funeral
service in memory ofnine Blue Helmets from the Niger
who were murdered in a cowardly way in an ambush.
This was of course an opportunity for me to express
the solidarity of the entire United Nations, including
all at Headquarters and the Secretary-General, with all
our colleagues who have shown their dedication to their
mission in making the ultimate sacrifice. I should add
that yesterday evening there was a mortar attack on our
base in Kidal, which killed one Senegalese peacekeeper
and injured another.

All of this comes at a time when the Security
Council is hoping to get a reading on Mali and on the
progress that has been made in the political process
and with the security situation. To begin with the
political process, I think it is clear that we are entering
an important and delicate phase, since in 10 days the
inter-Malian consultations and dialogue will resume,
facilitated by Algeria, whose active and effective role
has been commendable. We do have to acknowledge that
progress has been slow, with the parties continuing to
insist on their positions of principle. Clearly, therefore,
on the part of both the Government and the armed
groups, genuine and credible efforts will have to be
made to find a compromise based on trust, reciprocal
goodwill and creativity.

I should say that the President, whom I met with
yesterday afternoon in Bamako, assured me that his
number-one priority was to support the political process.
Interestingly, he added that unlike the crises that Mali
has been through in the past, for the first time this one
had benefited from a significant commitment on the
part of the international community. The principles, I
think, are well known - that is, a united, republican
and secular Mali. Those are the principles the Security
Council has endorsed, and I am sure that all the Council
members recall the important high-level meeting with
President Keita that took place only 10 days ago in
New York, and which was an opportunity for all the
members of the international community who were
present to reaffirm their attachment to those principles.

I believe we should express the hope that those
matters of principle will be taken into consideration.
Again, I would like to invoke the President, if the
Minister for Foreign Affairs permits. He said no to
federalism and yes to regionalization, and I think it is
important that we understand what is behind that notion
of regionalization. It means establishing effective and
impartial governance, the effective rule oflaw, access to
basic services, the provision of economic opportunities,
and, also very important, the recognition of social and
cultural identity throughout Mali's territory. There is a
whole process of ownership that must continue, and I
hope it will go forward in a sensible way, with a certain
degree of caution, but without wasting any time. It is
important that an agreement be reached that makes it
possible for me to transition to dealing with the security
issues, and that enables us to examine the issue of
consensus and the restoration of Malian institutions in
the whole of the North, which was one of the conditions
dictating the Security Council's choices - in other
words, re-establishing Mali's full sovereignty over its
territory.

(spoke in English)

With regard to security issues, it is true that the
situation right now is worrying. I should make two
points, the first of which is that the number of victims
among the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is probably
the highest we have seen in peacekeeping operations
recently. To date, no less than 31 peacekeepers have
been killed in the course of their duty in just over
15 months. Sixty-six peacekeepers have been injured,
some of them severely. I must say that the rate of attacks
has increased substantially in the past three months.
Yesterday, there were attacks on the Senegalese Blue
Helmets; five days ago, the nine soldiers from the
Niger; and, let us not forget, before that, a large number
of Blue Helmets from Chad and also from Burkina
Faso. That is of course a factor for concern.

I think that what we are seeing is a situation in
which there is a combination of factors. The first factor
is the reduction in the presence of the French troops
of Operation Serval in northern Mali. The second
factor has been the quasi-disappearance of the Malian
security forces, especially the armed forces, from many
places in the north. All that has created a situation
where, in effect, MINUSMA is the main international
foreign presence on the ground. That makes us a
target for all those spoilers * extremists, jihadists
and traffickers - who would like to have the ground
exclusively to themselves so as to be able to continue
their nefarious activities. In effect - and that is my
second point - we are in a situation where we are no
longer in a peacekeeping environment. That behoves
us to take a number of measures in order to face such
asymmetric threats.

If you allow me, Madam President, during the
consultations that will follow I will go into more detail
on all that we have endeavoured to do and are doing to
address the situation. Suffice it to say at this point that
we are working very actively on a number of measures
designed to harden the protection of our bases and
camps, as well as our equipment and people. We are
very active in the area of mine action and explosives,
because we face the whole range of threats, including
guided rockets fired randomly, mortar shells, as was the
case yesterday in Kidal, suicide attacks, ambushes, et
cetera. We also face a number of mines and improvised
explosive devices that, as we go on, are becoming more
and more sophisticated.

There are a number of tasks that we have been
undertaking and will continue to do to address those
risks. We are also addressing the issue of the rotation
of troops in the north. To sum up, we are doing
everything that we can to help our colleagues while the
Mission support teams are doing all they can to hasten
the construction of the bases and camps despite the
tremendous logistical threats that they face.

To conclude, we are also trying to get the message
through that we need the support of all the people in
northern Mali. We need the support of the armed groups,
who should be able to make us more aware of what is
happening on the ground. We need the support of the
countries in the vicinity that know some people and
some of those groups. They can also relay the call for
support to MINUSMA because, at the end of the day, we
cannot face the threat alone. We need the commitment
and the support of all the parties to the Malian peace
process. We need the support of the compliant armed
groups in the areas that they control. The armed groups
should in fact stand by their declaration in Algiers
condemning terrorist acts and committing to taking
measures to prevent and counter such acts.

Let me finish by saying that everyone must use
every influence and every possible role to enforce the
message that MINUSMA is not and cannot be a target.

