The Niger is horrified by the senseless attacks on peacekeepers in Mali and on innocent mothers and children in Afghanistan. I wish to thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the hard work she is doing with her team in Iraq's complex environment. We also welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting. The Niger welcomes the formation of a new Government in Iraq. We look forward to working with Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and his Cabinet members. We take note of the new Government's reform agenda, which includes "addressing the COVID-19 health crisis, bringing arms under State control, strengthening the economy, protecting demonstrators, balancing external relations, safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty from external interference and securing the return of internally displaced persons to their places of origin" (S/2020/363, para. 9). We wish them luck in this new endeavour. We also reiterate our encouragement to the Iraqi authorities for their continuing efforts to develop friendly relations with neighbouring countries and to expand their partnership at the regional and global levels. Along the same lines, we appeal to all stakeholders inside and outside Iraq to exercise maximum restraint for the sake of the Iraqi people. As Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert noted in the Chamber on 3 March (see S/PV.8739), Iraq has come a long way. The efforts made, however minimal, must be appreciated, supported and encouraged. The Niger supports the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMID) to find a lasting solution in Iraq by promoting dialogue among the political parties and regional Governments, strengthening State institutions and in particular providing assistance for electoral processes per its mandate. UNAMI's support for the Independent High Electoral Commission to rebuild its institutional and electoral operational capacities is at its most important point, with the Iraqis taking the step of forming a Government. Furthermore, the political process must be part of a quest for solutions to the multiple challenges facing Iraq today. The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must include Iraqi women, and, in that regard, we welcome the UNAMI consultations with the Women's Advisory Group, whose demands for representation at all levels of political participation and protection remain legitimate. The Niger commends the determination of UNAML, the Tripartite Commission and the International Committee of the Red Cross with respect to the issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War. We also welcome the recent discoveries made, as this will bring closure to some Kuwaitis and further the relationship between the two countries. The Niger remains gravely concerned about the ongoing acts of violence against peaceful protesters and journalists. We call on the new Government to accelerate the process of finding those culpable and holding them accountable for their actions in accordance with the rule of law and Iraq's Constitution. We also join the Secretary-General's call in urging the Government of Iraq to find tangible measures to protect all peaceful protesters, civil-society activists and human right defenders. Iraq, like all other countries, is not immune to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In fact, we just learned that COVID-19 had halted activities on many fronts. My delegation commends the early and active engagement of the Government of Iraq in joining global efforts to contain the rapid spread of the pandemic with the help of the World Health Organization and UNAMI. Inthe same spirit of containment, we appeal for a special pardon; the halting of mass arrests for persons breaking the curfew; and measures to prevent potential violence, including alternatives to family visits and timely information for detainees. In addition to the threat posed by COVID-19, terrorism represents another, equally dangerous menace. We commend the continued support of the United Nations in stabilizing the five governorates in Iraq that were previously under the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Nonetheless, that terrorist group continues to operate in, and attack the population of, Iraq and foreign troops in the country. We call on the Iraqi authorities, with the support of their partners, to continue the fight against terrorists while ensuring respect for international human rights law. My last point relates to the humanitarian access issue. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, an estimated 4.1 million people in Iraq require some form of humanitarian assistance this year. The Niger calls on the Government to take immediate steps to facilitate safe, timely and unhindered access for humanitarian organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance and protection to the people affected. I would like to conclude by reiterating the Niger's support for UNAMI's work in accordance with the mandate assigned to it by the Security Council. Lastly, I call for the international community to support the new Government and its reforms so that Iraq does not fall back into dark days.
