The Secretary-General: This is a very important
meeting for the cause of peace in the Middle East and
for the central role of the Security Council in achieving
it. For the 13 months since Annapolis, Israelis and
Palestinians have been negotiating continuously on all
the core issues between them.

The Palestinian Authority has been pursuing
genuine measures of self-empowerment in the West
Bank, improving security and economic life for its
citizens in the framework of increased Israeli-
Palestinian partnership. The international community
has been devoting new efforts with the parties to secure
the implementation of Road Map commitments on the
ground.

We had hoped by now to be marking the
conclusion of a peace agreement and turning our sights
towards its implementation. We all regret that this is
not the case and we know we still face many hurdles,
but a serious process is under way. We must ensure that
what has been started is seen all the way through to its
conclusion. We know what that conclusion must be.
The occupation that began in 1967 must end. All
people in the Middle East should be able to enjoy
peace and full security. Palestinians must see the
establishment of a State of Palestine, alongside Israel,
to coexist with it in peace and security, and Israel and
the Arab world must come to live together in a
comprehensive regional peace.

As we enter 2009, we must stabilize the situation
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza and ensure
that all tracks of the process are intensified. All of us -
Israelis and Palestinians, the regional countries and the
Arab League as whole, the Quartet, including the
incoming United States Administration, and this
08-65213
Council - must maintain our unity and redouble our
efforts.

As Secretary-General of the United Nations, I am
deeply and firmly committed to the goal of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region, based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, and I hope the
Council acts today to help set us firmly, finally and
irreversibly on the path to peace in the Middle East.

