The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), to participate in this meeting.

I wish to welcome the Secretary-General,
Ministers and other representatives participating in
today's meeting. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2012/25, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Colombia, India, Pakistan,
South Africa and Togo.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/805, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on United Nations-African
Union cooperation in peace and security. I also wish to
2

draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2012/20, which contains a letter dated 9 January
2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, and to document S/2012/13,
which contains a letter dated 4 January 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item to be
considered.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

Let me take this opportunity to thank everyone
here for participating in this important debate on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and in particular the African Union.
Their presence here bears testimony to the significance
they attach to this matter, and indeed to the African
continent.

Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the topic of this
debate. I would also like to thank him for his personal
commitment to the strengthening of the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union.

When the founders of the United Nations drafted
the Charter, they had the foresight and vision to
enshrine in it provisions that encourage cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
More than six decades ago, when the Charter was
drafted, there was no practical example of how this
cooperation would be structured and executed.
However, Chapter VIII of the Charter was
groundbreaking in that, in spite of the fact that there
were no regional organizations at the time, it provided
for flexibility in cases where such regional
organizations would be established.

As members are aware, most African countries
were still under colonial rule when the United Nations
was formed in 1945. Our concerns, issues and voices
were not considered. The absence of African countries
at the time of the formation of the United Nations is
reflected in the fact that not a single African country is
a permanent member of the Security Council. This is
despite the fact that, on average, about 70 per cent of
the agenda items of the Security Council concern
Africa. It is a huge continent that has 54 member
States, representing more than 1 billion people.
12-20534
The failure of representation, on a permanent
basis, of such a big part of the globe in such an
important body as the Security Council points to the
necessity and urgency of the fundamental reform of the
Council so that it can become more representative and
legitimate. This body believes in and preaches the
culture of democracy and the will of the majority,
which is the key element in a democratic system. At
the same time, however, it cannot, in some of its key
and decisive structures, practise something that
contradicts the purposes and the principles of its
founding Charter.

The African Union, the successor to the
Organization of African Unity, was established a
decade ago to coordinate and spearhead the continent's
efforts towards development and common security.
Through its peace and security organs, the African
Union has contributed immensely to the improvement
of peace and security and to the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights in Africa. The
AU has also sought to give practical meaning to the
vision of the United Nations Charter on cooperation
with regional organizations.

We are mindful of the fact that the United
Nations Charter gives the Security Council the primary
mandate and responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including on the
African continent. At the same time, we are of the view
that recognition should be accorded to the fact that the
Charter encourages cooperation with regional bodies,
such as the AU, in carrying out the United Nations
mandate in line with the spirit of subsidiarity. It is our
View that close cooperation with regional bodies has
advantages.

Regional bodies are closer to the situation, are
familiar with the issues and often understand the
dynamics of a given conflict. Neighbouring countries
also often bear the burden and consequences of conflict
in their neighbourhoods. It is for this very reason that
we support the principle of complementarity between
the AU and the United Nations and their respective
Security Councils.

We are pleased with the cooperation that has
existed between the African Union and the United
Nations since the AU's formation 10 years ago. The
adoption of resolution 1809 (2008) in particular was a
significant development in strengthening our
cooperation. That positive experience has laid a firm
12-20534
foundation for further enhancing and strengthening the
strategic relationship between the AU and the United
Nations.

Critical to building a stronger relationship will be
to avoid a situation such as that which transpired
during the conflict in Libya last year. As everybody is
aware, the AU developed a political road map that
would have assisted in resolving the political conflict
in that country. The AU's plan was completely ignored
in favour of the bombing of Libya by NATO forces.
The consequences of the actions that were carried out
in Libya in the name of the Security Council have
spilled over into other countries of the region. A
problem that was confined to one country, Libya, has
now grown into a regional problem. It is the view of
the AU that resolution 1973 (2011) was largely abused
in some specific respects.

The lesson we should draw from the Libyan
experience is that greater political coherence and a
common vision between the AU and the United
Nations are critical to the resolution of African
conflicts. The views of the African Union must be
listened to if we are to strengthen our relationship and
prevent further conflict. We now need the United
Nations, the AU and the League of Arab States to work
together to help the Libyan people to resolve the
situation in which they find themselves.

It is also important that those who implement the
decisions of the Security Council interpret those
decisions correctly. They should also be held
accountable for the actions they take in implementing
the Security Council's binding mandates. Unless we
take that serious view, the Security Council will be
undermined and lose credibility and respect in the eyes
of the world.

Africa can prosper and stability can be
maintained if we also avoid what happened during the
Cold War. We must never forget to take lessons from
history. As Council members are aware, a lot of
destabilization and conflict in the continent was
condoned and sometimes actively supported by the
protagonists of the Cold War because the conflict
furthered their interests. That should never be allowed
to happen again. Africa must never again be a
playground for furthering the interests of other regions.
It is important to underline that point so that conflicts
in Africa become manageable. They will be
3
manageable if they are not promoted or aided from
outside the continent.

We have gained insight and understanding from
the experience of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations over the past decade in
addressing matters of peace and security. Based on that
experience, we wish to make the following proposals
for strengthening the strategic cooperation between the
two bodies.

First, we are of the strong View that there is a
need for greater strategic political coherence between
the two organizations in the resolution, prevention and
management of conflicts in Africa. In that respect, the
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council is of critical
significance. Mechanisms must be found to avoid
duplications and divergent points of departure in terms
of the approach. We therefore believe that we should
institutionalize the relationship between the two
Councils if our common objective of maintaining
international peace and security is to be maintained. In
that regard, aligning our collective policies, strategies
and mechanisms for conflict prevention, mediation and
resolution in Africa is paramount.

Secondly, we should consider the possibility of
developing and defining modalities for cooperation and
decision-making between the two institutions. That
will assist in ensuring uniformity, consistency and
certainty when the two institutions are pursuing a
common objective. We believe that this proposal will
particularly assist in addressing the challenge of how
the Security Council reacts to the requests, suggestions
and proposals of the African Union Peace and Security
Council.

Thirdly, we are convinced that a clear division of
labour will be crucial to the success of the strategic
partnership between the two organizations. That has to
take into account the different competencies, capacities
and comparative advantages of the two bodies.

Finally, the issue of capacity-building and
sustainable resource allocation remains a fundamental
challenge. That is something that the African Union
needs to discuss with the United Nations in order to
explore solutions.

The African continent has in the past decade
demonstrated sufficient political will and commitment
to rid the continent of all conflicts and wars. We are
working hard to move the continent forward on a
sustainable path of socio-economic development and
prosperity. We know that we have the support of the
United Nations on that path. We would like once again
to reiterate that, for the African continent, the
strengthening of the strategic relationship between the
African Union and United Nations is critical if we are
to rid our continent of the scourge of conflicts that has
scarred Africa for decades.

Last weekend, the African National Congress, the
oldest liberation movement on the African continent,
celebrated 100 years of existence. We wish once again
to thank the United Nations and its members for the
support that they provided to the people of South
Africa during the struggle for liberation. The United
Nations declared apartheid a crime against humanity
and, in so doing, put enormous pressure on the
apartheid regime and on its supporters. In this
centenary year, we extend our deepest gratitude to the
United Nations for supporting freedom, peace, human
rights and justice in our country. We also thank the
Secretary-General for the recent high-level symposium
on South Africa's contribution to the fight against
racism and xenophobia, held here at United Nations
Headquarters last September.

We pledge to continue our dedication and
commitment to human rights, peace, democracy and
justice so that the support of countless men and women
here at United Nations Headquarters can prove not to
have been in vain. In that respect, partnership with the
international community and with the United Nations
in particular is critical. I wish the Council well in this
debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

