Mr. Matjila (South Africa): The delegation of
South Africa would like join others in thanking the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his
insightful, broad and forward-looking briefing. As this
is the first time that my delegation participates in the
political briefing on Syria, please allow me to join my
colleagues in congratulating Mr. Pedersen on assuming
his important role as the facilitator of the political
process in Syria. He has a challenging task ahead ofhim.
Our responsibility as the Security Council, together
with the backing of the international community,
is to provide him with all the support necessary to
successfully facilitate a Syrian-led, United Nations-
sponsored political process, as outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). We welcome his determination to build
upon the solid progress achieved by his predecessor,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura.

Next month will mark eight years since the crisis
in Syria began. We are extremely concerned about the
devastating and tragic consequences that the war in
Syria continues to have on the people of the country. It
is also having an increasingly destabilizing impact on
the wider region, through the displacement of people,
the exacerbation of political and sectarian differences
and the spread of extremism. It is the Security Council's
responsibility to ensure that political progress is made
and that Syria returns to normal. The people of Syria
deserve a future that is stable and prosperous.

Since the Syrian conflict erupted, South Africa
has maintained a principled position by reiterating the
importance of protecting the fundamental interests
and rights of the Syrian people, of maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East region, and
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basic norms governing
international relations.

We reiterate our View that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that
reflects the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed
protection for all groups in Syrian society. We
therefore call upon the Council to unite behind the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) as the road
map towards a long-term political solution in Syria.

We welcome the extensive consultations that
Mr. Pedersen has undertaken with the Government
of Syria, the opposition parties and key partners
in the region since January, when he took up
his responsibilities. Those comprehensive and in-depth
engagements are critical to building trust among
the people of Syria and the region and to move the
process forward. Equally important to the success of
the political process in Syria is the need to respect the
ceasefire and de-escalation agreements and to continue
to fight terrorism.

Furthermore, South Africa commends
Mr. Pedersen's efforts to continue overseeing the
deliberations on the establishment of the constitutional
committee. We call upon all relevant parties to make
every possible effort to support Ambassador Pedersen
in that endeavour.

In order to ensure that the Syrian-led and United
Nations-sponsored political dialogue does not end
behind big walls and in great halls in foreign countries,
we need to facilitate the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to resettle peacefully in their
ancestral lands. We need to receive regular feedback
from Mr. Pedersen and to ensure that all the groups have
a seat at the table and participate in talks on progress
so that the Syrian people are not reduced to being mere
observers in a process that will determine their future
and that of future generations. Rather, we must make

sure they participate in and own the outcome of the
process and build a stable, prosperous Syria.

Finally, the Council and the international
community should support a political solution to the
situation in Syria as a matter of priority and continue to
support the United Nations, including the Special Envoy,
as well as other mediation efforts aimed at resolving
the conflict. South Africa continues to maintain that
democracy is an unassailable right of the Syrian people
and therefore remains convinced that in a complex and
diverse society such as Syria's, there can be no military
solution, only a political negotiated settlement.

