Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the situation in Angola, which reflects, among other things,
the exceptional work being done by the men and women of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) to support the peace process under trying
conditions. My thanks also go to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Maitre Beye, whose extraordinary
devotion to his mission of bringing peace to Angola has
been exemplary.

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
distinguished ministerial delegation whose members have
addressed the Council on behalf of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC). Their role in the peace
process is vital, lending their voice and a helping hand to
bring the long era of conflict in Angola to a close. We were

 

very pleased to hear this morning that Angola has been
placed on the front burner of SADC's regional and
international agenda, and we fully agree with the
assessment of the Foreign Minister of Zimbabwe that the
condition of no peace, no war for Angola is unacceptable.

Despite that assessment, we must also acknowledge
that we have come a long way on the path towards peace
and national reconciliation, given the dark days of just a
few years ago. Angola, and indeed the world, is poised
for the most significant, and to some the most difficult,
step in this process: the integration of two warring parties
into a single entity, politically unified under a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and
militarily unified under a single high command with a
single armed force.

With so much accomplished and with the end in
sight, however, we are very troubled to find the peace
process nearly at a standstill, with dates for
accomplishment of promised actions set and repeatedly
disregarded; with combatants in quartering areas
becoming impatient to get on with their lives; with the
rains that hinder all forms of transportation threatening to
unhinge all demobilization plans.

It is time now for UNITA to act boldly, to take the
remaining steps towards compliance with the obligations
it set for itself in the Lusaka Protocol. Militarily, it must
integrate its senior generals into the high command and
designate its combatants for service in the nation's armed
forces. Politically, it must take its place in a Government
of National Unity, with its representatives rejoining the
National Assembly to assist in developing legislation and
with its civilian officials helping to spread central State
control throughout the national territory. It is also
incumbent on the Government of Angola to foster the
conditions for this to take place by putting aside past
differences and making use of the vast resources of talent
being provided by UNITA.

We and the rest of the world cannot hide our
impatience with the standstill in the process. As friends of
all the people of Angola, we have given our advice and
support. Now, as any good friend would do, we see that
the time has come to express ourselves more strongly, to
help a friend to find the way more clearly to make a
decision that, although difficult and fraught with
uncertainty, is the best one. The United States strongly
urges UNITA to avail itself of the security of the few
remaining months of UNAVEM. IIl's mission to complete
rapidly these commitments.

 

If UNITA can make these efforts and the Government
of Angola can honour its agreement to welcome UNITA's
reintegration, then the United States and, I would think,
other members of the international community would be
prepared to offer our continuing assistance in rebuilding
Angola.

I am proud of the role played by my country in this
international effort to assist Angola. This past year, the
United States provided more than $100 million in assistance
to address the tragic legacy of civil war, through
programmes to resettle refugees and displaced persons,
demobilize soldiers, build democratic institutions, reform
the economy, demine the roads and fields and address the
disproportionate hardships for women, children and the
handicapped. Today, child soldiers are putting down their
AK-47s and picking up schoolbooks; joint teams are
learning to lift the millions of mines that plague Angola
instead of planting new ones; the Government and UNITA
are deciding their futures around a negotiating table and not
on a battlefield.

In short, we have come a long way, and we can
almost see the end. We can almost see the withdrawal of
the large UNAVEM. III military force provided by the
Member States of the United Nations to ensure peace in
Angola during this difficult transition. We can almost see
a vast reduction in the threat of landmines to future
generations of Angolans. We can almost see the entire
region of southern Africa finally at peace: Mozambique at
peace, South Africa at peace, Namibia at peace and now
the possibility of Angola joining its brothers. We can
almost see the commencement of a new era of peace and
prosperity as Angola, with the assistance of other nations,
reasserts itself in the world economy.

The continued commitment of the United States to the
success of the peace process is evidenced by the fact that
the Secretary of State will visit Luanda next week. He is
hopeful that his visit can add to the impetus already
provided by the SADC summit of last week to reinvigorate
the peace process, and to the work of the Angolan people
to build the new Angola, an Angola that is democratic,
respectful of human rights, market-oriented and possessing
the basic institutions of a civil society.

