Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by thanking you, Sir, for convening this morning's
meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste. The entire
international community can rightly share in the
successes achieved by the people of Timor-Leste.
Timor-Leste is indeed one of the most recent and
remarkable success stories of our times.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report and, particularly, Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno for the inputs he has made, which will
facilitate our discussion this morning.

I would also like to say that we are very pleased
to see Minister Ramos-Horta among us this morning to
grace our discussions. We would also like to say that
we align ourselves fully, as a member of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP),
with the statement that will be made later by
Ambassador Joao Augusto de Medicis, Executive
Secretary of CPLP.

My delegation is greatly encouraged by the
steady progress accomplished by Timor-Leste since its
people decided with unshakeable courage and
determination to embark on the path to independent
nationhood. The Security Council is discussing today
how best to assist the Timorese people and that young
nation across a crucial threshold of its history. The
United Nations is called on once again to continue
playing a decisive role, as it has in the recent past, in
building a future of security, justice and prosperity for
Timor-Leste.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
been an instrumental element of such endeavours by
carefully checking on the present and future needs of
the Timorese people and by providing a careful
assessment of the situation of the country. Despite the
fact that Timor-Leste is experiencing a remarkable
period of peace and stability, it still faces a relatively
fragile environment for a sustainable trend towards
progress and development. The main institutions of the
State - the defence forces, the police and the judicial
system - still need external assistance and
consolidation, as the report of the Secretary-General
recognizes, recommending a continuing international
presence in Timor-Leste.

We fully agree with the principles outlined in the
report on the need for further United Nations assistance
to Timor-Leste so as to consolidate and build upon the
gains achieved so far. We also concur with the
recommendation contained in the report that the
Security Council should consider the extension of the
current Mission in Timor-Leste for a further 12-month
period - a "consolidation phase". This calls for a
modified mandate providing assistance to the justice
system and to the core administrative structures and
contributing to the continued development of the
national police and to the maintenance of security and
stability in Timor-Leste, as has been proposed. My
delegation will be ready to participate, in due time, in
the discussion of such a draft resolution.

It is my delegation's view that the
implementation of those proposals would provide a
realistic framework for consolidating the situation in
Timor-Leste, for successfully concluding the work of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor,
and for contributing to the building of a democratic and
stable society.

We share the common view that Timor-Leste still
needs to acquire the capability to secure its self-
defence. Therefore, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, the presence of a minor contingent is quite in
line with the reality on the ground. We welcome the
assessment of the Timorese authorities of the good
faith and political will demonstrated by the Indonesian
Government in preventing the use of its territory for
acts of destabilization against Timor-Leste. In that
regard, we deem it essential, in order to create
appropriate conditions for the sustained stability and
development of Timor-Leste, that relations between the
two countries continue to improve - and to improve
steadily - and that they establish good-neighbourly
relations of a permanent character as a prerequisite for
Timor-Leste's facing the future with confidence as a
country fully integrated into its geographical, cultural
and geostrategic environment.

We have also followed with great interest and
commend the authorities in Dili for the establishment
of good relations with all the countries of the region.
Australia, as a key partner in the region, can continue
in the future to play a role, particularly assisting in
strengthening the institutions of the country. That
should be viewed as a complementary effort towards
further strengthening the security and other sectors of
the country.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's full agreement with the proposals and
recommendations contained in the special report of the
Secretary-General, in the expectation that they will
meet with the approval of the Security Council and of
all the countries constituting the main stakeholders in
the situation in Timor-Leste. That would be a
contribution to regional peace, stability and a future of
democracy and development for Timor-Leste.

