Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): It gives me pleasure, Madam Minister, to
welcome you as you preside over the work of the
Security Council and to congratulate you on South
Africa's successful presidency of the Council for the
month of March, which is culminating in today's open
debate. My delegation also welcomes the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Congo and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
Identifying the joint approaches needed to
effectively overcome today's threats and challenges
requires steadily increasing cooperation between the
United Nations and its Security Council on the one
hand and regional partners on the other. As stated in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly 
07-28578
resolution 60/1), such cooperation must be firmly
based on the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular Chapter VIII.

In recent years, the Security Council has
repeatedly addressed the theme of enhancing practical
cooperation with regional organizations. Today's
debate, which focuses on interaction with the African
Union, offers further confirmation of the serious
attention the Security Council is paying to the
important task of developing an effective strategy for
peacekeeping, stability and security in Africa. Here,
priority must be given to political and diplomatic
methods of conflict prevention and settlement, in
which Africans themselves have a key role to play. In a
large number of cases, the peacekeeping efforts of the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Southern African Development
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, along with mediation missions by
eminent African political leaders, have made it possible
to make significant progress in strengthening regional
stability.

Russia has consistently promoted the View that
the efforts of African organizations should be fully
backed by the authority of the Security Council and by
the logistical and technical capacity of the United
Nations. That is particularly relevant to the work of the
African Union mission in Darfur, which we fully
support. Efforts to build Africa's peacekeeping
capacity - including exchanging information,
conducting joint manoeuvres and carrying out
demining programmes - are of great significance. To
be sure, feedback is important, first and foremost in
effectively planning and conducting regional
operations and properly ensuring accountability to the
Security Council. That is most relevant when the
Council not only supports but also takes decisions
sanctioning such operations.

Russia is contributing to the training of African
peacekeepers, and it intends to expand such activities.
A significant and useful discussion on the problems of
Africa, with the participation of the Presidents of the
Congo and the Republic of South Africa, took place at
the Group of Eight Summit chaired by Russia last year
at Saint Petersburg.

Post-conflict reconstruction and development
assistance constitute an integral part of the
international strategy to secure peace and prevent

conflict in Africa. Here, the Peacebuilding
Commission - which already has Burundi and Sierra
Leone on its agenda - has a key coordinating role to

play.

We hope that today's discussion will enable us to
move forward in implementing the decisions taken at
the 2005 World Summit and will give further impetus
to the process of enhancing multifaceted interaction
with the African Union and other regional
organizations with a View to strengthening collective
international security on the basis of the Charter.

I wish in conclusion to express our appreciation
to you, Madam President, and to the entire South
African delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement, on which we have all agreed and which will
be adopted later today.

