Mr. Ferrarin (Italy) (interpretation from French): I
should like first of all to say that the Italian delegation
completely endorses the contents of the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Ireland, Ambassador John
Campbell, on behalf of the European Union; we associate
ourselves with that statement without reservation.

We thank the Secretary-General for his extremely
detailed report on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, and
express our appreciation for the tireless efforts made by his
Special Envoy, Ambassador Brunner, and for the
contribution to the search for a peaceful settlement of the
question by the Russian Federation in its capacity as
facilitator, and by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The report of the Secretary-General indicates very
clearly that in spite of the international community's efforts
through the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) and the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) peace-keeping force, the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, has only worsened over the past few months. The
level of violence and intimidation in the Abkhaz region has
reached an intolerable point, which prevents the peace-
keeping forces from fulfilling their mandate. Italy firmly
condemns the use of violence and the ethnically motivated
killings and fully shares the view of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
recently declared unacceptable the attempts at demographic
modification in the region resulting from the conflict.
Likewise, we deplore the obstacles placed by the Abkhaz
authorities in the way of the free return of refugees and
displaced persons. We urge them to implement existing
agreements without further delay.

These violations of international humanitarian law
must not go unanswered. We appeal in particular to the
Abkhaz side to display moderation, to promote the
implementation of the human rights protection programme
and to cooperate toward that end with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the OSCE.
Furthermore, we express our grave concern at the
negative attitude of the Abkhaz leadership on the aspects
related to the future political status of the region. We
wish to underscore that it is up to it to make the major
efforts to eliminate obstacles to a peaceful settlement of
the question, in keeping with the principle of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, a principle
for which we reaffirm our unreserved support.

In this regard, we wish once again to draw attention
to the responsible attitude of the Government of Georgia,
which has already made a number of good-will gestures
to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the conflict, including
the submission of a political proposal which appears to us
entirely worthy of consideration.

In conclusion, we cannot fail to support the
assessment of the Secretary-General that no measure
taken by the United Nations can be effective unless the
parties, and in particular the Abkhaz side, display the
necessary will to cooperate in the search for a solution.
This is why we are convinced that the negotiations must
continue. We support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the UNOMIG mandate be renewed
until 31 January 1997. Italy will therefore vote in favour
of the draft resolution, whose contents, we believe, reflect
the current status of the question and which clearly
delineate the responsibilities in the conflict.

