Mr. Knight (Jamaica): Allow me at the outset to
express my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
leadership of the Security Council during the month of
February. Your diplomatic skills and gracious style
have obviously ensured the smooth and effective
handling of the various matters which have come
before the Council. I had the pleasure of visiting your
great country just over a week ago, and I was
impressed by its progress and its economic
development, as well as by its strong support for
multilateralism and the international system. I wish to
thank you and the Council for acting promptly on my
request to convene this meeting, and I am pleased to
see the Secretary-General, who I know has a keen
interest in this matter.

My delegation has come before the Security
Council, on behalf of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), to call the urgent attention of the
international community to the rapidly deteriorating
situation in Haiti. The situation has now reached crisis
proportions, given the continuing breakdown in law
and order, the rising insurgency and the conditions of
sheer anarchy and chaos, as well as a worsening
humanitarian crisis, which in turn has caused
displacement of the population, resulting in increasing
numbers of refugees pouring out of the country.

As the members of the Council are aware, during
the past weeks the political upheaval in Haiti has
escalated, with heavily armed groups using force to
extend control over parts of the country. They have
already managed to seize every city in the northern part
of the country and it is now our understanding that they
will seek to advance even further, with the intention of
marching on the capital, Port-au-Prince. The already
weakened and outnumbered Haitian National Police
have been forced to abandon their posts or protectively
barricade themselves against the mounting attacks of
the rebel groups. In the latest flare-up of violence,
some 70 persons have so far been killed. The
prevailing situation within Haiti can no longer be
viewed as an internal matter. The current situation now
poses a serious threat to regional peace and security,
given the outflow of refugees, which threatens to
overwhelm the resources of States in the region.

The past 20 months have been particularly
challenging, without much progress towards ending
polarization or building a political consensus. The
result is that the country is now locked in a political
stalemate as a result of the steadfast refusal of the
opposition to engage in the process of dialogue
mandated by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
action plan.

Given Haiti's status as its newest member,
CARICOM. has been concerned with the developments
in that country and has sought to provide its good
offices on numerous occasions to bring a lasting
resolution to the crisis. We have maintained that
adherence to the following principles is critical: first,
the full application of democracy in Haiti; secondly,
non-acceptance of a coup d'etat in any form; and
thirdly, that any change in Haiti must be in accordance
with the Haiti's constitution.

The situation in Haiti is a serious regional
concern. It is important to note that, in keeping with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, regional organizations are
often the first recourse in addressing threats to peace
and security. Following the coup d'etat against
President Aristide in 1991, CARICOM, as the directly
relevant sub-regional organization, participated fully in
the ongoing efforts of the Organization of American
States (OAS) and the United Nations to restore peace
and stability in Haiti, including through the provision
of civilian and military assistance.

The most recent CARICOM. efforts, initiated in
early January this year, have included fact-finding
missions to Haiti and meetings with the President of
Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and with the opposition.
CARICOM's initiative outlining proposals for moving
the process forward was presented at a meeting held
with the major political stakeholders in Nassau, the
Bahamas, from 20 to 21 January. The opposition
undertook to discuss the document internally. At
CARICOM's invitation, observers from the United
States, Canada and the OAS participated in the Nassau
meeting.

On 31 January, Prime Minister Patterson of
Jamaica, in his capacity as chairman of CARICOM,
hosted a meeting with President Aristide in Kingston.
We were again joined by our international partners,
including, this time, the European Union. This meeting
produced the CARICOM. Prior Action Plan, which
President Aristide accepted. It involved certain
measures to improve the security climate and to
generally build confidence. These included compliance
with previous OAS resolutions, negotiation of rules for
demonstrations, the release of detainees, disarmament
of strong-arm groups, the strengthening of the police
force and the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms. The
Plan also envisaged the establishment of an electoral
commission, the formation of a council of eminent
persons and the appointment of a neutral and
independent prime minister. It further called for the
formation of a new Government through a process of
consultations between the Prime Minister, the President
and the council. Emanating from a subsequent meeting
in Washington, with the participation of the United
States Secretary of State, the Foreign Minister of
Canada, the Secretary-General of the OAS and the
permanent observer of France to the OAS, a plan of
action was drawn up to facilitate the implementation of
the CARICOM. Prior Action Plan.

The plan was accepted by President Aristide but
has been rejected by the opposition. Members of the
Council will well appreciate that it is impossible to
make meaningful progress unless both sides are willing
to do their part. The fact is that there are some steps
that the President cannot take alone, as they require
participation by the opposition and other stakeholders.

The situation we now face is completely different
from that which began as a political impasse over the
exercise of rights and the role of opposition groups.
The more recent incursions by heavily armed rebel
forces from the north have resulted in reprisal killings,
the destruction of property and general lawlessness,
creating a state of anarchy in much of the country. As
Prime Minister Patterson indicated in a letter to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan last week, immediate
action is needed to safeguard democracy and to avert
bloodshed and a humanitarian disaster.

In response to the rapidly deteriorating political
situation in Haiti, the Government of President Aristide
has requested the international community to assist in
the restoration of security, order and the rule of law
within his country. Specifically, and given the
likelihood of the rebel forces reaching the capital,
CARICOM. has been requested to garner support in the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, with the
possibility of their participation in a multinational
force in Haiti.

While CARICOM. will continue to play its role in
seeking a political solution to the crisis in Haiti, we
believe the United Nations has a special responsibility
in assisting Haiti, given its record of involvement in
previous peacekeeping missions. The restoration of
peace and stability should be considered as part of its
unfinished business.
In this context, we welcome the appointment by
the Secretary-General of a special advisor to coordinate
and promote greater United Nations engagement in
dealing with the current crisis.

The United Nations past active involvement in
Haiti highlights an historical recognition of its
responsibility to assist in finding a solution to what has
been an intractable situation for too long. The United
Nations role has had a significant impact on past
attempts that have been deemed relatively successful in
stemming the downward spiral and in bringing the
parties to the negotiating table. There is no doubt that
the volatile situation in Haiti today and the potential
for further chaos is not only a threat to the peace and
security of the region but also, necessarily, of great
concern to the international community.

It is against this background that CARICOM
member States seek the direct and immediate
intervention of the United Nations in Haiti within the
context of the United Nations Charter. The situation is
one of utmost urgency and the need for decisive action
is paramount.

The immediate need is for the Security Council to
authorize the urgent deployment of a multinational
force to assist in the restoration of law and order, to
facilitate a return to stability and to create an
environment in which the continuing efforts to find a
solution to the political crisis can be pursued. Such
international support would be important in preparing
the ground for parliamentary elections and for a
presidential election when due. A solution is vital for
Haiti's short- and long-term future, which is so
seriously endangered by the escalating insurgency and
the prospect of a bloody civil war. The Council should
authorize the creation of a force to do this and
encourage participation by those States with the
available resources.

I wish to advise the Council that some members
of CARICOM. have already indicated a willingness to
contribute to such a force within their individual
capacities. All members of the international community
should do their part. I should stress, Sir, that
CARICOM's stand on this issue is not driven by any
desire to promote the political interests of any
particular personality in the Haitian political arena. It is
based on the need to remain faithful to democratic
principles and the integrity of a constitutional order.

CARICOM. also calls upon the Security Council
to endorse urgent action by the international
community to address the growing humanitarian crisis
and the need to extend assistance, including through
the delivery of international aid through the smooth
transition to long-term economic and social
reconstruction.

In the light of the growing surge of refugees to
neighbouring States, it is also imperative that the States
affected be provided with the requisite resources to
offset costs for the provision of relief and humanitarian
assistance to the refugees.

It is a cruel twist of fate that the first free black
republic in this hemisphere has had such a long and
difficult history of struggle to protect that very
freedom. It is even a more cruel irony that, in this, the
bicentenary of the commemoration of the historic event
that marked the end of their struggle and the beginning
of a new era of freedom, the people of Haiti are today
vastly removed from the goals they valiantly fought to
achieve - political freedom, economic prosperity and
social stability.

Let us collectively determine again to come to the
support of the valiant though long-suffering people of
Haiti in their hour of need and to meet their urgent
requirements at this critical time. The people of Haiti
need help. We are here seeking that help.

