Mr. Dumitru (Romania): At the outset, I would
like to express to you, Mr. President, and to the people
and the Government of the Russian Federation
Romania's heartfelt condolences for the tragic
accidents involving the two Russian aeroplanes. We
also express our deepest sympathy to the bereaved
families.

I am pleased to join other delegations in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his excellent
opening briefing, which provided us with a timely and
useful update on the situation in Afghanistan. I wish
also to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) (S/2004/634).

Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.
Therefore, I shall confine myself to specific comments.

In less than two months, Afghanistan will be
entering the crucial phase of presidential elections. At
this time, I do not wish to evoke the symbolism of that
essential stage in Afghanistan's democratic
transformation, but I do wish to point out a few aspects
that, in our view, remain key prerequisites for holding
presidential elections. The ultimate objective should be
to have credible, fair and free elections. To that end, no
effort should be spared by the international community
in supporting the Afghans to address the remaining
challenges in the coming months: improving the
security situation, accelerating the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and continuing the registration process.

First, given the triad formed by extremist
violence, factionalism and the narcotics industry - the
main threats to the current situation in Afghanistan -
there is undoubtedly a need for a greater focus on
security. In particular, the approach of the elections
seems to be generating an unprecedented resurgence of
activities perpetrated by those who oppose the current
political and stabilization processes. In that context, we
fully agree with the idea expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report that, in order to ensure the
conditions for free and fair elections, a net increase in
international security assistance remains indispensable.
Much more work must also be done to restore a
security environment consistent with the expansion of
humanitarian and development activities. Equally
essential are the security measures requested to ensure
greater safety for United Nations personnel and assets.

It is beyond doubt that preventing instability from
taking an increased hold in Afghanistan must be
matched by the international community's
determination to stand by its commitments. In that
regard, Romania welcomes the decisions adopted in
Istanbul at the NATO summit, and we believe that
setting up new provincial reconstruction teams and
committing new resources are crucial for the future of
Afghanistan. NATO's increased contribution in
Afghanistan demonstrates once more the political
weight and effective impact of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in
stabilization processes.

For its part, Romania remains committed in
Afghanistan. Our contribution of self-sustaining troops
and personnel to the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and to Operation Enduring Freedom
amounts to 500 personnel. At the same time, Romania
will continue to contribute military technology and
personnel to help build the capacity of Afghanistan's
national armed forces.

As a number of successes achieved in the areas of
public administration and economic and social
development demonstrate, international support must
be strongly associated with the Afghan authorities'
own efforts to complete the process of reforming the
national security institutions and extending authority
throughout the country. That is the only way to make a
difference in overcoming the obstacles engendered
both by decades of war and by the very nature of power
in Afghanistan in recent years.
Secondly, with regard to voter registration, we are
enthusiastic about UNAMA's reports on the impressive
number of Afghans who have registered to vote, and
we especially appreciate the fact that women account
for some 41 per cent of that number. UNAMA deserves
a strong commendation for the efforts undertaken in
that regard. Moreover, in View of the parliamentary
elections to be held by April next year, we would like
to stress the importance of further sustained and
coordinated actions aimed at achieving a multi-ethnic
balance at the executive and legislative levels. The
regional imbalances in total voter registration rates
should be a serious warning in that regard.

Thirdly, regarding the implementation of DDR,
we believe there is a need for further progress in order
to ensure a safer environment for the holding of the
elections. However, the issue of reintegrating former
soldiers should be cautiously approached, particularly
in the light of the current high unemployment level and
taking into account its potential for generating further
instability.

Finally, in View of the general partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community -
as reaffirmed at the Berlin conference - we would like
to briefly highlight the potential of regional
cooperation for boosting the stability and development
of Afghanistan. The declaration adopted at the high-
level conference on regional economic cooperation,
held in May in Bishkek, rightly stressed the importance
of regional cooperation for Afghanistan's recovery and
for stability in the region. Romania strongly
encourages Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries
to develop concrete projects of cooperation at the
regional level, both in the economic field and in
combating narco-trafficking.

