Mr. Kim Won-soo: I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to brief the
Council on the Syrian chemical file, undertaken in
furtherance of Security Council resolutions 2118
(2013), 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016). But I will do so
with a heavy heart.

Since yesterday morning, I have been in close
contact with the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). I
also met with the charge' d'affaires of the Syrian Arab
Republic in New York.

I will first brief the Security Council on the most
recent reported use of chemical weapons, in Khan
Shaykhun, in Idlib, Syria. At this point, information
is still coming in. Currently, details about the attack
are not fully known, but, according to the most recent
media reports, a chemical attack may have caused
the deaths of at least 70 civilians, with perhaps more
than 200 injured. Both the Secretary-General and the
OPCW Director General issued statements expressing
grave concern about these reports and reiterating their
condemnation of any chemical-weapons use.

I have been in close contact with the Director-
General since the first reports came in yesterday. He
informed me that the OPCW Fact Finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic is actively engaged in
gathering and analysing information from all available
sources and will be prepared to deploy a team at the
earliest opportunity.

If confirmed, this would constitute the single
largest chemical-weapons attack in the Syrian Arab
Republic since the attack on eastern Ghouta, in August
2013. Reports have stated that the attack was carried
out through an airstrike on a residential area. However,
the means of delivery of the alleged attack cannot be
definitively confirmed at this stage.

Reports have also indicated that the presentation
of symptoms after the attack included respiratory
problems, vomiting, fainting and foaming at the mouth,
as well as miosis, or pupillary constriction. This was
visible in videos on social media said to have been
taken at the scene of the attack.

During my discussions yesterday with the charge'
d'affaires of the Syrian Arab Republic, he stated that
his Government denied having used chemical weapons
in this attack or any other attack.

I would like now to turn to my monthly briefing on
work regarding the Syrian chemical file.

First, on destruction, for the last three years
following Syria's initial declaration, all declared
chemical materials and equipment have been removed
or destroyed. Four hangars and seven tunnels have
been disabled. One hangar and two above-ground
stationary facilities remain subject to verification of
their disablement.

This work is still pending, mainly due to the
prevailing security situation around these facilities. For
this work to be complete, the OPCW, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the United Nations Office for Project
Services extended the tripartite agreement until the end
of this year.

Secondly, on the declaration assessment, for the past
three years the OPCW has worked with the Syrian Arab
Republic to assess and verify the declaration. A number
of outstanding issues related to Syria's declaration still
remain open. The high-level consultations between
the OPCW and the Government of Syria to address
these unresolved issues will resume in The Hague in
early May.

The first OPCW inspection at the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) took place
starting last February. During this inspection, OPCW
inspectors took samples, which are now being analysed
by OPCW-designated laboratories.
Thirdly, on investigations into alleged chemical
attacks, the OPCW Fact Finding Mission is looking at
a number of incidents that have taken place over the
past several months. It is in the process of finalizing its
reporting, and this should be done in some weeks' time.
Should any Fact Finding Mission report conclude that
an incident involved or likely involved the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons, it will provide the basis for the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) to begin its work to attribute responsibility for
their use.

The investigative capacity of the JIM. is now
operational. It is based in The Hague owing to the
obvious need for it to work closely with the OPCW
teams. It will be fully ready to begin its work as soon
as the Mission reaches its conclusions. The political
and other support structures of the JIM. in New York
are likewise operational, with a liaison presence in
Damascus soon to be established.

As has been done in the past, I expect that all
members of the Security Council, and all Member
States in a position to do so, will provide information
and access to both the Mission and the JIM. in order to
facilitate the collection ofevidence for the establishment
of facts.

The Secretary-General is deeply disturbed by
the continuing reports of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun and elsewhere in Syria.
The Secretary-General recalls that the Security Council
has repeatedly determined that the use of chemical
weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to international
peace and security as well as a serious violation of
international law.

With this determination, the international
community has made tremendous efforts, symbolized
by three consecutive joint missions of the OPCW and
the United Nations over the past four years, to stop
the impunity for chemical-weapons use from growing
any further.

Despite these efforts, however, it is profoundly
disturbing to witness the tragic consequences of
the continued use of chemical weapons on innocent
civilians. We are grateful to the Security Council for
addressing this issue with unity, including through the
creation and renewal of the JIM.

On our part, we would like to reassure the members
of the Security Council that the OPCW and United
Nations secretariats will provide every possible support
to the work ofboth the Fact-finding Mission and the JIM
so that these missions will discharge their mandates in
an independent, impartial and professional manner.
We look forward to the deliberations of and continuing
guidance from the Security Council.

