Judge Byron: I would like, first of all, to express
appreciation for the kind and encouraging words
addressed to me as I assume the Office of President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). I would like to give the Security Council the
assurance that I will make my best efforts to attain the
laudable objectives of the Tribunal. I would also
indicate that I will, with great pleasure, convey to my
predecessor, Judge Erik Mose, the kind words and
congratulatory messages expressed by members here
today.

This is the first time that I have attended a
meeting such as this, and the most powerful impression
I have is the intimate knowledge of the challenges
facing the Tribunal which has been exhibited by all
participants here today. That makes it unnecessary, I
think, for me to reiterate any points I had made earlier,
and particularly I recall that during the course of this
week there will be an opportunity for more detailed
discussions on the legacy and issues which have been
raised today.

I have every confidence that the attention to
detail that has been demonstrated today will lead to
finding the most appropriate solutions to the challenges
that have been highlighted.

Before closing, I should refer to the questions
that were specifically addressed to me by the
representatives of the Republic of Congo and of South
Africa, both of which relate to the same issue: dealing
with the location of acquitted persons.

The Tribunal needs to address these issues in a
holistic manner. Nothing that I have said indicated that
there was a problem with cooperation with Rwanda,
which, as I have specifically stated, continues to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal in all its activities.

But some of the issues which have been affecting
the decision-making in these processes include the
interests of justice and human rights, including
concerns expressed by the acquitted or released
persons. The Tribunal has been acting, with the
assistance of States and relevant United Nations
agencies, to deploy its best efforts to resolve this
matter in a manner that is consistent with the rules of
international humanitarian law, taking into account the
best interests of all concerned.

I hope that I have answered the questions which
have been raised as fully as I can at this time.

As my colleague Judge Pocar said, I also have
taken note of the remarks made today. We are
particularly pleased at the widespread assertion of the
importance of State cooperation to the attainment of
the goals of the Tribunal, and, on behalf of the
Tribunal, I express appreciation once again to the
Security Council for the interest it has evinced, the
support it has given and its pledges to continue giving
it.

