Mr. Kan (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English text provided by the delegation): Today, threats to the
security of human beings are diversifying, as
exemplified by issues such as the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and acts of
piracy. Furthermore, the context in which such threats
originate is becoming more complex. To cut off those
threats at the root, we need to fully understand their
causes and carefully choose the most appropriate
policy options.

In April this year, Japan hosted a ministerial
meeting in this Chamber, and we came to the
conclusion that a peacebuilding strategy is necessary to
enable us to work in a comprehensive and integrated
manner on political, security and development issues.

It is worthwhile for world leaders to engage in
discussions on peacebuilding on this occasion. It is
testimony to the fact that peacebuilding is an urgent
issue and a common goal of the international
community. I appreciate the initiative of President
Abdullah Giil of Turkey in this regard.

What does true peace mean? Can we call the
mere absence of the state of war or conflict "peace"?
No, that is not the case. Restoring peace and the lives
of people destroyed by war, conflicts and natural
disaster leads to true peace. Japan fully supports the
people who strive for the reconstruction of societies
and the economies in this process of restoration.

That is why I firmly believe that the most
important role of State leaders is to reduce, to the
extent possible, sources of human suffering such as
diseases, poverty and conflict. I call this concept the
realization of a society where human suffering is
reduced to a minimum. I also introduced this idea as a
fundamental philosophy during my speech yesterday at
the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly. Japan will take proactive and concrete
action towards the realization of true peace.

Based on these thoughts, Japan will promote its
assistance through focusing on four pillars, namely,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
human security.

First is peacekeeping. As Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
Japan will lead discussions on enhancing cooperation
among countries contributing to peacekeeping
activities and on securing the necessary resources for
peacekeeping operations. Japan itself is actively
contributing to peacekeeping and other related
operations. This year, we expeditiously dispatched
Japanese self-defence forces to the disaster-affected
countries of Haiti and Pakistan. We also decided to
dispatch military liaison officers to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.

Let us next consider peacebuilding. The common
assumption is that peacebuilding is to begin after
peacekeeping ends. However, in order to realize true
peace, it is imperative to engage in peacebuilding in
tandem with peacekeeping activities from the early
stages of the latter. Japan has learned the importance of

a comprehensive and integrated approach to
peacebuilding through its experience with long-term
assistance in peacebuilding in Cambodia, where we
were fully engaged from the outset, hosting a peace
conference and donors' conferences, and where we
continued to provide support through the final stage of
the peace process, the Khmer Rouge trials. In the
nation-building efforts in Timor-Leste, our
contributions based on such prior experience are about
to bear fruit. We attach great importance to
peacebuilding efforts employing similar approaches in
other areas, such as Afghanistan, Iraq, the Middle East
and Africa.

Of all of these, it is Afghanistan that presents the
greatest challenge to the international community in
terms of peacebuilding, and it is that country to which
Japan is providing the most intensive assistance. In
cooperation with various partners, Japan has extended
comprehensive and integrated support for the Afghan
Government's efforts, focusing on three pillars: the
improvement of security, including police training;
reintegration through vocational training and job
creation for former Taliban rank-and-file soldiers; and
sustainable and self-reliant development by means of
agricultural assistance, among other programmes.

Japan will cooperate with the Republic of Turkey
in assisting Afghan police training by providing
funding as well as police personnel, with a View to
improving security in Afghanistan. We also recently
disbursed $50 million in assistance for the
reintegration of insurgents. It is our intention to
provide assistance, in cooperation with the
international community, in such a way that the people
of Afghanistan will be able to perceive a tangible
improvement in their lives.

In the area of conflict prevention, the third pillar,
creating a safe and secure environment for people to live
their lives and implementing continued confidence-
building measures are essential in vulnerable or post-
conflict States.

The Security Council also must continue exerting
its utmost efforts to halt the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in order to prevent terrorist groups or
other organizations from acquiring those weapons.
Japan will implement the action plan agreed at the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. During a
meeting of foreign ministers yesterday, Japan and

Australia, together with other like-minded countries,
launched a new group on this issue. We will also
continue to work on nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation efforts in cooperation with the
international community.

The concept of human security, the fourth pillar,
is useful in helping the Security Council to cope with
these matters. True peace can be sustained only when
each individual human being achieves freedom, secures
dignity and leads a fulfilled life. Relying on this
philosophy, we will continue to contribute to
international efforts to protect and empower vulnerable
States and people.

Finally, it has been 65 years since the birth of the
United Nations. The world situation has changed
drastically since then. If the Security Council is to
continue to play an effective role in maintaining
international peace and security in the twenty-first
century, the Council itself needs to demonstrate its
legitimacy by reflecting the reality of the international
community. To that end, Japan will cooperate with
other Member States and work actively for the early
realization of reform of the Security Council.

