Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome
Ambassador Madeira, Special Envoy of the African
Union (AU) on the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
issue. We applaud the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and its
commitment alongside the subregional organizations
to bolstering the security and institutional capacities of
the States of the region.

My country welcomes the joint and individuals
efforts undertaken by countries of the Central African
region to address multiple regional challenges. The
agreement made within the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community to waive Visa requirements,
starting in January 2014, is an important sign of those
States' willingness to collectively face security and
economic challenges affecting development.

Mr. Abou Moussa, in his comments, and the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/671) describe the
challenges to the region resulting from instability in the
Central African Republic and the spread of rebel groups
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the insecurity resulting from the situation
in the Gulf of Guinea and the Sahel region - all of
which demand a coordinated, urgent response of the
international community.

The situation in the Central African Republic
continues to unravel, especially at the security and
humanitarian levels. There is a risk of dangerous
consequences affecting the country and the entire
region if the situation is not brought under control as
soon as possible. To that end, we welcome international
and regional efforts aimed at rapidly restoring stability
in the Central African Republic and the region.

The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) has played an exemplary role through
its efforts to mitigate the crisis in Central Africa at
the political and security levels by strengthening the
Central Africa Multinational Force. It is essential that
UNOCA continues to strengthen its cooperation with
ECCAS aimed at resolving the conflict in the Central
African Republic, especially concerning all issues
of common interest. In that context, we welcome the
meeting between Mr. Abou Moussa and Mr. Ahmad
Allam-Mi, whose nomination as Secretary-General
of ECCAS we applaud. Moreover, we commend the
efforts of UNOCA, as the secretariat of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, in organizing the 36th
ministerial meeting of the Advisory Committee in
Kigali, in August.

The intensification of cross-border trafficking is a
further source of concern. There have been forty-three
incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea recorded
in the past nine months, exceeding the number of such
incidents in the Horn of Africa, which is considered
to be the most highly-impacted region of Africa.
According to the International Maritime Organization,
it is also feared that piracy is spreading throughout
Africa's Atlantic coast. We endorse the Secretary-
General's call for the implementation of the Yaounde
Declaration adopted in Yaounde in June.

The level of trafficking and illicit trade in ivory in
the subregion is considered among the highest in the
region. According to the report of the United Nations
Environment Programme, revenue from such illegal
activity finances transnational criminal economy,
terrorist networks and rebel groups, including the Lord's
Resistance Army. In that regard, we commend the
decision of the States members of ECCAS to carry out
intensive, coordinated action against poaching, which
will make it possible to cut off sources of financing to
rebel groups and to the LRA.

Security deficits in the Sahel region have also
impacted the Central African and Maghreb regions
as the firearms of terrorists and foreign combatants
terrorism represent additional threats. In that
context, Morocco - which is linked by traditional
ties of cooperation and friendship with the countries
of the Central African region, the Sahel and West
Africa - organized on 13 and 14 November an
international ministerial conference on border security
in countries of the Sahel and Maghreb regions. The
conference concluded with the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration on establishing a cooperation network
linking border monitoring and security services of the
countries of the region, and on shareing experiences
in that sphere. The lessons learned in such exchanges
could be duplicated in the countries of Central Africa.
Morocco will also host the upcoming summit of the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, which will
provide an opportunity to strengthen subregional
cooperation and implement decisions taken at prior
summits.

With regard to the Lord's Resistance Army,
while the reports of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) indicate a reduced
number of incidents, the numbers of people who
have lost their life and of kidnappings remained high
between January and September as compared to the
same period in 2012. LRA attacks have created a
worrisome humanitarian situation for thousands of
internally displaced persons, including 350,000 in the
Central African Republic, according to OCHA.

Morocco reiterates its condemnation of the
atrocities and violations of human rights committed by
the LRA and calls for coordinated cooperation efforts
at the regional and international levels to address those
plagues. In that regard, we welcome the role played by
UNOCA in implementing the United Nations regional
strategy for the fight against the LRA. My country,
which has long been committed to international efforts
in peacekeeping through the presence of its troops in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in that country, joins with international
and regional efforts to halt the scourge of terrorism
in Central Africa and the Sahel and will continue to
provide the necessary humanitarian and medical
assistance within the framework of the MONUSCO
mandate.

Finally, we would like to express our support for
UNOCA and Special Representative Abou Moussa for
their efforts aimed at preventing conflict in Africa.

