Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his first
briefing to the Security Council this morning, and to
welcome him into this important new role. I also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his briefing
this morning, as well as Ambassador Tanin for his
comments.

I will focus my statement today on three areas:
the importance of international support for the new
Government and its reform agenda, the launch of the
Resolute Support Mission, and the United Nations
future engagement in Afghanistan.

As Afghanistan prepares to enter the transformation
decade, I applaud the new Afghan Government for its
reform agenda as set out by President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah at this month's London
Conference on Afghanistan. The agenda provides a
credible framework for delivering economic security by
tackling corruption, maintaining progress on national
security, delivering political reform and consolidating
progress on human rights. Those are the right priorities.
At the London Conference, the international community
demonstrated its clear commitment to Afghanistan's
future and to the implementation of the reform agenda.
We also commend President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah for their work to establish a National
Unity Government. We now encourage the swift
confirmation of Ministerial appointments to ensure
that the momentum is maintained.

This is the last time the Security Council will meet
before the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission to Afghanistan. I want
to pay tribute to the courage of the servicemen and
servicewomen who have served to bring peace and
security to Afghanistan, particularly, to those who
sacrificed their lives in that task.

The recent attacks in Kabul against Afghan security
personnel, international workers and innocent Afghan
civilians bring home to us the gravity of the security
challenge, as does the increase in civilian casualties,
including, especially, children. But they also illustrate
the courage and perseverance of those who have strived
to achieve security and development in Afghanistan.
Those men and women can take great pride in the fact
that Afghanistan has seen its first ever peaceful transfer
of power between elected leaders.

As the Afghan National Security Forces continue
to bravely combat the insurgency, it is vital that we
continue to provide support. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the NATO Resolute Support Mission
to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security
Forces from the start of 2015. The Council showed its
support for that Mission with the adoption of resolution
2189 (2014) last week.

A political settlement remains the best way to
secure a sustainable peace in Afghanistan. We therefore
welcome the recent dialogue between the leaders of
Afghanistan and Pakistan and look forward to further
progress. Afghanistan's neighbours will be central to
that effort. We welcome the support ofcountries engaged
in the Heart of Asia Process and other initiatives to
promote security, trade and economic prosperity.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will play an ever more important
role in Afghanistan next year, working to support the
reform priorities of the new Afghan Government. Its
provision of good offices to assist with Government
formation, preparation for parliamentary elections and
protecting the gains made on human rights must be
central to its mandate. To do so effectively, UNAMA
must also have the resources it needs to maintain its
presence in the provinces.

In conclusion, we are entering a new chapter
in our ongoing partnership with a sovereign and
independent Afghanistan. There is no doubt that 2015
will be a challenging year, but it is heartening to see
the commitment of the Afghan people and Government
and the international community to building a stable,
democratic and prosperous future for Afghanistan.

