Mr. Covie (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation):
Before I begin my comments on Kosovo, I would like
to give the Council a brief update on the situation in
southern Serbia; I have prepared a more detailed
written briefing for review. Thanks to the support and
assistance of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), KFOR and many of the countries
represented here on a bilateral basis, we are continuing
to consolidate the reconciliation process in southern
Serbia. To this end, I would like to list some of the
most recent confidence-building measures in this
process.

Over 345 new recruits, including 213 ethnic
Albanians and 23 women, have gone through OSCE-
assisted training and been assigned in southern Serbia
as multi-ethnic police. The Serbian Government spent
more than $16,882,000 on various infrastructure
projects in 2001 and plans to spend a further
$10,000,000 this year. This is in addition to the
considerable assistance provided by other countries.
Municipal elections are scheduled for 15 or 16 June.
We have withdrawn 12,282 special unit soldiers from
the region as peace has been restored. There is full
freedom of movement and security. The integration of
representatives of the ethnic Albanian and Roma
communities into State institutions has been
intensified. Amnesty and abolition have been fully
implemented. The army units will be withdrawn from
the school building in Bujanovac and the shoe factory
in Presevo by 15 April. 8,982 internally displaced
ethnic Albanians have returned to their homes in
southern Serbia, while document problems for the
Albanians have been resolved to allow their diplomas
and other certificates issued in Kosovo and Metohija to
be fully recognized.

More remains to be done, however. We must
continue to improve the infrastructure, particularly for
returning refugees and internally displaced persons,
and we must increase employment possibilities for
everyone. We need the Council's continued help on
these and other issues.

I wish to touch briefly on Macedonia. I have been
in frequent touch with the leaders of Macedonia and
given them advice and encouragement based on the
model we developed together for southern Serbia.

Turning to Kosovo and Metohija, the most
important point that I wish to make is that we are
currently in a race against time. Two different forces
are going to be pushing harder and harder to come to a
final solution for Kosovo and Metohija: the ethnic
Albanians from Kosovo and Metohija and, for separate
reasons, the international community, which is growing
tired of investing resources and energy in the Balkans.
If this last statement should be doubted, one need only
consider the sharp reduction in refugee funding for the
Balkans for next year or the statements made by
various troop contributors about withdrawing all or
part of their forces.

I firmly believe that we have less time than most
of us think or want to prepare for this final solution, so
every day counts. I personally think that, unless we
make major progress on key issues this very year, we
will face immense problems.

There are two basic interrelated tasks in Kosovo
and Metohija: building institutions and building a true
multi-ethnic society. For obvious reasons, I am going
to concentrate more on the latter than on the former in
my remarks, though both are crucial to real success.

Unlike the situation of ethnic groups in Bosnia,
the Serbs of Kosovo have been given absolutely no
assurance whatsoever that their language, culture,
religion or way of life will definitely survive and
flourish in Kosovo and Metohija. Quite to the contrary,
everything really depends on the prevailing whim or
good will of UNMIK and KFOR, with absolutely no
assurance for the future. This is an absolutely critical
flaw, because nothing that the Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija are now seeing can give them any comfort at
all about their future. Freedom of movement outside of
a few enclaves is totally impossible, refugee return is
almost non-existent and a climate of violence
permeates the very air that the Serbs breathe. There are
those who will say that the situation is improving. They
should not be believed. The Serbs and other minorities
have simply learned the rules of the game and how to
stay out of harm's way.

In November 2001, I signed with then Special
Representative Haekkerup a Common Document
outlining how we would work together to improve the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. I believe that the key
to our common future is to fully implement that
agreement in good faith and with as much energy as
possible. This includes making a major push this year
on refugee return; confronting extremists on all sides;
insisting that there be real freedom of movement
throughout Kosovo and Metohija; working hard to
make the institutions work; and trying to account for
the missing on both sides.

As I speak here today, virtually all of the
remaining 146 Albanian prisoners from Kosovo and
Metohija who were transferred from Kosovo prisons in
the last days of the war to Serbia proper are on their
way to UNMIK in an agreement worked out with
UNMIK. A companion agreement will allow Albanians
from Kosovo and Metohija who were arrested after 5
October 2000 in Serbia proper to apply to serve out
their sentences in Kosovo and Metohija and Serbs who
were arrested and convicted in Kosovo and Metohija to
apply to serve out their sentences in Serbia proper. This
removes one of the key issues that has long been cited
as a block to genuine reconciliation between the ethnic
groups in Kosovo and Metohija. I hope that proves to
be the case.

I am here today to ask for the Council's help in
moving forcefully to create a true multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo and Metohija. The stakes are very high. In
Yugoslavia and Serbia, we are trying hard to overcome
the legacy of the past and to move towards a
democratic, market-oriented society, taking its rightful
place in the European Union. We face immense
challenges, however, from the legacy of problems left
behind by Slobodan Milosevic, including a failed
economy, the Kosovo and Metohija issue, coming to
terms with our past and with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and the
Montenegro question. If we are not successful in
creating a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo and
Metohija, the resulting turmoil and dislocation will
have a dramatic negative impact on the political
situation in Yugoslavia. At the very least, it will shift
the focus from economic, democratic, nation-building
issues to nationalism. At worst, it could well return to
power those forces of darkness and despair that ruled
over my country for far too long.

But as difficult and dangerous as that scenario
may be, it is in fact just as bad, or even worse, for the
future of Kosovo and Metohija. If extremist groups
there are allowed to prevail, the real losers will be all
the citizens of Kosovo and Metohija. Those same
extremist groups that bomb buses carrying Serbs are
also killing other Albanians from Kosovo and Metohija
who do not share their extremism. What sort of society
will result if the extremists prevail? What sort of
relationship can they expect to have with Serbia ifthey
drive the local Serbs out of Kosovo and Metohija?
Believe me, for Kosovo and Metohija to survive and
flourish economically, it must have a positive,
constructive relationship with the rest of Yugoslavia.
Otherwise it will continue in perpetuity to rely on the
generosity of the international community.

Finally, let me say a word about the relationship
today between Belgrade and the Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija. There are those, including many in the
international community, who would prefer to build a
five-metre-high wall around the boundary of Kosovo
and Metohija with the rest of Yugoslavia, the theory
being that the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija must learn
to live entirely within Kosovo and Metohija. That same
theory seems, by the way, to prejudge the future of
Kosovo and Metohija by ensuring that it would be
totally independent ofthe rest of Yugoslavia.

Let me say more with sadness than with anger
that if those members of the international community
continue to build that wall they will certainly succeed,
because they undoubtedly have the power to do so. But
virtually all the Serbs now in Kosovo and Metohija will
be on the other side of that wall in Yugoslavia and
Serbia, both putting enormous social pressures on us
and creating the very poisonous situation in Kosovo
and Metohija which I described earlier.

Unless and until the Serbs of Kosovo and
Metohija feel secure in their position in Kosovo and
Metohija and are free from violence and certain that
their children will have full opportunities to speak their
language, practice their religion and travel freely, they
will want a lifeline to Serbia itself, as normal people
anywhere would.

We in the Coordinating Centre have
demonstrated, by the get-out-the-vote campaign and
now on the Kosovo Albanian prisoner issue, that we
can play a positive role. I ask the Council to help us to
continue to do so by working with us on enhanced
return of refugees from Yugoslavia to their homes in
Kosovo and Metohija, on ensuring freedom of
movement for all in Kosovo and Metohija, on bringing
to an end standoffs and confrontation with UNMIK and
KFOR in Mitrovica, and on a comprehensive
programme to locate the missing on all sides. That is
the best way forward for Kosovo and Metohija, for
Yugoslavia and for the region as a whole.

I wish to draw attention to the detailed briefing
material on results in the implementation of the plan
for resolution of the crisis in southern Serbia, and on
results in the implementation of the Common
Document for Kosovo and Metohija of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK, copies of which
have been made available to members of the Council.
Annexed to that material are copies of two very
important documents: the Agreement on the Basic
Principles for the Holding of Municipal By-elections in
South Serbia, and the UNMIK-Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Agreement on the Transfer of Sentenced
Persons.

