Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome the holding of
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassadors Gabriela Shalev and Riyad
Mansour for their remarks.

As we meet for another quarterly open debate on
the Middle East, my delegation can see some
improvement in the situation on the ground - but,
unfortunately, much less than we all wished for. It is
disappointing to be forced to recognize that the region
remains tense and that a solution continues to prove
elusive.

Making substantial progress on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is perhaps the single most important
pending business in the Security Council today, a
conflict whose resolution would surely have a positive
effect in many areas. In the long term, the status quo is
in the interest of no one. Rather, it feeds extremism,
fosters disillusionment and discredits diplomacy.

We therefore reiterate our support for the
mediation efforts by the United States Administration
through the proximity talks and hope that these can
lead to direct negotiations. But we should have no
illusions: if no real progress is made in the coming
weeks, the situation on the ground is not likely to
improve in a sustainable manner. On the contrary, the
fragile support obtained, on both sides, for engaging in
indirect negotiations may be gravely eroded. This
process is approaching a point where it must yield
results.

When direct talks resume, the international
community will have to sustain its involvement
throughout the process, as history shows that progress
requires strong external incentives. In this context,
Brazil reiterates its support for the holding of a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East, once conditions are appropriate. Further
engagement by relevant players from outside the
region might prove beneficial.

An independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders, remains the only solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and for the long-term stability of the entire
region and the world.

On 1 June 2010, the Security Council called for a
"prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards"
(S/PRST/2010/9) into the Israeli action against a Gaza-
bound humanitarian flotilla.

We took due note of the Israel's decision to
establish an inquiry panel, with two respectable

foreigners as observers. That is a positive step.
However, the panel does not meet the requirements set
forth by the Security Council. In our View, the gravity
of the incident and the facts that the attack has taken
place in international waters and that it involves
entities and individuals from various countries require
that the investigation be conducted under the auspices
of the United Nations. We therefore urge the Secretary-
General to continue consultations on an arrangement
that fulfils the requirements by the Council.

The tragic loss of life and injuries to civilians as a
result of that action showed once again that the
blockade of Gaza is politically unsustainable. That was
clearly recognized by the Security Council in the
presidential statement of last June. We therefore
welcome the Israeli decision to expand the list of goods
allowed to be brought into Gaza, including building
materials for projects sponsored by the international
community. That is particularly welcome, as it will
speed up the long-overdue reconstruction of the Strip.

In this regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that yesterday President Lula signed into law a bill by
which Brazil will donate 25 million reais - around
$15 million - to the Palestine Authority, in principle
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for
projects to support Gaza's reconstruction and
development.

Also positive is Israel's decision to improve the
capacity at the Kerem Shalom crossing and to extend
its hours of operation.

However, those measures are still insufficient.
Israel must find ways to reconcile legitimate security
concerns with the normalization of life in the Strip. An
immediate and sustained opening of crossings is
imperative. The resumption of regular exports from
Gaza is urgently needed as a way to revive an economy
that has been crippled by the blockade. The population
of Gaza must not be forced to keep surviving on
international charity.

A lasting solution to the crisis in Gaza can create
a new logic of peace that might not only strengthen
those forces in Palestine that favour moderation and
national reconciliation, but also pave the way for a
strong revival of the peace process altogether. The
continuation of the blockade, on the other hand, might
aggravate the Palestinian schism and impair a future
viable Palestinian state.

Israeli policies that prejudge the result of
negotiations and forcefully change the demographics of
the West Bank and East Jerusalem make it more
difficult for negotiations to be resumed. We reiterate
the need for a permanent cessation of all settlement
activity. On their part, Palestinians must overcome
their longstanding divisions, keep extremists in check,
including in Gaza, completely halt the launching of
rockets against Israel and enhance democratic
governance. In this context, we welcome and support
the efforts of Prime Minister Salam Fayyad to
implement his two-year statehood programme.

We must continue to avoid the return of the
conflict between Lebanon and Israel. All parties must
therefore faithfully implement their obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006). We also urge the international
community to assist Lebanon in building up its state
capacity, in particular its armed forces, and facilitating
the central Government to exercise its authority
throughout the country.

