The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Japan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Qatar,
Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ali
Khalif Galaydh.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Galaydh
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Ruyt
(Belgium), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia),
Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria),
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took seats at
side ofthe Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. David Stephen, Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Stephen to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia,
document 8/2001/963.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I would invite those members who wish to
speak or to ask questions to so indicate to the
Secretariat as from now.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. David Stephen,
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, to
introduce the Secretary-General's report.


