The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the 8 June
Road Map for the Return of Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs) and Implementation of the Abyei
Protocol (the Road Map) between the National
Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM). The Security
Council emphasizes that a peaceful resolution of
the situation in Abyei is vital to the effective
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and peace in the region. The
Security Council welcomes the agreements in the
Road Map, including its provisions regarding
revenue sharing and the interim boundaries in
Abyei. The Security Council urges the parties to
use the opportunity created by the signing of the
Road Map to resolve all outstanding issues
related to CPA implementation and welcomes the
parties' commitment to take unresolved issues to
arbitration as necessary.

"The Security Council deeply regrets the
recent outbreak of fighting in Abyei, the ensuing
displacement of civilians and the obstruction of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) freedom of movement. The Security
Council urges the parties to facilitate immediate
humanitarian support for the displaced citizens
and support for their voluntary return as soon as
an interim administration and the agreed security
arrangements are in place.

"The Security Council encourages the
parties to fully implement the Road Map Within
the agreed timelines, in particular with the
establishment of an Abyei Area Administration;
deployment of a new Joint Integrated Unit
battalion; ensuring of free movement for UNMIS
forces in the Abyei area and access to the north
and south of the Abyei area to carry out its
mandate to support implementation of the CPA;
and redeployment of the Sudan Armed Forces and
SPLM. troops outside the interim Abyei
administrative area agreed to by the parties.

"The Security Council calls on UNMIS,
within its mandate and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1812 (2008), to
robustly deploy, as appropriate, peacekeeping
personnel in and around Abyei to help reduce
tensions and prevent escalation of conflict, in
support of implementation of the CPA. The
Security Council requests the Secretary-General
to examine the root causes of and the role played
by UNMIS in connection with the violence
between the parties in Abyei in May 2008 and
consider what follow-up steps may be appropriate
for UNMIS."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 17.171.
08-39598
