Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States renews our call for the international community
to support the newly formed Government of Ukraine
and to prevent unnecessary violence.

I would like to take a moment to respond to the
comments made here by the representative of the
Russian Federation. Actions speak louder than words.
Early this morning, the Russian Duma acted to
authorize the use of military force in Ukraine. This
is as dangerous as it is destabilizing. We are deeply
disturbed by reports this morning of Russian military
intervention into Crimea. This intervention is without
legal basis; indeed, it violates Russia's commitment
to protecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Ukraine.

It is time for the Russian intervention in Ukraine
to end. The Russian military must stand down, the
aspirations of the Ukrainian people must be respected,
and political dialogue must be allowed to continue. We
applaud the remarkable restraint and commitment to
that dialogue that the new Ukrainian Government in
Kiev has demonstrated in the face of hostility.

We have said from the outset that we recognize
and respect Russia's historical ties to Ukraine, but
instead of engaging the Government of Ukraine and
international institutions about its concerns for ethnic
Russians, Russia has ignored both, and has instead
acted unilaterally and militarily. It is ironic that the
Russian Federation regularly goes out of its way in this
Chamber to emphasize the sanctity of national borders
and of sovereignty, but Russian actions in Ukraine are
violating the sovereignty of Ukraine and pose a threat
to peace and security.

Russia alleges various actions against and threats
to minority groups in Ukraine. We see no evidence of
such actions yet, but Russia's provocative actions could
easily push a tense situation beyond the breaking point.
Russia's incitement of groups to come out to protest
is not responsible behaviour in the present situation.
There is a clear way forward that would preserve
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
address Russia's concerns.

First, Russia should directly engage the Government
of Ukraine. Secondly, international monitors and
observers, including from the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), should be sent to Ukraine. That is the best
way to get the facts, monitor conduct and prevent any
abuses. Russia is a leading member of both institutions
and can participate actively to ensure that its interests
are upheld. The immediate deployment of international
observers from either the OSCE or the United Nations
to Crimea would also provide transparency about the
movements and activities of military and paramilitary
forces in the region, and defuse the tensions between
different groups. We are also working to stand up an
international mediation mission to the Crimea to begin
to de-escalate the situation and facilitate productive
and peaceful political dialogue among all Ukrainian
parties.

Our paramount concerns are to end the confrontation
and to find a solution that allows the Ukrainian people
to determine their own destiny, their own Government
and their own future. That must be the goal of the
Council and the international community. The United
States will work with Ukraine, our allies and partners
in Europe and around the world, and here at the United
Nations to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity
and democratic future of Ukraine.
