Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today's debate. It is very
timely. We all followed the events of recent days and
the cancellation or interruption of the United States-
led peace talks. Mr. Cohen will certainly enlighten us
on where we stand on that. Despite that cancellation
or interruption, we have to determine where we now
stand in comparison to last year. Last year, there was
no genuine political process. Today, there are prospects
for a genuine political process, thanks to the efforts
of the Afghan Government, Afghan civil society, the
opposition, the United States, Qatar and others.

I would like to repeat what Mr. Yamamoto said at the
outset - there is no alternative to a political solution.
We have to do everything to return to a political track.
It has to be an intra-Afghan negotiations track, in which
the Afghan Government, the political opposition, civil
society and key Afghan shareholders take part. We
must work very hard and with determination to get
there. We must also be patient. The right conditions
must be created and, in that respect, I would like to
echo what the Afghan Ambassadorjust said with regard
to what the Taliban has been doing in recent days and
weeks and the despicable attacks it has launched in
Afghanistan, which have killed so many civilians. That
needs to stop if we are to create the right conditions.

Germany remains committed to Afghanistan. We
are the second-largest donor and the second-largest
troop-contributor. In July, on the margins of the Doha
talks, Germany, together with Qatar, launched an
intra-Afghan dialogue. We are ready to pursue that
dialogue. A specific element of that dialogue was
the inclusion of women. We believe that the full and
effective participation and leadership of women in the
peace process and, overall, in the decision-making
in Afghanistan at all levels - local, national and
regional - are key. I would also echo what the Afghan
Ambassador said with regard to the Deputy Secretary-
General. Her trip to Afghanistan in July was a very
strong and positive signal.

I would also like to highlight one of the many points
I retained from Mr. Fedotov's intervention. With the
means he has at his disposal, creating jobs for women
is very important. As the Ambassador said, women are
the agents of change and resilience in Afghanistan.

A sustainable peace process must take place. Here
again, I would like to echo Mr. Yamamoto's remarks. To
ensure the continuity and stability of State institutions
and the Constitution of Afghanistan, any future solution
has to respect human rights, in general, and the rights
of women and their freedoms, in particular. We, as the
Council, have a very important role in communicating
that and our expectations.

To avoid a constitutional vacuum, it is very
important that the presidential elections of 23 September
be held in a fair, transparent and democratic manner.
What we heard today from Ambassador Yamamoto
and Ambassador Raz with regard to the elections is
encouraging. There are certain risks but regarding
preparations, much has been achieved.

I would like to raise one specific point that is very
dear to our hearts - the effects of climate change on
Afghanistan. The effects ofclimate change are tangible.
There are unprecedented droughts and flash flooding.
The impact on the country has been devastating. That is
an additional factor that destabilizes the country and has
implications for the security situation. All stakeholders
must consider that factor and take appropriate action.
It perhaps has one positive effect. This question is
for Mr. Fedotov. What impact does drought have on
poppy cultivation?
We - I and my friend the Ambassador of
Indonesia - are the co-penholders for the draft
resolution on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We believe that we need
a strong substantive mandate that corresponds to the
expectations of the Afghan people, as just expressed
by the Ambassador of Afghanistan. In particular, in
the present situation with the interruption of peace
talks, we need to comfort the Afghan people. We need
to send the message that the international community
is determined to remain present and engaged with
the Afghan people. I would urge all Security Council
members to put Afghanistan and UNAMA first and be
ready for compromise.

