Mr. Winid (Poland): I should like to thank the
presidency of Chile for having convened today's open
debate. Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the European Union.

The year 2015 provides a special opportunity to
have a discussion on the relationship between inclusive
development and international peace and security. We
hope that the upcoming review of the peacebuilding
architecture and the review of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the high-level review to assess
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), will
lead to a deep reflection on this issue. The seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations and preparation for
the summit for the adoption of the post-2015 agenda
will also be a good opportunity to discuss progress in
this respect.

We understand that development is not a main issue
within the scope of the Security Council deliberations.
However, too many times in the past the Council has
had to deal with the effects of underdevelopment and
fragility. Too frequently, the international community
has had to react at the very last moment. That is why
we appreciate that in recent years the linkages among
peace, security and development have been increasingly
recognized by the members of the Security Council.
There is a fruitful cooperation between the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping
operations and political missions allow for greater
effectiveness. More often, the mandates of United
Nations peace operations are constructed in a way
where more peacebuilding tasks - inter alia, support
for economic reconstruction, electoral processes and
institution-building - are assigned to peacekeepers.
That is why the security/development nexus should be
reflected in this year's reviews of peace operations and
peacebuilding architecture.

There are still places in the world where we need
to prevent the cycle of recurring violence. We believe
that the Council can make greater use of its working
methods in this regard, in particular through more
frequent Arria-formula meetings with representatives
of civil society. Security is not only the lack of conflict
but also the lack of threats that natural disasters and
climate change pose to human safety and well-being. As
we are all aware, climate change is a threat multiplier.
Possible sea-level rise and the loss of territory resulting
from climate change may seriously affect the future
of many vulnerable States. There are countries that
might disappear and entire nations might need to seek
refuge far away from home. It is our global challenge of
adaptation to climate change, a global challenge of risk
management and a global challenge of sustainable use
of non-renewable resources.

We are satisfied that the Climate Change
Conference in Warsaw in 2013 adopted very important
decisions in this regard - the Warsaw International
Mechanism on Loss and Damage, which provides
assistance to vulnerable populations, and the Warsaw
Framework for REDD-plus to compensate and track
developing countries' efforts to reduce emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation.

Let us not forget about the third element of the
triad, that is, human rights. Respect for fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of expression, media and
association and the inclusion of women in all parts of
political and social life as well as the rule of law and
good governance are critical for reducing the likelihood
of violent conflict.

