Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for providing this opportunity for the
outgoing Security Council members to reflect on our
work in leading the Council's subsidiary bodies over
the past two years. Malaysia has had the honour of
chairing the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict as well as the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I would like to share
some observations gathered in the course of our tenure,
beginning with the Working Group.

The magnitude of the Council's responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security is never more
deeply felt than when we consider the devastating
impact of armed conflict on children. The past two
years have unfortunately seen a grave deterioration
in the situation of children in many countries affected
by conflict, as well as unprecedented trends and
challenges related to ensuring their protection. In
undertaking the responsibility of chairing the Working
Group and tackling its challenges, Malaysia has
focused on strengthening the normative framework of
the Council's agenda on children and armed conflict,
as well as mainstreaming the issue of child protection
into its wider work. Where possible, we have also
continued the tradition of innovative approaches that
characterized the spirit of the Working Group when it
was first created.

During our presidency in June 2015, with regard
to strengthening the agenda's normative framework,
the Council adopted resolution 2225 (2015), which
introduced child abduction as a fifth trigger for listing in
the annex to the Secretary-General's report, along with
children's recruitment and use; killing or maiming; rape
and other forms of sexual violence against children; and
attacks on schools and hospitals. It therefore expanded
the tools available to enable the Security Council and
the United Nations to address grave violations against
children, including those committed by non-State
armed groups.

During Malaysia's two years at the helm of the
Working Group, we adopted conclusions on the
situation of children in armed conflicts in South Sudan,
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Central African Republic,
in accordance with the Working Group's mandate, as
established in resolution 1612 (2005). In coming up
with recommendations for parties to conflicts and child
protection actors for each specific country situation,
we were cognizant of the lack of a mechanism for
regular follow-up on the implementation of conclusions
documents. As a result, all of the Working Group's
conclusions incorporate provisions that encourage
sustained engagement in child protection efforts with
concerned Member States and international actors,
including the donor community. While we did not have
the chance to conduct follow-up engagement during
our term, we hope that this will create a foothold for
future Chairs to build on in ensuring the effective
implementation of Working Group conclusions.

We also strove to continue the efforts of our
predecessors to ensure that child protection concerns
are sufficiently mainstreamed into the wider work of
the Council, including in the establishment and renewal
of United Nations peace operations mandates. The
establishment of child protection capacity in United
Nations missions through the appointment of advisers
has been a critical development in strengthening the
implementation of the agenda on children and armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that child protection
advisers continue to be given an effective mandate and
allocated the resources they need to carry out their
crucial work in the field.

Similarly, we emphasized the important role of
the relevant Sanctions Committees in using sanctions
designations to hold accountable those responsible for
violations and abuses against children, including the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. In
that regard, we have continued to support the sharing
of information with relevant Sanctions Committees,
including through periodic briefings, by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

We further pioneered the practice of inviting
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to provide joint briefings to the Working
Group and the relevant Sanctions Committees as part
of efforts to promote understanding and collaboration
on the complementary work of the subsidiary bodies.
We believe that this platform for cross-fertilization
between subsidiary bodies on the issue of child
protection can be further explored. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and her Office, and to
UNICEF, for their tireless dedication and commitment
to upholding the protection and rights of children. I
would also like to pay tribute to all the United Nations
child protection advisers and the other United Nations
officials and personnel who implement its agenda on
children and armed conflict on the ground, as well as to
civil society actors. Although our term in the Council
has come to an end, our solidarity with and commitment
to this important agenda will continue.

I now turn to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. Since
I briefed the Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Committee just two weeks ago (see S/PV.7827), I do not
intend to elaborate too much on the details of its work.

In the past two years, during Malaysia's
chairmanship of the Committee, Libya has been through
very challenging times. The political scene has been
split, and most of the first half of our tenure as Chair
of the Committee saw the parties working to negotiate
the Libyan Political Agreement. Even after the adoption
a year ago of the Political Agreement, and since the
Presidency Council's arrival in Tripoli, the process of
establishing a Government of National Accord is still
not complete. The work of the Committee over this
period has therefore had to be balanced carefully and
delicately in order to ensure that in 2015 the sanctions
regime did not interfere with the political process,
and in 2016 that it supported the establishment of a
Government of National Accord.

Accordingly, while the issues before the
Committee during 2015 were evenly distributed, there
was a significant increase in the second half of 2016,
mostly in requests for guidance on the measures'
scope. In that regard, the Committee issued one
additional Implementation Assistance Notice, and
also incorporated updates to such notices twice in
2016. They are aimed at providing greater clarity for
the relevant sanctions measures, as well as at assisting
Member States in discharging their obligations to
implement Security Council resolutions on Libya.

Over the course of2015 and 2016, the Committee has
kept a close eye on the arms embargo and particularly
on movements of arms and military materiel into
Libya, as well as the risk of diversions. One of the most
notable changes to the sanctions regime has been the
authorization permitting Member States to interdict
vessels on the high seas believed to be violating the arms
embargo. Despite the Committee's efforts, the embargo
continues to be violated, with reports of increases in
the flow of arms and military materiel and the presence
of mercenaries and foreign military forces in Libya, as
well as foreign air strikes.

Another key aspect of the Committee's work was
the assets-freeze measures, aimed at protecting Libya's
public assets in order to ultimately make them available
to the Libyan people. Similarly, the Committee
remains committed to the protection of Libya's natural
resources in the same cause. In that regard, the listing
and subsequent delisting of the vessel Distya Ameya
was a success story that demonstrated the Committee's
resolve to support the Government of National Accord
and ensure that Libya's natural resources are used
for the Libyan people. Here I would like to highlight
the tremendous contribution and relentless efforts of
the Committee's Panel of Experts. It has been a vital
component of the Committee's work, particularly in
monitoring and enhancing the implementation of the
relevant sanctions measures. As a result, the Committee
has consistently taken action to follow up on the Panel's
recommendations. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation and gratitude to the Panel of
Experts for their excellent work in that regard.

Moving forward, we would like to encourage
the new Chair to continue pursuing the possibility
of organizing a visit to Libya, given the appropriate
timing and conditions. It is unfortunate that none of
the Chairs of the Committee, including me, have been
able to undertake such a visit since the Committee was
established in 2011. At the same time, engagements
with regional partners and the international community
should continue to be strengthened. In supporting
the Libyan-led transition, regional partners and the
international community must work hand in hand
and live up to their responsibilities and obligations
by respecting and implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Regional partners and the
international community should also assist and
cooperate with the Libyan authorities, particularly in
the current climate in which the Libyans lack the means
to do so.

Finally, I wish to express our heartfelt appreciation
to all of the members of the Committee for their
cooperation, the Panel of Experts for their contributions
and especially to the Subsidiary Organs Branch for
their invaluable assistance and depth of knowledge. I
also thank the wider United Nations membership for
the support and cooperation during the two years of my
country's chairmanship.

To conclude, I should like to assure the delegation of
Sweden, which will succeed Malaysia as Chair of both
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, of our full
cooperation and best wishes for success in 2017.

