The Secretary-General: I shall be brief this
morning. Let me say how happy I am to see the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda here this morning, as well as, of
course, Minister Dlamini Zuma, representing South
Africa, which co-facilitated this agreement.

I believe that the signing of the peace agreement
between the Governments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda in Pretoria on 30 July
represents an important political milestone which could
help pave the way towards a lasting resolution of one
of Africa's most complex conflicts. The parties have
indicated their determination to honour this agreement
and to end the conflict. We, on our side, should do
whatever we can to assist them in implementing the
agreement. I applaud President Mbeki for his important
contribution to the agreement in his capacity as
Chairman of the African Union.
The two presidents have committed themselves to
achieving peace and, specifically, to working with each
other to achieve it. That is very encouraging. We must
now quickly approach the parties in a pragmatic
manner and urge them to take the steps required to
operationalize the agreement as soon as possible.

I believe that the international community must
provide all necessary support to ensure the success of
this initiative. The momentum established must be
maintained and built upon. I hope this meeting of the
Council can contribute to that. I have instructed the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
determine which actions it can take within its current
mandate and resources to assist the parties to carry out
the agreement. However, the parties need to be
perfectly clear on the tasks to be performed and to
provide the necessary information in order for
MONUC to define its specific role.

The Secretariat is also looking forward to
receiving a team of experts from South Africa - in
fact, I think they have arrived today - to discuss
together the support that the process requires and how
we move forward from here. I therefore expect to
revert to the Council in due course with specific
recommendations for MONUC after the Secretariat
undertakes intensive consultations with the parties
concerned.

The presence with us today of the South African
Foreign Minister, as well as of Mr. She Okitundu of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mr. Mazimpaka
of Rwanda is particularly valuable because it enables
you to engage directly with the Council and enables the
Council to engage you on issues that are directly
concerned with the implementation of the agreement.
Of course, I look forward to a very serious dialogue not
only here in the Council but also with the various
United Nations departments. I think that reflects the
value of the new partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations.

I am now eager to listen to the Foreign Minister
of South Africa and to the representatives of the parties
so that we can gain a full and detailed understanding of

this important agreement and this implementation as
soon as possible.

