Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite for
her comprehensive briefing. We greatly appreciate her
efforts and the relentless work of her team of civilians,
military and police to promote long-term stability in
Haiti. We witnessed these efforts clearly during the
most recent Security Council visit to Haiti.

Egypt welcomes the progress in promoting
democracy and security in Haiti, especially with regard
to the endorsement by the Parliament, on 22 March,
of the Prime Minister and the new Cabinet, as well
as the most recent results of local elections, which
were recently held in Haiti. We hope that the return of
Haiti to constitutional order and the full reactivation
of its executive and legislative branches will promote
political and institutional stability and increase the
country's ability to overcome urgent challenges.

Despite progress at the political and institutional
levels, Haiti continues to face many serious challenges
on several fronts, starting with the difficult economic
situation and the numerous humanitarian and security
challenges, especially with the ongoing cholera
outbreak in the country, as well as the weak rule of
law institutions and national police. In that regard, we
believe it important for the United Nations to continue
to play an effective and vital role in Haiti until the
building ofnational institutions is complete, and to help
Haiti to enhance its capacities with a view to optimally
shouldering its responsibilities. That will help prevent
Haiti from relapsing into a new crisis with new
humanitarian, security and political complications that
might require international intervention once again.

Moreover, we believe it is imperative for the
international community to work together to support
Haiti and mobilize efforts to promote the capacities
of State institutions during this critical turning point
so that Haiti can turn a new page towards a more
prosperous and stable future. Therefore we have
supported the calls to review the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
to close it down and adopt a new approach for a United
Nations presence in Haiti by establishing a new United
Nations mission - the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) - that is
better able to meet the needs of the country. It must
focus on the police and rule of law components.

It is therefore important to work to prevent any
setbacks in the transitional period the closure of
MINUSTAH and the deployment of MINUJUSTH. In
that connection, we welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/604), as well as ongoing
efforts to withdraw the military and police components
of MINUSTAH in a way that does not affect - and thus
far has not affected - the broader security situation in
the country. In that regard, as MINUJUSTH takes on its
mandate in October and in the light of our conclusions
from the Council's valuable field visit to Haiti last
month under the presidency of Bolivia, we would like
to make the following five observations.

First of all, we stress the importance that the new
United Nations mission mandate be limited to the
building of Haitian national institutions, especially
rule-of-law institutions and the Haitian National Police,
in line with the national priorities and needs set by the
Haitian Government, without any non-traditional or
successor mandate.

Secondly, we attach special importance to the
cholera outbreak in Haiti, especially as the United
Nations bears a moral and legal responsibility to
support the Haitian authorities in combating the
epidemic. Therefore, the expected United Nations
presence in Haiti must enjoy the necessary capacities
to fight the outbreak. We welcome the report's
reference to the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran
as the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Haiti,
to guide the implementation of the United Nations
approach to cholera and to support national efforts to
implementation the Sustainable Development Goals in
Haiti. We also call for the provision of the necessary
funding for fighting and ending this epidemic.

Thirdly, the capacities of the United Nations
country team must be enhanced so that it can meet the
future needs of Haiti and can focus on infrastructure
development; the promotion of vocational training,
education and health services; and the creation of
a legislative environment conducive to foreign and
domestic private sector investment, especially in the
agriculture and tourism sectors. Such initiatives will
give rise to job opportunities for tens of thousands of
young people and promote the empowerment of women.

Fourthly, we must also firmly and seriously address
the accusations of sexual abuse by MINUSTAH because
during the Council's latest visit to Haiti, we listened
to their national concerns on that issue. We sensed
their bitterness at us not having addressed those cases
and understand the situation's potential impact on the
reputation and credibility of the United Nations.

Finally, as the peacekeeping era in Haiti draws to a
close, supporting the efforts of building and sustaining
peace must be the focus of the upcoming phase of the
engagement of the United Nations and the international
community in Haiti, especially in the light of a clear
national vision of priorities that requires coordination
among the different components of that engagement.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to express
our full support to the people and the Government of
Haiti. We have full trust in the ability of its elected
Government and people to overcome this critical phase
and open a new chapter of development, prosperity and
conclusion in its region.

