Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for taking
the initiative of convening this important meeting on
the difficulties that United Nations police forces are
encountering in carrying out the protection of civilians
mandate. I would like to also thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, and the Deputy Police Commissioner of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) for their briefings.

About a year ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 2185 (2014), its first resolution on the
functions of the police. It provided strategic and
practical guidance for the heads of United Nations
police components. It is important to ensure high
levels of competence, adequate training and suitable
equipment for the United Nations police components,
without which they will not be able to effectively
discharge their protection-of-civilians mandate.

It is therefore logical that the United Nations police
and the Member States maintain a close collaboration
aimed at identifying areas where there are gaps to
fill or improvements to be made. Moreover, given
that the police components interact regularly with
the population, it is important that the officers be
equipped with the linguistic and cultural knowledge
that are appropriate to the host country. Accordingly,
we encourage Member States to increase the number
of female personnel, trained appropriately within the
police components, including in high-level positions.
We think that women personnel are in a better position
to protect other women against sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as abuse directed against women and
children, in general.

Taking into account the threats arising from
organized crime, the proliferation of arms and the
insufficient number of officers within the police
components, those components must work together
in a coordinated and concerted manner with all other
components, as well as with local civil society, in order
to better implement the mandate to protect civilians.

I would like to cite the specific cases of South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia
and the Central African Republic. In South Sudan,
despite the successive strengthening of UNMISS,
its mandates to protect civilians, to monitor and to
investigate human rights matters, the situation among
civilians is more troubling. That situation reflects a
departure from the Security Council's original vision
when it established UNMISS in 2011, which focused on
peacebuilding, security and facilitating development.
Nevertheless, UNMISS continues to be useful in
providing refuge to tens of thousands of civilians within
its bases, even if that is not sufficient to accommodate
such numbers. In order to better protect civilians, it is
necessary to go beyond a simple physical presence by
increasing commitment to prevention, mobility, active
intervention and the protection of civilians against
imminent threats. We welcome the recent Rwandan
formation ofa police force in Malakal in the Upper Nile
state, and hope that it will soon achieve full capacity
with the additional deployment of other formed police
units. Moreover, we need to think about protecting
individual police officers, who are neither armed nor
provided with protective equipment.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, we welcome
the activities undertaken within the framework of the
Strategy to Combat Insecurity in Beni in the territory
of the Allied Democratic Forces. We also welcome the
progress made in certain key activities identified in
the 2012-2017 action plan for police reform, including
the establishment of a mechanism in support of the
reform and its implementation, as well as the increase
and reinforcement of specialized police forces. We
call on the MONUSCO police component to continue
to contribute to training Congolese police in the
maintenance of public order and human rights. It must
also strengthen its deployments in remote areas and
resolve its logistical problems, so as to conduct rapid-
response counter-offensives in cases where the civilian
population is attacked. In that regard, it is important
that its work focus on preventive measures and seek, in
particular, to strengthen its relations with communities
and the Congolese police, in order to improve rapid
warning and response. To that end, we also encourage
the Congolese authorities to complete the legal toolkit
on reform and to wage war on impunity by prosecuting
the alleged perpetrators of violent acts.

In Liberia, during its more than 12 years of
existence, UNMIL has made considerable progress.
However, much still needs to be done. While in
the transition phase, the Mission must redouble its
efforts for a successful transfer of all security-related
competencies to the Liberian authorities, in accordance
with resolution 2239 (2015), adopted on 17 September.
To accomplish that, we must strengthen the capacity of
Liberian security agencies - in particular, the Liberia
National Police and the immigration and naturalization
offices - and accelerate the implementation of lasting
programmes in the areas of the rule of law, justice,
governance and security-sector reform. The continued
contribution of the bilateral and multilateral partners
is essential. We must not forget that all of this must be
undertaken in close collaboration with the Government
of Liberia and with its participation.

In the Central African Republic, the reopening of
the police stations and the police patrols in Bangui are
positive signs, for in the quite recent past the population
itself formed committees and groups to provide for its
own self-defence. We encourage the Central African
authorities to further commit to bolstering the security
of their population and to building trust among the
people and forces of public order. However, we remain
deeply concerned about the violations of human rights
and the violence committed with impunity against
civilians. Furthermore, while welcoming the laudable
efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in the protection of civilians, we believe that it
must play a crucial role in restoring the rule oflaw and
assistance to the transitional Government in the fight
against impunity.

We commend the critical role played by the United
Nations police in the performance of their protection
of civilians mandates, and we pay deserved tribute to
all the women and men police officers who continue to
spare no effort in the protection of civilians, as well as
to all the police-contributing countries that have made
deployments in countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict.

I would like to close by asking the three Police
Commissioners a question. How, specifically, can the
Security Council help them to resolve the issues on the
ground, particularly those regarding the implementation
of the protection of civilians mandate?

