Mrs. Gueguen (France) (Spoke in French): First
of all, I thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for her
enlightening briefing.

The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is doing excellent work by
providing support to the Haitian authorities in a country
where the security, economic, social and environmental
contexts remain fragile. The protests that took place in
July, which prompted the Security Council to request
the parties to restore calm, have sorely tested the Haitian
National Police and proved the importance of pursuing
and stepping up efforts to achieve lasting stability
in Haiti, in particular by building the capacity of the
Haitian National Police, together with MINUJUSTH.
That awareness and, in particular, its translation into
action are even more important as we move towards
transition through an exit strategy that will begin on
the ground with the withdrawal of two police units by
15 April next year.

In that context, I would like to underscore three
points that are critical to consolidating the rule of law,
without which there will be no lasting stability.

First, with regard to the Haitian National
Police - one of the pillars of stability - we welcome
the strengthening of the national police force, which
now has more than 15,000 officers. In a volatile security
context, marked by the presence of criminal gangs in
several regions of the country, it is those officers who
are helping to build the rule of law on the ground. France
welcomes the support provided by MINUJUSTH in that
area, in situations that are at times dangerous, and calls
on the Haitian authorities to take full responsibility for
managing public disturbances ahead of the Mission's
departure. In order to ensure the long-term effectiveness
and resilience of law enforcement, France urges the
Haitian authorities to avoid politicizing the National
Police. As seen in the past, politicization would be
incompatible with the lasting stability for which we
and the Haitians are striving. It is essential to put in
place recruitment procedures based on professional
merit, neutrality and impartiality that meet rule-of-
law criteria.

Secondly, concerning justice, without which there
can be no political legitimacy, it is now up to Haiti
to pursue, in line with its national plan, all avenues
for improving the judicial system established by
MINUJUSTH, including issues related to the efficiency
of the criminal justice system and detention conditions
in prisons. It is therefore crucial to build the trust of the
Haitians in the capacity and willingness of the judicial
system to fight crime. At times it is said that this goal
can wait, on the grounds that priority should be given
to economic development. Nothing could be further
from the truth. Equitable and sustainable development
depends essentially on building the rule of law under
which all economic actors can enjoy the legal certainty
that encourages them to invest - that is, to build the
future of their nation. Furthermore, there can be no
economic development without resolute action to fight
corruption. France therefore encourages the Haitian
authorities to continue their efforts in that direction and
to do their utmost to bring those responsible to justice
and eradicate the problem.

Lastly, in connection with the issue of justice I just
addressed, it is essential to pursue efforts in the area
of respect for human rights in order to assure Haitians
of respect for their fundamental rights. That is a
prerequisite for the stability of Haiti and the well-being
of the Haitian people. France calls for continued efforts
to strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson for
Human Rights and to consolidate the implementation
of the 2014 strategic plan, in particular by appointing
a high-level focal point in the Government. France also
calls on Haiti to reduce the number of detainees held
in pretrial detention for more than two years, improve
detention conditions and launch fully independent
investigations into human rights violations committed
by law enforcement. It is also essential that transitional
justice mechanisms be put in place to shed light on
massive human rights violations committed in the past.
With regard to that and other issues, France expects the
Haitian authorities to redouble their efforts ahead of the
transition period and the drawdown of MINUJUSTH.

The United Nations has taken action, as expected
by the international community, in particular after
the tragic earthquake in 2010. As we approach a new
phase in the relationship between Haiti and the United
Nations, France strongly encourages the Haitian
authorities to make the most of MINUJUSTH - now
headed by Ms. La Lime, whom I wish every success
in her work - in order to lay the foundation for a
successful transition.

