Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his detailed
briefing, and we welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Tieman Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali.

We noted the signing on 20 September by the parties
in Mali of a memorandum on a cessation of hostilities
and the subsequent halt to the fighting between the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and the
Platform coalition of armed groups. We also took
positive note of the meeting held in Anefis in October
on intercommunal reconciliation among the Malian
parties. Nor should we omit to mention the completed
establishment of all the interim administrations for all
five of the country's northern regions. We hope that
Mali's decision to postpone the municipal and regional
elections until April, taken with the active mediation
of Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, will enable a more inclusive
political process.

Despite those positives, we are concerned about
the delays in implementing the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, including the processes of
cantonment and security-sector reform. We welcome
the agreements reached by the Malian parties just last
week on renewing the timetable for implementing the
Algiers Agreement. Now they must be implemented.

Unfortunately, the security situation is now
deteriorating, not because of the Malian parties but
rather as a result of an increase in terrorist activity. We
are worried about the geographical expansion of their
activity, as well as the growing losses among Malian
security forces and Blue Helmets. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment of the countries of the region
to establishing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, and we participated in coming up with a
balanced Security Council resolution to support them
(S/20l7/2391). However, we share the Secretariat's view
that it will be impossible to stabilize the region without
full implementation of the Agreement by Mali's
stakeholders. We should never forget that the collapse
of the security situation in the Sahel followed the 2011
foreign intervention in Libya that led to the de facto
dismantling of the Libyan State.

We welcome the strengthening of the military
and police components of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We call on the Secretariat to take
additional measures to provide peacekeepers with
armoured personnel carriers and attack and transport
helicopters, as well as to improve the Blue Helmets'
security. We expect the Mission to finally reach full
operational readiness in 2018. Taking into account the
Malian Government's position, we helped to adopt
resolution 2364 (2017), which defined the specific
tasks of MINUSMA in assisting the country's security
forces. It is important to note that a memorandum on
this specific issue was signed in November.

Taking the wishes of Bamako into consideration,
Russia also supported the adoption of resolution 2374
(2017), which imposed a sanctions regime on individuals
who sabotage the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We share the
desire of the Malians to speed up the stabilization of
the northern regions. At the same time, we would like
to warn once again that using the threat of sanctions
has its own collateral effects. We hope that that step of
the Security Council does not lead to the hostility from
the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and
the Platform coalition of armed groups and increased
mistrust among the Malian parties. We also hope that
the established sanctions mechanisms will be used
only as intended, namely, to contribute to the political
process and the stabilization of the country.

