Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I should first like to welcome
the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta,
and to thank him for his extensive and enlightening
briefing on his young nation. We are deeply honoured
by his presence today. We are also delighted to see him
fully recovered after the cowardly attack of 2008 on
democracy and stability in Timor-Leste. The Timorese
people's reaction to this attack by further embracing
the agenda of reform and development was most
remarkable.

Today, we are pleased to see that the security
situation in Timor-Leste has substantially improved
since last February, as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2009/72.
These improvements have provided the opportunity to
focus on key issues such as security reform, the rule of
law, democratic governance and socio-economic
development. At this point, I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and his remarks
today, and Special Representative Atul Khare for his
continuous to efforts in assisting Timor-Leste in these
endeavours.
That said, much remains to be done in order to
ensure that the achievements realized so far can be
sustained and carried forward. In this regard, the main
challenges, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, are poverty, unemployment, uncontrolled
migration, the lack of effective land and property
regimes, a weak judicial system and security
institutions still in need of development. The local
elections to be conducted this year will also be an
important test.

Given the progress made so far, we are confident
that Timor-Leste will overcome those challenges and
achieve self-sufficiency. However, that will require
continued national dialogue and unity, as well as the
articulation of clear strategies and plans. Transparency
and accountability in the policy and decision-making
processes are also keys to success.

In that context, we believe that the United
Nations still has a valuable role to play. There is no
doubt that the joint efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
United Nations country team are instrumental in
providing coordinated policy, political, technical and
financial support to help the people of Timor-Leste
accomplish their goals.

The two priority areas in which UNMIT is and
should continue to be most active are facilitating a
constructive political dialogue Within the country and
ensuring the success of security sector reform. In that
regard, we are pleased to see a general consensus that
the gradual handover of policing responsibilities from
UNMIT to the Timorese national police should not be
bound by restrictive timetables and that the emphasis
must be placed on meeting the necessary criteria.
Indeed, that is of the utmost importance if public
security is to be maintained at this critical stage.

Likewise, we also concur with the Secretary-
General in his call for the definition of a meaningful
role for the Timorese army in a peacetime setting. In
that regard, we think that, if the 1,300-strong army
could be oriented and trained towards contributing to
peacekeeping operations, it might at some point be put
to good use in a number of peacekeeping missions
throughout the world.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General about
the need for a continued robust UNMIT police
presence across the country and therefore endorse his
recommendation that UNMIT's mandate be extended
for a further period of 12 months, maintaining the
Mission's current composition and strength.
In conclusion, we are confident that Timor-Leste,
under the able leadership of President Ramos-Horta
and with the help of the United Nations, will continue
to make impressive strides towards peace, security and
prosperity. Turkey will continue to support the young
but vibrant Timorese nation on its promising journey.

