Ms. J ahan (Bangladesh): Thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate on a subject
that has long been on the Council's agenda -
regrettably, however, without any tangible progress. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in the Middle East this morning. Against the backdrop
of the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in the Gaza
Strip, my delegation considers this session to be most
timely and attaches great importance to it.
The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, we would
like to highlight the following points.

At the outset, let me reaffirm Bangladesh's deep
commitment to the cause of Palestine. I also take this
opportunity to pledge our continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their just and legitimate struggle
for self-determination and statehood. Bangladesh
reiterates its long-standing position that the continued
occupation of Palestine is the root cause of violence,
unrest and destabilization in the region. The people of
Palestine are being denied their fundamental right to
self-determination and the right to live freely in their
own land. We believe that the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, is the only sustainable solution to this long-
lasting conflict.

Bangladesh strongly condemns the attacks in
Gaza that took a bitter turn in the last week of
December 2008, killing and maiming innocent
Palestinians, including women and children, and
resulting in devastating humanitarian and economic
crises. It is alarming to note that not even the
humanitarian workers were spared from the atrocities
and that the universal symbol of unity and peace - the
United Nations compound - is no longer a safe place.
We strongly condemn these heinous actions, which are
blatant violations of international law. Bangladesh
condemns Israel's ongoing illegal settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which further
undermines the Palestinian territory's unity and
contiguity, We express our grave concern at Israel's
plan to build a museum on the site of an ancient and
historic Islamic cemetery and urge its immediate
reversal.

Bangladesh stresses the need to conduct a
thorough investigation of the heinous crimes and
violations committed in the Gaza Strip and hopes that
follow-up action will take place immediately thereafter
so that the perpetrators of the crime can be brought to
justice. We appreciate the Secretary-General's dispatch
of a Board of Inquiry to conduct necessary
investigation in the Gaza Strip and expect that the
Board's findings will be followed up without delay. We
also expect that the fact-finding mission called for by
the Human Rights Council will be sent immediately.

All concerned must comply with Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, must undertake
necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution. Border crossings
should be opened forthwith and humanitarian workers
must be guaranteed full and secure access to Gaza.

It is our belief that, under the continuous defiance
and blatant disregard demonstrated by the occupying
Power of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, all concerned, including the Security
Council and the international community at large must
make every effort to oblige Israel to comply with
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Road Map.

While we are outraged by the brutal suppression
of the Palestinian people by the Israeli forces, we are
also frustrated at the factional divisions among the
Palestinian people. Such a lack of unity gives the
wrong impression and adds fuel to the fire, thus
making peace ever more elusive. We believe that unity
among the Palestinians is essential in their pursuit of
their just cause.

Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just resolution of the Palestinian problem is the
key to peace in the entire Middle East. The relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East Road Map remain the guiding
principles in this regard. Bangladesh hopes that the
international community, particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council, will no longer shy
away from mustering the necessary political will to
achieve the much-aspired-to peace in the Middle East.

