The President (spoke in Russian): Before we
take up the item on the agenda for today's meeting, I
should like to welcome warmly the decision by
Ukraine to close the Chernobyl nuclear power station
on 15 December.

That was not a simple decision for Ukraine. It is
an important contribution to regional and global
nuclear security and a major step towards overcoming
the destructive consequences of the Chernobyl disaster,
in the interests of all the countries affected by it. We
are convinced that the continued assistance and support
of the international community for Ukraine's efforts
are important in finding a solution to the ecological,
social and economic problems associated with the
closing of the Chernobyl nuclear power station.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
(8/2000/1156)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, document S/2000/1156.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2000/1182, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following changes to be made to
the text of the draft resolution contained in document
5/2000/1182 in its provisional form.

In operative paragraph 7,
(spoke in English)

"in Eastern provinces"
(spoke in Russian)
should read
(spoke in English)

"in the eastern provinces"
(spoke in Russian)
in the appropriate language versions.

Operative paragraph 8 should read as follows
after "Mbandaka":

(spoke in English)

"in due course and, subject to the proposals
submitted by him under paragraph 7 above, to
other areas he may deem necessary, including
possibly to Goma or Bukavu".

(spoke in Russian)

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2000/1186,
which contains the text of a letter dated 13 December
2000 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

S/PVAZ/W

 

The first speaker on my list is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency Mr.
Leonard She Okitundu, to whom I now give the floor.


