Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): May
I begin by discharging a sad duty and expressing the
full support and solidarity of the Moroccan people with
France in connection with the barbaric acts that took
place, as well as our deepest condolences. We express
our sympathy and support to the families of the victims
and to the people of Lebanon, Russia and Turkey, who
have also been struck by heinous terrorist acts. We
offer our deep condolences to them and to all countries
affected by the scourge of terrorism. We condemn in
the strongest possible terms all of these horrific acts,
which require us to take decisions that are up to the
challenges that we are all facing.

I wish to thank the United Kingdom for having
organized this open debate in the Security Council
on this item of great relevance, on a cross-cutting
subject that is extremely important to the international
community as a whole. I thank you, Mr. President, for
the clear and precise concept note (S/2015/845, annex),
which underlines current challenges and calls for a
renewed vision of the nexus between peace, security
and development.

Security and stability are the pillars of development,
without which our countries cannot improve their social
situations or carry out their development initiatives.
Therefore, a holistic approach to addressing issues of
peace and security, development and human rights is all
the more necessary, given that we live in a world that
is becoming increasingly globalized, and characterized
by interdependence among States and societies, which
influence each other in the political, economic, security
and other spheres. The current situation serves to
illustrate that the traditional forms of cooperation need
to be reviewed. We hope that this debate will allow us
to enter into a wide-ranging consideration of ways to
improve that.

We have responsibility as Members of the United
Nations to ensure that the links among the main organs
of the United Nations established by the Charter are
effective and functional. To that end, we need to come
up with a vision and to find solutions in the short term
so that we can work together for a sustainable peace.
The root causes of conflict and instability are well
known, and they are often the same from country
to country - exclusion, political and economic
marginalization, unequal access to justice, the absence
of effective mechanisms to promote and protect human
rights, corruption, transnational crime and illegal
trafficking, especially in light weapons. Those are just
a few examples.

On the other hand, the establishment of inclusive
political and economic systems, the promotion of the
rule of law and the strengthening of State institutions
are often cited as effective solutions to attacking those
underlying causes. All of those reforms are necessary,
of course, and we must continue to support countries
that are at risk in those areas. Nevertheless, we need
to broaden our range of action. We need to implement
the holistic vision we are all calling for. Among the
means to succeed, we should make certain adjustments
in the way in which we cooperate, whether we are
talking about cooperation between Member States and
the Secretariat or between different United Nations
departments and agencies.

For example, as a way to provide members of
the Security Council further information on the
challenges of development, the Council could consider
including the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) in these discussions, or even the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Given the
existence of its country offices, UNDP is the best
agency to brief the members of the Security Council on
such issues.

In his statement this morning, the representative of
Venezuela drew an unacceptable parallel between the
Palestinian question and that of the Moroccan Sahara.
We must remind that delegation that the question
of the Sahara is not one of decolonization, but of
achieving Morocco's territorial integrity. The Security
Council took up the issue pursuant to Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, which pertains to
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The question of
the Sahara - perhaps Venezuela is unaware - is the
subject of a political process led under the auspices of
the Secretary-General and facilitated by his Personal
Envoy to achieve a mutually acceptable political
solution. During the past 10 months alone, Personal
Envoy Christopher Ross has been to the region five
times. Morocco assures the Special Envoy that it
remains fully comitted to that process.

Peace and security are threatened by other
factors - expansionism, threats to neighbours due to
links with illegal traffickers and massive violations of
human rights. Venezuela is threatening the security of
its neighbours and is trying to absorb a neighbouring
State Member of the United Nations just because that
small country has discovered oil reserves. Venezuela
persecutes the nationals of neighbouring States by
violating the rules of good neighbourliness and the
principle of respect for territorial integrity, which is
at the cornerstone of the Organization. Venezuela has
links with drug trafficking networks that threaten the
regional security and territorial integrity of another
neighbouring State, which has appeared on the front
pages of the international press.

It is paradoxical that a country that represents a
threat to its enemies can talk about peace and security.
It would have the moral legitimacy to do so if it were
to respect good neighbourliness, an inalienable right
set out in the Charter. It is important that the General
Assembly be careful in the election of members to
the Security Council by taking into account their
contribution to international peace and security, as
stipulated by Article 23 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need
for an integrated and consistent approach to achieve
the high goals of the United Nations with regard to
peace and security, development and human rights,
all of which place the human being at the centre of its
concerns.

