Mr. Acosta Bonilla (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important Security Council meeting.

The international community has placed its hope
in the United Nations and firmly believes in its
conciliatory and peaceful role. It also believes that that
is a fundamental factor for the economic development
and well-being of our peoples. Security, peace and
economic development constitute the triple equation
that sustains the peoples of the Earth. What can a
country hope for without internal or international
security? How can we work towards economic
development if there is no security? Economic, social
and cultural development cannot be achieved if
valuable resources are spent on ensuring internal and
international stability while education, food, health and
infrastructure programmes are postponed.

That observation leads us to acknowledge the
importance of this open meeting of the Security
Council. New challenges threaten world peace and are
the impetus to unite the world's efforts and resources to
meet them. Terrorism and drug trafficking are a
tremendous threat to humankind and, together with the
spread of pandemics, could lead to the destruction of
broad social sectors in all parts of the world. Hunger,
AIDS, malaria and, recently, SARS - the severe acute
respiratory syndrome: each alone could decimate the
population of the planet.

We must make rational use of our collective
resources in order to meet those enormous challenges.
To do that, we must strengthen the role of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council. Bolstering
and enhancing our Organization, reviewing its working
methods and bringing together mechanisms that can
enable the Organization to work efficiently is an
essential task that will allow us to resolve, together, the
enormous challenges threatening humankind now and
in the future.

The Honduran people faithfully comply with
international law. Our national constitution is an
expression of our commitment to peace. We have
therefore signed all instruments relating to the peaceful
settlement of international disputes, and we recognize
unreservedly the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice and abide solemnly by its decisions.
Furthermore, we trust in the Security Council as a
guarantor for carrying out the sentences handed down
by international justice bodies. Peace, security and
development at both the international and national
levels will be thwarted if there is no consensus in the
Council and if we cannot guarantee compliance with
the sentences imposed by the International Court of
Justice or one of the main international tribunals that
have been created.

The Council must solemnly voice its opinion on
this issue and fully support the decisions of the
International Court of Justice and other world legal
forums. A more active diplomacy on the part of the
Secretary-General, a greater capacity for analysis and
the proper use of resources available to the specialized
agencies of the United Nations can make a substantive
contribution to the prevention of possible conflicts, as
the reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council must reflect in a timely fashion the
information available on possible inter-State and intra-
State conflicts that fall within the purview of the
United Nations. That mechanism can be more effective
if the Council, when it is informed of a potential
conflict, were to invite the parties to a meeting of
special consultations in order to recommend or
promote an early solution to the conflict.

The Honduran people place our trust in the
procedures of international organizations for the
settlement of international conflicts and for facing the
major challenges facing humankind. That is why we
support our world Organization and ask for all
countries' respect and support for the functioning of
the Organization and implementation of and
compliance with its resolutions.

In the twenty-first century, the men and women
living on this small planet are committed to eradicating
the major calamities facing humankind - wars,
hunger, slavery and disease - in order to achieve a full
life allowing for unlimited material well-being and
spiritual development for all people. That goal is
within our reach. The process must be led by the
Security Council.
