Mr. Serrano: I wish to thank you, Sir, for having
invited the European Union (EU) to today's important
meeting.

The candidate countries Turkey and Croatia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Montenegro; as
well as the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia
align themselves with this declaration.

I wish to thank High Representative Inzko for his
presentation and reiterate the full support of the EU for
his Office and actions. We have also listened carefully
to President Silajdzie's important statement, and I wish
to express my gratitude for the cooperation and support
Bosnia and Herzegovina has extended to the European
Union during its membership in the Security Council.

As the High Representative has reported, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made some progress in recent
months in advancing its European and Euro-Atlantic
perspectives. We commend these developments and
encourage further efforts. It is also encouraging that
regional cooperation in the Western Balkans has
continued to develop positively, with renewed
constructive engagement from Serbia and Croatia and
with Turkey playing a useful role. We look forward to
the momentum that will be generated by the
EU-Western Balkans ministerial meeting in Sarajevo
on 2 June. But as the High Representative has pointed
out, the overall political climate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has continued to be negative.

Unhelpful rhetoric has increased in the run-up to
the elections scheduled for 3 October. It remains a
matter of great concern that the authority of State
institutions and competencies and the authority of the
High Representative have been increasingly challenged
over the past six months. The adoption of a new law on
referendums by Republika Srpska may be particularly
worrying should it be used to challenge the existing
constitutional framework. The European Union wishes
to reiterate its strong support for High Representative
Inzko and calls on all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to comply fully with the decisions taken
by him and not to seek to challenge his authority. We
underline once again our firm commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Against this backdrop, we encourage all political
leaders to work for the long-term interests of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Consensus is urgently needed to
achieve political reforms and to tackle significant
economic and social challenges.

The European Union is firmly committed to and
fully engaged in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
European Union is using all instruments at its disposal,
including by providing significant financial assistance
and expertise. The Lisbon Treaty gives us new impetus
and new possibilities for an enhanced political
presence in the country in the future. Through our two
missions on the ground, the European Union Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR ALTHEA) and the
European Union Police Mission, the European Union
supports Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to maintain
a safe and secure environment.

The European Union is committed to continuing
the executive mandate of EUFOR ALTHEA in
accordance with resolution 1895 (2009). Should the
situation require it, the EU stands ready to maintain an
executive military role to support these efforts beyond
2010, under a United Nations mandate. Building on its
achievements, the operation has started to provide
non-executive capacity-building and training support,
thus contributing to strengthening local ownership and
capacity. The EU Police Mission mandate has also
been extended until the end of 2011, with a specific
focus on fighting organized crime and corruption and
on enhancing cooperation among police, prosecutors
and the penitentiary system.

We firmly believe that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina indeed lies within the European Union.
We are encouraged that, when there is political
dialogue and consensus, the country can achieve
reforms. Visa liberalization is a concrete example. As a
result of Bosnia and Herzegovina's good progress in
meeting the benchmarks, the European Commission is
working on a proposal for updating the Schengen white
list, on which the Council and the European Parliament
will decide together in the coming months.

Such positive political will also needs to be
demonstrated in other areas to ensure that Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not fall behind the rest of the region
in its European integration process. As High
Representative Ashton noted in her address to the
Security Council on 4 May (see S/PV.6306), steps
remain to be taken by Bosnia and Herzegovina to
secure a well-functioning State. In particular,
additional efforts are needed in order to meet the
outstanding requirements - five objectives and two
conditions - for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, notably regarding State and defence
property. The European Union has been clear that it
will not be in a position to consider an application for
membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina until the
transition of the Office of the High Representative to a
reinforced EU presence has been decided.

Progress is also needed on constitutional reform
to enable the better functioning of Bosnia and
Herzegovina institutions, as well as to implement the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on the
rights of minorities to stand for election and be
appointed to important State-level institutions. The law
on census should be adopted without further delay. The
European Union continues to attach importance to a
full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

In his report, the High Representative has set out
some urgent and pressing reform priorities for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Many of these are essential if Bosnia
and Herzegovina is to realize its ambition of EU
accession. Without them, Bosnia and Herzegovina
compromises its strategic priority and risks falling
further behind other countries in the region as regards
the European integration process. We cannot afford to
waste time. It is the responsibility of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina leadership to move ahead rapidly and
constructively, and to do so as soon as possible.
As high-level visits by High Representative
Ashton and Commissioner Fiile have shown, the
European Union remains fully committed to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and will remain so after the eventual
closure of the Office of the High Representative. In
turn, we encourage all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leaders to be committed to the European
Union and to act in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European aspirations.

