Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by greeting you, Mr. President, and thanking
you for being here to preside over our meeting. I wish
to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing, which
was quite complete.

The Palestinian question has been deadlocked for
a number of years now, after a great many efforts.
Today, we see that we are at a critical and historic
juncture. The peace process in the Middle East now
faces major challenges as a result of the obstacles put
in its path by Israel. We note that there is a lack of
political will to allow the Palestinian people to enjoy
their rights and establish an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Those obstacles and
procrastination tactics - along with the ongoing
crises, especially with regard to the settlements policy,
home demolitions and the confiscation of Palestinian
land and property, including villages and towns being
cut off as a result of the construction of the separation
wall, in spite of international and Arab peace
initiatives - mean that, unfortunately, the two-State
solution cannot be achieved.

Last week, Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, spoke about the current state of
affairs and provided us with figures and statistics that
clearly illustrate the negative and dangerous impact of
the settlements policy, in particular with regard to the
economic, social and humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people. That also has a negative impact on
reaching a durable solution at the international level. In
addition, some Israeli settlers carry out systematic and
repeated attacks against the Palestinian people, which
the Israeli authorities do not deter or punish.

The Israeli occupying authorities in Jerusalem
have stepped up settlement activities, both in Jerusalem
in general as well as in East Jerusalem and
neighbouring areas. A number of excavations are taken
place under the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in blatant violation
of international norms. We must ensure respect for this
pivotal city in order to arrive at a solution to the
Middle East issue. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility and help to find a solution to
this very complex problem involving a city of great
importance to all monotheistic religions.

The Council should work quickly to meet the
legal, moral and political obligations incumbent upon it
and the Organization vis-a-vis the Palestinian people,
whose right to establish an independent State should be
realized. As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Morocco supports all international and
regional efforts aimed at relaunching the peace process,
in particular with regard to the Jordanian initiative,
which we truly hope will make it possible to resume
negotiations. Once the desire and political will for
peace are made clear by both parties, especially by the
Israeli people in rejecting anything that obstructs
peace, my delegation will not hesitate to promote every
effort aimed at comprehensive and just peace based on
international legitimacy.

This conflict has lasted far too long. We must find
a lasting and comprehensive peace. A great number of
regional and international initiatives have been
launched, with Arab States putting forward a bold
initiative demonstrating our good faith and
commitment to achieve peace. The elements of an
ultimate solution are now clear to everyone, as are the
details. Israel must demonstrate political will and
determination to arrive at a genuine solution that takes
into account the aspirations and rights of the
Palestinian side. Israel must demonstrate on the ground
its desire to negotiate sincerely in order to achieve
peace, security and cooperation. We all want to see
peace in the region, which has suffered more than any
other part of the world. This is a region that has
suffered from wars and tragedies and whose people
year for peace, coexistence and cooperation.

