Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan is very pleased to
welcome President Touadera to the Security Council
today. His presence attests to the strong commitment
of his Government to the consolidation of peace and
the rebuilding of the nation. We are encouraged
by the determination of the people of the Central
African Republic, as evidenced by the Bangui Forum
and the elections, in their quest for peace, stability
and prosperity.

In response to the strong national ownership,
regional and international partners are also
increasingly committed and united in their support
for the Government of the Central African Republic. I
especially commend the devoted efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and its troop-contributing countries. I would like to
assure Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, of Japan's
support for the Mission's proactive and robust postures.

I have already had the pleasure of speaking in the
presence of President Touadera this morning in the
Peacebuilding Commission, so I will be brief now.

The leaders of armed groups that have not yet laid
down their arms must understand that there is more
to be gained in the peace and reconstruction process
than in war. The extension of State authority is an
essential priority in delivering peace dividends to the
population and avoiding its marginalization. Japan
will continue to take part in reconstruction efforts
through assistance for the most vulnerable, including
refugees and internally displaced persons. That is
why we have recently decided to provide $15.3 in new
project assistance for the Central African Republic and
vulnerable populations in neighbouring countries.

The Council is fully aware of the importance of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We cannot
afford to let the Central African Republic relapse into
instability. Japan is committed to its ongoing support
to the Government of the Central African Republic, led
by President Touadera, as part of our joint efforts to
achieve sustainable peace.

