Ms. Kelley: It is my honour to make this
statement on behalf of the President of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
who was prevented from coming to New York on short
notice.

In the name of the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, I thank the Security Council
and Portugal for the opportunity to speak and
participate in today's important discussion. The
Commission would also like to thank the delegations of
South Africa, Germany, Switzerland and Japan for their
support today, and the Council itself for having
envisaged, in resolution 1894 (2009), of 11 November
2009, making use of the services of the Commission. I
would like to reiterate the preparedness of the
Commission to face that challenge. The Commission
feels that there are opportunities to do so, including in
particular allegations currently being made in respect
of the situation in Libya.

In the name of the Commission, I would like to
briefly restate reasons that the Security Council might
consider for entrusting the Commission with such a

task. The most important point is the legitimacy of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
as a treaty body established under the Geneva
Conventions. The very treaty regime that is the source
of the obligations the respect of which is at stake in the
inquiries to be undertaken is also the basis for the
inquiry Commission. That fact, together with an
election process that ensures the independence and
impartiality of its members, instils confidence in the
Commission's work. We submit that this will enhance
the acceptance of its findings.

There is a variety of expertise in the current
composition of the Commission, which is crucial for
meaningful and successful inquiry, as recommended
during the excellent preparatory workshop held on
1 November. There is a medical doctor experienced in
dealing with victims of violence; a psychiatrist
renowned for her ability to deal with traumatized
persons; former and active military or police officers;
and judges and lawyers with expertise in the relevant
fields of law. The Commission has continuously
worked to be well prepared for such a task, by having
its members participate in various field missions and
practical exercises, as well as through information
gathering and contingency planning.

A mandate given by the Council may certainly be
elaborated in consultations. In that process, the
Commission will have the flexibility required by the
circumstances. The Commission considers that such a
mandate, obligatory as it would be pursuant to Article
25 of the Charter, should enjoy the agreement of the
parties to a conflict. We are convinced that the specific
features of the Commission I have just described would
facilitate obtaining such mandate and agreement. The
Commission would be honoured and proud if it could
thus assist in the work of the Security Council.

