Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, the Secretary
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for their
statements. Their joint presence in the Council shows
that the method we have followed in Yemen was the
right one. The United Nations has worked with the
relevant regional organization - the Gulf Cooperation
Council - to set in motion a process to respond the
legitimate demands of the Yemeni population. This
process shows that, in situations of open crisis, the
establishment of an orderly, peaceful and democratic
transition is possible.

Indeed, the Yemeni transition, implemented under
the auspices of President Hadi Mansour, to whom
we reiterate our full support, provides a model to the
world in these troubled times. It is emblematic above
all because of the commitment of Yemenis themselves,
who have achieved significant progress in implementing
resolution 2014 (2011).

We welcome the progress of the National Dialogue
Conference, which was launched on 18 March and
provides an opportunity for all stakeholders in Yemen,
in particular the youth and civil society, to achieve
national reconciliation. We welcome the pledges of
good will from the parties involved, such as the formal
apology made by President Hadi Mansour for the
clashes of the past, in which all Yemenis suffered.

France urges all the parties to maintain their
commitment in a spirit of constructive vision in order
to continue the political transition by the earliest
deadlines set out. Recent difficulties have caused a
delay, as we all know, in the conclusion of the National
Dialogue Conference, which had been scheduled for
18 September. It is the responsibility of all Yemenis to
resolve the last issues under discussion in the working
groups concerned, including on the administrative and
territorial organization of the country. This should,
in any event, include respect for the principles of the
territorial integrity and unity of Yemen and establish
a distribution of powers that does not impede the
prospects for economic development.

In order to strengthen the second phase of the
Yemeni transition, it is also urgent to make progress
in other areas, in particular on the restructuring of
the security forces, on economic reforms and on
the humanitarian situation. The restructuring of the
security and defence forces is indeed a priority area in
view of the magnitude of the security challenges facing
Yemen.

France reiterates its strongest condemnation of
all acts of terrorism, regardless of the justification.
It is necessary in this connection for the Yemeni
Government to deploy adequate means to protect not
only the people, as its top priority, but also industrial
facilities, the repeated sabotage of which deprives the
country of its own resources and discourages investors.
This is a major challenge to the country's economic and
social development.

Whatever institutions the Yemenis choose to
establish in the months to come, it is up to the Yemeni
authorities to undertake the economic, social and
political reforms necessary to a balanced development of
the country and good institutional governance. Indeed,
without a legal environment conducive to the growth of
the economy and guarantees for the establishment of
the rule of law, there can be no development in Yemen
in the long-term.

France welcomes the cooperation of the Yemeni
authorities with the Human Rights Council, and their
resolve to make progress with respect to the rights
and freedoms of individuals. However, the question of
women's rights, forced marriages in particular, and the
application of the death penalty, including to minors,
continue to concern us.

The Yemeni authorities should pay special attention
to the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. As Ms. Amos stressed again in New York
at the meeting of the Friends of Yemen, the country
must address the critical humanitarian situation, which
could affect its stability if it were to continue. Half
the population lives below the poverty line, 13 million
people require humanitarian assistance, and migrants
and refugees entered the system by the tens of thousands
in 2013. The United Nations emergency humanitarian
programme does not have sufficient funds to deal with
this alarming situation. The international community
cannot remain indifferent.

In that context France, a guarantor of the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, fully supports this
iconic and peaceful political transition. We sought it
assiduously and we contribute to it by taking part in
the stabilization of the country in all fields. We stress
its centrality and insist on respect for the stages of
transition leading to the convening of elections as close
as possible to the deadlines that have been set.

France has therefore dispatched a constitutional
expert to the National Dialogue Conference to support
the drafting of the new constitution. Such a framework
will open the possibility of consolidating development
activities in the country. We are ready, as we confirmed
to the Friends of Yemen conference held on Wednesday,
to participate through the investment of our businesses,
by providing our expertise when it responds to needs
defined by the Yemenis themselves, and through our
cooperation and development projects, including for
the electrification of Yemen.

My country and the Council therefore remain
firmly alongside the Yemeni authorities at this historic
moment, when we have the opportunity to meet together
the legitimate democratic aspirations of the Yemeni
people.

