Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this meeting to focus the
world's attention on the need to address the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, especially nuclear weapons. We also welcome
the presence of the authorities who are with us today
and thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for their important briefings.

Throughout its history, the Security Council has
remained united in the fight against the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, in fulfilment of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations. There is no better way to eliminate the
risk posed by weapons of mass destruction than by
ending their existence. In that regard, we support the
preparations leading up to the tenth Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to be held next year.

Peru maintains its firm position in support of the
full implementation of the three pillars of the NPT and
emphasizes the importance of achieving its universality.
We therefore urge the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil
their commitments under article VI of the Treaty
and make progress towards the total destruction of
those weapons, thereby eliminating their effect on
humankind. In our understanding of and commitment
to that goal, we participated actively in the adoption
of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
and have signed it. We hope that one day all countries,
especially those with nuclear arsenals, will accede to it.
In our view, this legally binding instrument strengthens
and complements the current disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes, particularly as it contributes
to the implementation of article VI of the NPT, on the
reduction of such weapons.

In recent years we have observed with concern
the challenges that have arisen to the non-proliferation
regimes, especially that of nuclear weapons, which
pose the most serious threat to international peace and
security in our current circumstances. We will continue
to seek unity in the Council in our response to such
challenges, such as those we have seen in the nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

Peru affirms the inalienable right of all States to
conduct research on, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. In that regard, we support the work
that the IAEA has been doing in the implementation of
safeguards and verification mechanisms for the use of
nuclear energy.

With respect to nuclear disarmament, it is
imperative that we begin negotiations that will lead
to a fissile-material cut-off treaty. In that connection,
we especially call on nuclear-weapon States to break
the deadlock in the Conference on Disarmament with
a view to immediately taking up negotiations on a
non-discriminatory and verifiable treaty. Similarly, as
we look ahead to the tenth NPT Review Conference,
we believe that this regime can be strengthened only by
reducing the nuclear arsenals that remain, which is why
we urge nuclear-weapon States to comply with article
VI of the NPT and take concrete measures. Peru hopes
to see points of convergence in well-known areas of
disagreement. In that regard, we deplore the suspension
of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and
urge both countries to resume a dialogue with a view to
overcoming their differences and achieving agreements
based on the principles of irreversibility, verifiability
and transparency.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our strong
commitment and resolute support to ensuring the
success of the forthcoming NPT Review Conference.
It will be essential to work on addressing the various
perceptions of insecurity by countering proliferation
and arms races and coming up with measures geared to
cooperation, trade and development.

