Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union. Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Iceland, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align themselves
with this statement.

The year 2005 is particularly significant for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ten years ago next week the
Dayton Peace Agreement was initialled, bringing bitter
fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina to an end and
establishing the constitutional structures of the country
we know today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina today stands at the
threshold of another, new chapter in its history. In
Brussels next week, we expect the European Union to
agree formally to open negotiations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina on a stabilization and association
agreement. The conclusion of those negotiations will
establish a formal, contractual relationship between the
European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

For Bosnia, that marks the first step on the long
path to eventual membership of the European Union. It
also demonstrates that the European Union is
determined to deliver on the Thessaloniki agenda: the
commitment that all the countries of the Western
Balkans are potential members of the European Union
provided that they meet the necessary conditions. The
opening of negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina
will also mean that all the countries of the region will
have concluded, or be negotiating, formal contractual
relations with the European Union.

We have heard just how far Bosnia and
Herzegovina has come in 10 years. That is underlined
by the other anniversary commemorated this year -
that of the massacre at Srebrenica of some 8,000
Bosnian Muslim men and boys in July 1995. We must
never forget what happened at Srebrenica. Nor can we
forget what happened to Bosnian Muslims, Croats and
Serbs in countless other towns and villages all over
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is for that reason that a fundamental condition
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's further progress towards
membership of the European Union is the requirement
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, including the
apprehension and transfer of all fugitive indictees, in
particular Karadzic and Mladic.

The fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina has come
so far in 10 years is a testament to the enormous
political, financial and military investment by the
international community, including the European
Union, and to the efforts of the Bosnians themselves.

It is also a testament to the efforts of Lord
Ashdown, who, as High Representative and European
Union Special Representative, has been tireless in
assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina to drive through the
significant reforms that we have seen over the last
three and a half years. We believe that the European
Union, the wider international community and
particularly Bosnia and Herzegovina all owe Lord
Ashdown a debt of gratitude. He leaves Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the threshold of a new chapter in its
history and better able to face the challenges ahead.

As European Union Special Representative, Lord
Ashdown has played an important role in coordinating
the work of various European Union instruments
deployed in support of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
particular strength of the EU is the potential to bring to
bear its financial, political and military instruments in
support of one objective in this case i to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-Atlantic integration.

We are very clear. We believe that Lord Ashdown

used his powers as High Representative effectively, but
we also recognize that he was sometimes criticized for
usurping the role of democratic institutions. That
approach was necessary at a time when institutions
needed the sort of push that would cause them to move
forward. But, as Lord Ashdown has described, it is
now time for the relationship to evolve, and with it the
style of the High Representative, in order to allow
Bosnia to stand on its own two feet and for us to end
the dependency culture and allow Bosnia to flourish.
That means that we should move away from the
commanding approach to one of support.

Working in the closest cooperation with the
NATO presence, the European Union Force has
successfully assumed the main peace stabilization role
under the Dayton Peace Agreement. The European
Union Police Mission has provided advice and support
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in its efforts to bring its
own police structures up to the expected standards. The
EU continues to provide significant financial support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina under the Community
Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and
Stabilization assistance programme.

As the High Representative acknowledged,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way -
perhaps the longer part of its journey. But it still has
much work to do in implementing the reforms and
meeting the benchmarks, which are basic to integration
within the European Union. Many of the challenges
that Bosnia and Herzegovina faces are a legacy of the
years of conflict. It will require determination and
resolve on the part of the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome them once and for all. But let
us be clear: the European Union's commitment to
continuing to support them in their efforts is evident
and will be maintained.

