Mr. Monteiro (Cape Verde) (interpretation from French): I congratulate you, Sir, on the highly competent
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Security Council during the month of February. I also
thank your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of Japan, for
his very successful work during the course of the last
month.

I am grateful for the opportunity my delegation has
been given to speak before the Council at this formal
meeting on the question of Angola, which is a topic of
the utmost importance to us.

Looking back, we note the extent to which the
Government and UNITA have progressed in their quest
for peaceful national reconciliation. That path has been an
extremely long and difficult one. Lusaka came about only
after several missed opportunities. Subsequently, the
prevailing lack of confidence became a major,

 

multifaceted constraint that led to many uncertainties and
setbacks.

Throughout this entire process, the Angolan conflict
has received extraordinary attention from the United
Nations and the international community, and in particular
from some of its member States. This has provided
consistent and increasingly effective support for the cause
of peace in the country.

We have now reached a stage that can be described
only as a decisive turning-point, a stage at which two must
become one: one Government, one army, one police force,
and, lastly, one country.

The first military units of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) have been withdrawn;
further withdrawals are soon to take place, in keeping with
the agreed time-tables; and the ceasefire continues to be
very broadly respected.

These are positive aspects in the field of military
activities. However, these cannot mask the slowness and
inadequacies in other areas of activity, such as in the
essential area of the selection and integration of soldiers
and officers of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces and
the National Police.

However, reconstruction and the demining of roads
seem to be proceeding satisfactorily; they are being carried
out as part of a planned institutional framework. These
activities will have a positive and immediate impact on the
lives of the people and will restore their confidence.

Likewise, we note improvements in certain significant
areas of economic management, such as lower inflation and
a stabilization of the exchange rate, as well as other
measures adopted as regards prices and budgetary activities.
We congratulate the Government on these accomplishments
and express the hope that this initial success will gain
strength and become part of a broader process of reversing
the economic and social situation in Angola.

All eyes are now focused on the completion of the
establishment of the Angolan Parliament and the setting up
of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.
This is as it should be. These two issues are indeed the
keystone of the Lusaka accords. To a certain extent, they
represent the final test of confidence - the point of no
return.

The two successive deferrals of the dates agreed for
these events fully justify the prevailing sense of concern
and urgency. My delegation fully endorses the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report of 7 February on this matter.

Indeed, given that the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation has
been stalled, it would be unreasonable for us to expect to
be able to implement the upcoming complementary
agreements, or others that the parties might enter into in
the near future, with a view further to hone this common
endeavour.

Quite the contrary: the political will must be
mustered to follow the course that has been charted and
thus build on the accrued capital of goodwill and
understanding. We are confident that this will be the case
and that the Angolan political scene will soon see
decisive action.

In the report I mentioned earlier, the Secretary-
General, while issuing recommendations concerning a
United Nations presence throughout 1997, is making a
more immediate proposal to extend UNAVEM's mandate
for one month, indicating that a closer follow-up of the
commitments that are in abeyance is considered good
policy.

The next report of the Secretary-General, which will
come out before the end of the period in question, will be
reporting to the Council on the expected establishment of
the Government. The Council will be deliberating on this
basis. We hope that the report will note positive
developments and thereby spare the Council the need to
impose measures, including those provided for in
paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September
1993. Nonetheless, the Council is prepared to do so if
necessary, as stipulated in resolution 1098 (1997), which
it has just adopted.

In the forthcoming phase of the United Nations
mission in Angola, apart from support for national
reconciliation as such, special emphasis will be placed on
humanitarian issues in view of the way they are
considered in this context. The issues of relief and
rehabilitation, quartering and demobilization will be
included.

Significant resources will be required. The figures
speak for themselves: almost half a million former

 

combatants and their families, a million displaced persons,
tens of thousands of refugees.

It is essential, if we are to avoid the worst at either the
humanitarian or the security level, that international efforts
to finance scheduled activities be maintained. To that end,
the response to the comprehensive inter-agency appeal that
is being planned must be such as to meet this challenge.

In conclusion, we thank the Secretary-General for his
persistent and consistent efforts, as can be seen in his report
of 7 February, which clearly shows the changes to be made
in the United Nations presence on the ground in Angola
during the next phase, which is one of observation. This
presence will focus more on promoting national
reconciliation and on consolidating the newfound peace.

We join the Government of Angola in once again
expressing our thanks for the untiring efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We thank also the
three Observer States and the other Member States that
have been contributing to the cause of peace in Angola.

