Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would first, as others have,
like to thank you, Sir, for arranging this wrap-up debate
and to thank and congratulate the Malian presidency
for a month of very real clarity and focus in terms of
the Council's agenda and the way in which all of the
issues before us have been handled.

In terms of wrap-up debates, my delegation has
always taken the view that they are a useful chance to
assess broad themes in the Council's work and to look
in a reflective way at our procedures and methods.
They bring to mind slightly the comment by King
Alfonso that, had he been present at the Creation, he
would have been able to give some useful hints on how
it might have been done better. I think that it is a useful
spirit, even though it was meant slightly ironically at
the time, in terms of how we can look at ways in which
our Organization and procedures can change and
evolve, as has been mentioned earlier.

There are four points that I want briefly to make.
The first relates to the work programme. Ireland very
much welcomed the strong focus on Africa during the
past month. We had very useful discussions in the
Council on Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - including on the report of the Panel of
Experts - as well as an important open debate on West
Africa. These are all areas where the United Nations is
actively involved in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
advancing social and economic development.

In all of these areas there are varying signs of
hope, as well as challenges, and the focus that we had
this month allowed us to take valuable stock of the
progress, and also of the huge challenges remaining,
and to consider what must now be done within the
United Nations, by the Council specifically, in the
period ahead in advancing the progress that has been
made.

The Council rightly placed Afghanistan at the
forefront of its agenda again this month. We adopted
two extremely important resolutions - 1383 (2001)
and 1386 (2001). We endorsed the Bonn Agreement
and took stock of both the situation as it exists at the
moment and the support that Afghanistan and its
people will need in the period ahead.

On the Middle East - a final point on our agenda
this month - Ireland welcomes the fact that we were
able to hold a debate. We think it was useful. It was
unfortunate that the Council was not able to achieve
consensus at the conclusion of it. But the fact that we
held the debate and had an exchange of views was is in
itself valuable, and we welcome that.

As a second point, on wider themes arising from
the work programme, a clear need which has been
emphasized by many of the speakers so far today is
how best to bring clarity and strategic thinking to our
approach. We can do that, given the level of detail,
issue by issue. We can also do it, as Ambassador
Greenstock suggested, by regular briefings in which we
pick out main themes.
On Afghanistan, for example - Ambassador
Durrant mentioned this i there is now a very real need
for the United Nations system generally, and for the
Council in particular, to support Special Representative
Brahimi in every way possible in the very difficult
challenges that the United Nations will face over the
coming months. This is an area where it would be very
useful for the Council to regularly assess the situation
on the ground and to listen to reports, in terms of the
work of the International Security Assistance Force and
the United Nations role in particular.

On Africa, too, there would be great value in
periodically making a broad assessment of different
trends that are emerging. Much of value is happening
in the Bretton Woods institutions and in the approach
of the European Union - with the Cotonou
Agreement - and the approach of the United Nations
itself to humanitarian issues, peace-building and
economic and social development. The Council in its
work cannot reinvent the world. But it can try to ensure
that the best thinking is integrated into its own
approach, including, at the normative level, the
thematic issues that are agreed in other parts of the
United Nations family. Although we rightly address the
details of issues at times, this is an area where it would
also be very useful to stand back from time to time and
look at the wider picture.

As a third point, in terms of the role of the
Council with regard to the rest of the United Nations
family and the international community, again, Ireland
has always taken the view that it is important for the
Council to show the greatest possible level of openness
to and engagement with other United Nations bodies.
This can be done by holding more open debates, by
dialogue and by engagement, including through Arria-
formula meetings. There has been a lot of progress in
this area, which we welcome. As has been mentioned
in other wrap-up discussions, there is also a need for
greater dialogue, for example with the Economic and
Social Council. We would welcome that, because there
is a need for an interlocutor on economic and social
issues with the Council, including at the operational
level. If there is a lacuna in some areas of United
Nations work, this absence of dialogue may be it.

On methods, Ireland shares the view of others
that it is important that we regularly look at our own
procedure. Perhaps we should make shorter statements;
perhaps there should be more clustering of agenda
items. There are various ways of approaching this
issue, but there can be no doubt that the Council
agenda can at times can be excessive in terms of the
number of subjects that come up each month.

Finally, on behalf of Ireland, I would also like
very warmly to thank Bangladesh, Tunisia, Ukraine,
Jamaica and Mali for their work in the Council over the
past two years. We have very much enjoyed working
with all the delegations during the one year that Ireland
has been a member of the Council. As has been said by
other speakers, the contribution of elected members
coming to the Council can, in ways that often may not
be apparent outside the United Nations, be enormous in
terms of their particular focus, their emphasis on
agenda and the fresh blood and energy that they bring.
So we are very grateful to them, and we will miss all of
our colleagues very much. We look forward to meeting
in other forums regularly.

In conclusion, we would like to thank Mali once
again for a very successful presidency and to express
our appreciation to the delegation.

