Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and Bolivia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also want to thank Ambassador Nikki Haley
and her team for the exceptional guiding of our work
for the month of September.

(spoke in English)

I thank you, Mr. President for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED).

Terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
continue to pose a grave threat to peace and security
around the world. ISIL has suffered significant losses,
but has transformed itself into a global network that
continues to motivate its supporters and followers
around the globe to commit attacks. The growing
sophistication of the methods used by terrorists requires
innovation in our responses, while ensuring that those
in place are both effective and sustainable.

Not long ago, we were concerned with the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to the conflict zones in Iraq
and Syria. Our concerns now include not only the
activities of those foreign terrorist fighters who remain
in the conflict zones, but also returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters and their family members and
the potential risk posed by the forthcoming release of
imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters and other persons
convicted on terrorism-related charges. In this regard,
the Committee is currently preparing a special meeting
to update its 2015 Madrid guiding principles on
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.

Pursuant to resolution 2396 (2017), CTED is
engaging with Member States, in cooperation with the
relevant organizations, including the International Civil
Aviation Organization, to assist with the implementation
of the Advanced Passenger Information and Passenger
Name Record systems and the use of biometric data to
identify terrorists, in compliance with domestic law
and international human rights law. I would note in
connection with this the recent issuance of the United
Nations compendium of recommended practices
for the responsible use and sharing of biometrics in
counter-terrorism, developed by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

CTED is also supporting the development of
comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies for former members of
terrorist groups, including in the Lake Chad basin.
Similarly, the Committee and CTED continue to focus
on the main evidentiary and jurisdictional challenges
that hinder attempts to prosecute returning foreign
terrorist fighters.

Since our previous briefing (see S/PV.8127), the
Council has also adopted resolution 2395 (2017), which
renews the mandate of CTED and reaffirms its role
as a special political mission acting under the policy
guidance of the Committee. Pursuant to the same
resolution, CTED has reported to the Committee on
ways to strengthen its assessment tools and improve the
utility of its assessment to Member States, technical
assistance providers, implementing partners, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), other relevant
agencies, and international and regional organizations.
Since the beginning of 2018, CTED has concluded
13 country-assessment visits on the Committee's
behalf, in cooperation with international and regional
organizations. I wish to note that the Committee recently
obtained consent to visit Mali and Saudi Arabia, and
that Finland, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America have invited assessment visits for 2019.

We are concerned about the impact of terrorism
on children and on the role played within terrorist
groups by women. While women are often victims of
terrorism, they also can be perpetrators and facilitators.
In June, the Committee held a briefing on children
and terrorism, with the participation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and representatives of United
Nations University. In the same vein, in September the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the UNOCT joined the Committee for a briefing on
the human right aspects of counter-terrorism, including
the rights of victims and survivors. Human rights and
gender issues have also been streamlined throughout all
Committee and CTED activities, including within the
framework of assessment visits and thematic briefings.

As Council members are aware, cooperation with
and among international and regional organizations and
among the relevant United Nations entities is essential.
In March, CTED organized a subregional consultation
with the Governments of Afghanistan, Maldives and Sri
Lanka on promoting the adoption and implementation
of national strategies to counter violent extremism.
Last July, the Committee held an open briefing on
Central Asia, focusing on the current counter-terrorism
situation in the region, the progress achieved by the
five States of the region and the remaining challenges.
Just last week, CTED, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International
Association of Prosecutors jointly launched a practical
guide for requesting electronic evidence across borders
for investigators, prosecutors and central authorities.

CTED also continues to promote and facilitate
cooperation with other major actors and partners in the
private sector, civil society and the research community,
including through the CTED Global Counter-Terrorism
Research Network. Participants in the Asia Information
andCommunicationsTechnologyandCounter-Terrorism
Dialogue have discussed counter-terrorism, countering
incitement and violent extremism leading to terrorism,
the development of counter-narratives, enhancing the
practice of private online communications, service
providers and empowering online communities. In this
regard, in May the Committee held an open meeting on

countering terrorist narratives and preventing terrorist
use of the Internet.

Countering terrorist financing also continues to be
a major focus of our attention. The CTED Executive
Director notably played an active role in the No Money
For Terror international conference, held in Paris in
April. Pursuant to resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017), CTED continues to investigate the possible
links between transnational organized crime and
terrorism, particularly human trafficking and terrorism.
In cooperation with UNODC and the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, the
Committee will hold an open briefing on the nexus
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime in October, and will also hold a joint
special meeting on this topic, in accordance with the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
May 2018 (S/PRST/2018/9).

Acting under the guidance of the Committee and
in accordance with resolution 2395 (2017), CTED has
also continued to strengthen its cooperation with the
Office of Counter Terrorism. A joint CTED/UNOCT
report on enhanced coordination and cooperation was
issued as a Security Council document (S/2018/435)
and as an addendum to the Secretary-General's report
to the General Assembly on the biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/72/840, annex IV). Moreover, CTED and UNOCT
have conducted joint high-level consultations with
Iraq, Kenya, Nigeria, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
Continued efforts have also been made to match the
activities of UNOCT with a technical assistance need
and recommendations set forth in the Committee
visit reports.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the determination
of the Committee and CTED to develop and implement
comprehensive responses to the evolving terrorism
threat, in close cooperation with other relevant
United Nations entities and with our international and
regional partners.

