I will be brief this morning. I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her comprehensive update. The United Kingdom recognizes the challenging circumstances faced since the Secretary-General's last report (S/2020/944) - as the Special Representative and others have described today - and we welcome the progress made. The people of Haiti deserve an end to the dysfunction that has plagued State institutions and governance in that country for so long. I would like to start by joining others in calling for credible and transparent legislative elections as soon as possible. They are necessary to put Haiti on a path towards stability and prosperity. Concurrent progress on human rights is critical to underpin stability. The United Kingdom welcomes the appointment of a Minister-delegate for Human Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty. This is an important step in demonstrating the political will to safeguard human rights. However, we are concerned that the national action plan for human rights is yet to be adopted by the Council of Ministers. I also wanted to express our grave concern over the assassination of the President of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval. The United Kingdom calls for a prompt and transparent investigation into this and welcomes the commitment by President Moise to hold the perpetrators to account. The establishment, almost one year ago, of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) reflected the Security Council's conviction that the international community's engagement with Haiti needed to rest on a new model of cooperation, with Haitians firmly in the lead. The United Kingdom welcomes the finalization of the United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework that supports and underpins Haiti's national priorities. We are pleased to see the United Nations country team stepping up, and instruments such as the Peacebuilding Fund - to which the United Kingdom is wholeheartedly committed - being deployed strategically. As we approach discussions on mandate renewal, the United Kingdom continues to be supportive of BINUH's work. But it is political commitment - from all leaders - that is needed to overcome national divisions and give Haiti the chance to break through the cycles of instability and to begin a new chapter.
