Sri Lanka warmly congratulates France on its assumption of the presidency for the month of June and is confident that it will be a successful tenure. The convening of this open debate on children and armed conflict is appreciated and timely as the scale, severity and recurrence of violations and abuses against children in such conditions remain a grave concern. Despite global efforts to end and prevent violations against children in situations of armed conflict, they continue to be targeted, greatly impeding their right to a normal childhood and development. This has also been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. For nearly three decades, Sri Lanka suffered at the hands of brutal terrorism, propagated by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which is designated as a terrorist organization by 32 countries, whose modus operandi included the forcible recruitment of children as soldiers. UNICEF reports indicated overwhelming evidence of recruitment of children, often forced, throughout areas under LTTE control as well as from Government- controlled areas in the north and east. As of September 2007, the total number of children known to have been recruited by the LTTE since January 2002 was well over 6,000, although the real number was thought to be much higher, including 40 children orphaned by the 2004 tsunami that ravaged certain coastal areas of the island. In fact, in the lead-up to the end of the conflict, in February 2009, the UNICEF Representative in Sri Lanka expressed its gravest concerns for children, stating that it had "clear indications that the LTTE [had] intensified forcible recruitment of civilians and that children as young as 14 years old [were] now being targeted." As a country that maintains a zero-tolerance policy on the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, one of the immediate priorities of the Government of Sri Lanka following the end of separatist terrorism in 2009 was the rehabilitation of these child soldiers, reuniting them with their families and addressing their educational needs. The programme launched under the Commissioner of Probation and Child Care Services resulted in the rehabilitation and reintegration of all former child soldiers, numbering 594, which is a success story in this respect for Sri Lanka to share with the world. Recognizing that access to safe, quality education is a critical need, particularly for children affected by armed conflict, all the former child soldiers were supported by the Government of Sri Lanka in their education by facilitating school enrolment, with the provision of school supplies and financial assistance, including scholarships. Education being a key component of reintegration programmes for children associated with armed groups, special attention was paid to those whose education had been disrupted due to such conscription and who were seeking to complete their formal education. As a result, the rehabilitation programme implemented in Sri Lanka enabled a number of former child soldiers to participate in national school examinations. With education being a central goal of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, such policies have contributed to the pursuit of achieving this objective. These initiatives provided opportunities for children who had lost their childhood to terrorism, and Sri Lanka is pleased to note that 11 children had taken university entrance examinations, with 4 being successful, either during or after their rehabilitation programme. Three were able to receive a university education. Many others have participated in vocational training programmes offered by the Commissioner General of Rehabilitation, which made a transformative contribution to these conflict-affected societies by facilitating the employment of many of these former child soldiers as accounts clerks, computer instructors, mechanics, carpenters, farmers, fishermen or in the garment-manufacturing industry. In recognition that involvement in violent conflict and loss of loved ones cause trauma and other psychosocial effects that could severely hamper a child's growth and education, those requiring special attention with regard to these aspects were identified and provided with care, including professional counselling. This was accomplished through the education system as well as community and civil society groups. A special screening process was also carried out to identify former child soldiers who were physically disabled, recovering from injury, and others who required medical intervention. As aconcerted policy, no former child soldiers were prosecuted, with priority being accorded to their investigations and to the speedy conclusion of their cases. In these efforts, the Government collaborated with United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross and civil society organizations, including international non-governmental organizations and non-governmental organizations with knowledge and experience in dealing with children exposed to armed conflict, with a view to their rehabilitation. On the international front, Sri Lanka is a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and pornography and on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Sri Lanka has also endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, Sri Lanka, as one of the first States to have ratified the Protocol, takes this opportunity to reiterate its firm commitment to the promotion and protection of children's rights. All signatories abiding by these international legal instruments in spirit and letter would make the world better for the young generations of today and tomorrow. However, we as nations must also work towards holding non-State actors formally accountable for engaging in the abhorrent practice of using children in the arena of armed conflict. Further, States must also desist from supporting such non-State actors, as such support could be interpreted as an endorsement of an illegal policy. Let us all pledge to unwaveringly secure childhood, in accordance with its norms of a safe development to adulthood, so as to better the world.
