Ms. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General and to Ms. Navi Pillay for their briefings.
We would also like to pay tribute to Ms. Pillay for
her service, especially for her efforts on behalf of the
United Nations under difficult circumstances.

The United Nations plays a crucial role in
maintaining international peace and security. Thanks
to its institutions, the Organization has been able to
prevent or forestall the development of a number of
conflicts. However, we must recognize that the United
Nations could have prevented far more conflicts, and
saved far more lives, if preventive measures had been
taken in advance.

A number of factors highlight the shortcomings in
conflict prevention, as some of the preceding speakers
have mentioned. As they observed, things have
substantially changed since the Charter of the United
Nations was adopted almost 70 years ago. Most conflicts
now are intra-State conflicts, involving State and
non-State actors. That does not imply that the Charter
of the United Nations is no longer valid in attempts to
prevent conflicts before they break out. Nonetheless,
we need to envisage a wholistic perspective for all the
Articles of the Charter in order to implement all its
purposes and principles so as to establish international
peace and security worldwide.

Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States lies at the heart of international relations. It
should not serve as a pretext to keep us from working
together as an international community, as the
United Nations or as the Security Council to prevent
conflicts. On the contrary, it is armed conflicts that
undermine the sovereignty and endanger the political
independence and territorial integrity of States. The
Charter provides guarantees that should serve as the
framework for measures adopted by United Nations
bodies for the prevention of conflicts, namely, the rule
of law. Politization has largely affected the ability of
the Security Council and that of other United Nations
organs to prevent conflicts and to effectively address
hotbeds of tension.

We welcome the adoption a short time ago of
resolution 2171 (2014). Its implementation could prevent
conflicts from escalating. The resolution provides
mechanisms, principles and strategies that could be
implemented. We would like to stress, however, the
importance of the provisions of Chapter VI of the
Charter with regard to the peaceful settlement of
disputes. That aspect has been absent from the Council's
work for many decades, hindering the Council's ability
to prevent conflicts. The measures set out in Chapter
VI offer the best way to address situations that can
endanger international peace and security, especially
when States are the parties to a conflict. They are the
least onerous measures for preventing or delaying the
outbreak of conflicts.

The Secretary-General, his envoys and his
representatives have major and crucial roles to play
in early warning when a situation has the potential to
degenerate into armed conflict. The Secretary-General
should utilize all available mechanisms to notify the
Council that action is needed when a situation requires
it, based on the information he receives. The Council
should use the ability of the Secretary-General to
prevent conflicts and provide him with all the necessary
means to fulfil his role. We call on the Secretary-
General to use preventive diplomacy, good offices and
mediation in coordination with the Council. United
Nations missions, peacekeeping operations and special
political missions could be used to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts. We could also consider the establishment
of working groups under the Security Council so as to
establish mechanisms to follow hot spots of tension.

We underscore the importance of cooperation with
international and regional organizations in the context
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
There is no competition among such organizations
and the United Nations. Their role is as a catalyst and
is complementary to that of the United Nations. One
element that limits the Council's ability to prevent
conflicts is the absence of timely and accurate
information. We should therefore support and adopt
mechanisms such as the Arria Formula and consider
new mechanisms in order to receive information from
the field.
The United Nations and the Council should try to
adopt a comprehensive approach and a clear strategy
within the institutional framework so as to prevent
conflicts. The correct approach requires a strategy
that takes into consideration the operational, legal
and thematic aspects of conflicts. We hope that the
Secretary-General, other United Nations bodies and
the Security Council can cooperate in devising such a
strategy as soon as possible.

