Ms. Citaku: As always, it is an honour to come
to speak before the Security Council on behalf of the
Republic of Kosovo.

The countries that Council members represents
have put so much effort into bringing about peace
and stability in the Western Balkans, and for that we
will be forever grateful. We Kosovars are living proof
that, when there is solidarity among the free nations
of the world, when there is courage and goodwill,
life overcomes death and good prevails over evil.
The Security Council members have spent countless
hours negotiating and adopting dozens of resolutions
and presidential statements concerning the situation
in Kosovo. Furthermore, the tax payers' money of
Member States was spent for the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to be
deployed in Kosovo in the immediate aftermath of the
war. We in Kosovo remember very vividly goming back
to our homes in 1999 and finding everything in ashes.
Fortunately, thanks to the Council's hard work and
commitment, we were not alone. The United Nations
and its agencies were at the forefront of our efforts to
build peace and stability. Again, for that we will be
forever grateful.

It is precisely because of that profound feeling
of gratitude that we in Kosovo somehow feel
uncomfortable that, every three months, we come back
here to the Chamber, taking up the Council's valuable
time, when we all know that the world we live in today
has way too many pressing issues demanding the
Council's attention.

Let us just do a quick reality check. First, this
is 2016, not 1999. Secondly, as of 17 February 2008,
Kosovo is no longer administered by the United Nations.
Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign State that
is recognized by the overwhelming majority of the free
nations of the world. Those facts are irreversible. The
clock of history cannot be turned back. But yet we come
here every three months to hear from my colleagues
from Serbia about a parallel universe in which Kosovo's
statehood is inexistent; in which Kosovo Albanians
committed ethnic cleansing; in which the oppressor
becomes the oppressed; in which Milosevic is the
hero and the Kosovo Liberation Army, an army that
fought for liberation, is a terrorist group; and in which
Kosovo violated international law, while Serbia was
trying to protect it. That is the parallel universe that my
colleagues from Belgrade try hard to portray.

In the real world, as I said, Kosovo is free,
independent and sovereign - and that fact will not
change. It is not only that we did not violate international
law but, at Serbia's request, the International Court
of Justice issued a clear and unambiguous separate
opinion in its advisory opion on the Accordance with
internatinoal law of the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo (see A/64/881). I
shall quote part of it, as I am sure Council members
have seen it:

"No State can invoke territorial integrity in
order to commit atrocities (such as the practices of torture, and ethnic cleansing, and massive forced
displacement of the population), nor perpetrate
them on the assumption of State sovereignty,
nor commit atrocities and then rely on the claim
of territorial integrity notwithstanding the
sentiments and ineluctable resentments of the
'people' or 'population' victimized. What has
happened in Kosovo is that the victimized "people"
or "population" has sought independence, in
reaction against systematic and long-lasting terror
and oppression, perpetrated in flagrant breach
of the fundamental principle of equality and
non-discrimination. The basic lesson is clear: no
State can use territory to destroy the population.
Such atrocities amount to an absurd reversal of
the ends of the State, which was created and exists
for human beings, and not vice-versa." (A/64/881/ Add], para. 176)

While we in Kosovo will never shy away from
and remain committed to bringing justice to all the
victims, regardless of their ethnicity and background,
we are not seeing the same level of commitment
from our neighbour to the North. Kosovo has taken
unprecedented measures to address the alleged crimes
by establishing the Specialist Chambers. Cooperation
with international and local justice has never been a
subject for negotiation in Kosovo. We want justice for
all, because that is the only way we can bring peace
to all the families that have lost their loved ones. In
Kosovo we do not fearjustice, because we have nothing
to hide. Our cause and our war were just.

While we have gone to great lengths to address
all the allegations made against us, Serbia has been
anything but willing to prosecute war crimes. I
have said it before in this Chamber, and I will say it
again - 20,000 women were raped in Kosovo during
the war. The number of people indicted for that is
zero. Again, 1,262 children were brutally killed, and
the number of people indicted is also zero. Thousands
are missing, and there are very clear traces of the
institutional chain of responsibility and command used
to hide its tracks. As has been documented, the Serbian
Government went so far as to erect buildings in the
mass grave sites. I will say it once again - the number
of those indicted is zero.

There can be no reconciliation without
accountability and justice. As we reaffirm our
commitment to inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia, mediated by High Representative Mogherini, I
must stress that we in Kosovo are not satisfied with the
pace of the implementation of the agreements that have
been reached. A few days ago, our delegations agreed
on the dialling code for Kosovo. That is certainly great
news, as it will strengthen our independence and bring
millions of dollars to our budget. However, I should
remind the Council that we also celebrated agreement
on the dialling code a year ago.

Our scepticism about the success of that dialogue
is also amplified by Serbia's constant violations of
the agreement on freedom of movement. Two Kosovo
citizens, one of them a regional police commander,
were recently arrested and detained under arrest
warrants issued by the Serbian authorities. They were
released - after being held in prison unnecessarily
and for far too long - because no reasonable charges
were brought against them. The Serbian authorities
claim to have lists of arrest warrants against hundreds
of Kosovan Albanians. That is absolutely unacceptable.
Serbia has no jurisdiction over Kosovan citizens.
Actions such as those we have witnessed recently are
not only legally wrong, they also directly undermine
our efforts to normalize the region and improve
freedom of movement. Because they fear arrest,
Kosovan Albanians do not feel comfortable travelling
through Serbia any more. And this is not the first time
that Serbia has violated international law and abused
the agreement on freedom of movement reached in the
high-level dialogue in Brussels. It is a demonstration
of the Serbian Government's attitude in insolently
provoking Kosovo's Government.

If we look back, however, it is not only former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army who have
persistently featured on Serbia's wanted lists. I would
like to recall here Serbia's lists of arrest warrants issued
even for various Western leaders, who include former
President Bill Clinton, Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright and Secretary of Defense William Cohen of
the United States; former President Jacques Chirac
and Premier Lionel Jospin of France; former Prime
Minister of Britain Tony Blair; former Chancellor
Gerhard Schroeder of Germany; and many other
ministers of foreign affairs and defence. The former
NATO Secretaries-General Javier Solana and George
Robertson and former NATO Supreme Commander
in Europe, General Wesley Clark, were also among
those accused. The bottom line is that the process of
normalizing relations between Kosovo and Serbia does
not end in Brussels, where the agreements are signed.
They are meaningful only when they are implemented
in our own countries.

Another clear demonstration of Serbia's lack of
sincerity regarding normalization is the outrage that
Belgrade has expressed over the new law we recently
enacted concerning the Trepca mines. Serbia has also
exploited the Serbian community in Kosovo as a means
to its ends. The Trepca mines are in Kosovo, they
belong to Kosovo and they will be managed by Kosovo.
The Trepca law accords fully with Martti Ahtisaari's
comprehensive proposal on Kosovo's final status and
with our Constitution. And it was specifically UNMIK
that assigned full authority over and management
of public and socially owned enterprises to the-then
Kosovo Trust Agency, which later became the Kosovo
Privatization Agency. I know that my colleague has
distributed complete background information on the
new law to everyone here.

Serbia has no legal basis supporting its allegations
about property rights relating to public property and
enterprises located within the territory of the Republic
of Kosovo. Any such efforts will meet with strong
opposition from the Government and the people of
Kosovo. Such behaviour undermines the normalization
ofrelations between the Republic ofKosovo and Serbia.
There is no legal basis to the claims of the Serbian
authorities; their words and actions only exhibit
colonial tendencies towards Kosovo. The time when
decisions for Trepca and other Kosovo resources were
made in Belgrade is over, once and for all.

On 13 October, 11 Members of Parliament
representing the Serbian community in Kosovo sent
a request to the Constitutional Court of the Republic
of Kosovo to review the applicability of the Law on
Trepca with the provisions on property protection and
the rights of communities of the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo. On 31 October, the Constitutional
Court of the Republic of Kosovo ruled that Law No. 05/
L-120 on Trepca is in compliance with the Constitution.
The ruling stated that Kosovo-Serbian Members of
Parliament did not substantiate their allegations on
constitutional grounds and did not provide evidence
indicating how and why the challenged law on Trepca
has violated the Constitution, either in procedure or
in substance.

The Court further commented that the law on Trepca
is not limited to one or another ethnic community in
Kosovo but is designed for the well-being of the whole
of society. There is no evidence as to how and why
Kosovo Serbs would be damaged this this law; quite
the opposite is true. Making Trepca and other Kosovo
resources fully functional means permitting and
allowing all Kosovo citizens to work and prosper. We
hope that Serbian representatives in Kosovo will start
making their own decisions without any fear or pressure
from Belgrade, and that they decide to re-engage in the
parliamentary and institutional life. That is the only
way forward.

Allow me to also take this opportunity to also
address the preliminary observations of the Special
Rapporteur, Ms. Karima Bennoune.

As to the number of displaced people, to claim that
200,000 thousand Serbs were displaced after the war
from Kosovo is factually incorrect. Ifthat had been the
case, then no single Serb would be living in Kosovo
today. According to the census organized in 1991, at
a time when Kosovo was under Serbian occupation,
the number of Serbs living in Kosovo was 194,000.
Unfortunately, to this date we still do not know the
accurate number of Serbs living in Kosovo. That is
because when Kosovo institutions organized the census
in 2011, the Government of Serbia unleashed a very
aggressive campaign to discourage the participation
of the Serbian community. The smear campaign went
so far as to label registration in the census as an act
of betrayal. For us, this is not about numbers; even if
only one Kosovo Serb cannot return, for us that is one
too many.

At the same time, we must also remember that not
all Serbs who fled Kosovo after the war were actually
citizens of Kosovo. When the war erupted in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, entire neighbourhoods were
built in several locations in Kosovo to accommodate
Serbs who used to live in those parts of the former
Yugoslavia. Some of them decided to stay, as is the
case of the Marevie family, which came to Kosovo in
July 1995. Today, one of the members of that family
is a Minister for Local Government in the Republic
of Kosovo.

In addition, in line with our Constitution, dual
citizenship is allowed. Kosovo Serbs who are also
citizens of Serbia have a constitutional right to vote
in the Serbian Parliamentary elections. In the absence
of a Serbian embassy in Kosovo, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe mission
administers the process in Kosovo. According to data
from the 2016 parliamentary elections, 106,094 voters
in Kosovo were eligible to vote in those elections.
Obviously, the numbers do not match up. Either the
Serbian Election Commission inflated the number
of Serb voters in Kosovo, or the number of Serbian
displaced people is inflated.

We will only get the full picture once we organize
the next census. We will spare no effort to create
better living conditions for all Serbs living in Kosovo.
Every citizen of Kosovo is free to return. The Kosovo
Government has spent tens of millions on different
projects, building homes and supporting sustainable
return. As enshrined in our Constitution, Kosovo
belongs to all its citizens. However, we also need
to be cautious and work with the local communities,
and not provoke unpleasant situations like the one we
witnessed in late August in the village of Mushtisht in
the municipality of Suhareke, when visiting Serbian
pilgrims were met with protests from the Albanian
villagers seeking justice for the crimes committed
during the war in their village.

On 3 April 1999, the Serbian army, with the
assistance of some local Serbs, deported the entire
local Albanian population, killing 14 civilians and
destroying, looting or burning down every single house
in the village - 1,051 of them, to be more precise.
According to the testimonies collected by several
human rights organizations, 122 local Serbs were active
members of the Serbian military and paramilitary
forces. These are small communities where everybody
knows one another. Everybody knows what happened,
and everybody knows who did what, and yet no one
was ever indicted for the crimes committed there. That
is why justice is so important. It has been said time
and time again by people much wiser than me that true
peace is not only the absence of war, but the presence
of justice. All victims in Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnicity, deserve truth and justice. That is the only
way we can build peace and reconciliation.

Another issue that is repeatedly brought to the
Chamber by my colleagues from Serbia is the state ofthe
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo. Allow me to state
that the Kosovo Constitution provides unprecedented
rights for the protection of the Serbian Orthodox sites
in Kosovo. It is not only our constitutional duty to
protect and preserve our shared cultural and religious
heritage; it is also our moral duty. During the last war
in Kosovo, Serbian forces destroyed 218 mosques and
other historic or religious sites in my country, including
centuries-old libraries. Unfortunately, we also saw
scenes of attack and destruction in the March riots in
2004, when around 35 Orthodox sites were attacked.
We in Kosovo condemned those acts in the strongest
terms. Over $10 million were allocated in the budget of
Kosovo to repair the damage, and many international
donors have contributed with additional funds.

Religious tolerance has been the backbone of our
society. Churches and mosques share the same yard in
many cities in Kosovo. Interfaith tolerance had always
functioned in Kosovo until politics decided to step in.
There is only one Orthodox Church in Kosovo with
which we have a problem, and that is the church that
the Milosevic' regime decided to build on the premises
of the Public University of Pristina. That is the church
my colleague was referring to.

Let me remind those present that construction
on that Church began in 1992, at a time when our
autonomy was revoked and when the University of
Pristina closed its doors to all Albanian students and
professors, including my own. That object lately has
become a source of tension, and the only heritage it
bears is that of repression. It stands there as a reminder
of a time when we were denied our most basic human
rights. The Serbian Orthodox Church on the grounds
of the University of Pristina campus was built illegally
and by force as part ofa campaign ofrepression, and we
in Kosovo should preserve it as such.

Destruction is not the answer. That object should
serve as a reminder of very difficult times, but it
should also serve to persuade the clerics who accepted
the illegal building of the church by Milosevic' to do
some soul-searching and confront the role they played
when they acted in unison with the Milosevic regime.
Kosovo is a secular republic. It is multireligious and
multicultural, and we will fight to preserve it as such.
Any attempt to change the fabric of our society will
be meet with resistance by our people and action from
our Government.

Just last week, thanks to the cooperation ofKosovo,
Albanian and Macedonian law enforcement institutions,
a terrorist group was apprehended. That is yet another
reason why Kosovo must become part of the global
family. Most of the challenges we face are borderless,
and cross-border cooperation and coordinated actions
and responses to those threats are necessary. We
therefore regret that INTERPOL has decided to postpone
voting on three applicant countries until the criteria for
membership are revised. We believe that we should all
be treated on individual merits. Kosovo's request to
join should be considered because we meet the criteria.
Transparency International highlighted in a report last
week that the Kosovo police is the most credible and
trusted police force in the region. We believe that not
only Kosovo, but also INTERPOL would gain from our
membership, and we are convinced that in the coming
sessions our request will be put forward.

We in Kosovo are fully aware that there is much
more work that needs to be done in order to meet the
rightful expectations of the Kosovo people. Internally,
we have realized that independence is not self-
sufficient. People want more jobs, better education and
health care. They want to be equal citizens ofthe global
family of the free nations of the world. And it is our job
to make sure that what we leave behind for the future
generations is a republic in which everyone, regardless
of ethnicity, gender, religion or sexual orientation, has
equal opportunities to prosper. To achieve that goal,
there is more that needs to be done, but it is a goal worth
fighting for.

