Mr. Hill (Australia): Climate change is a serious
global challenge for the future. Over coming decades,
5
climate change will progressively alter biospheres and
sea levels, as well as add incrementally to the intensity
of climate-related events such as cyclones and
droughts. By moving early to address the risks, we
could do much to reduce the potential threats to human
well-being and security.

Australia is particularly vulnerable to climate
change. We occupy the driest inhabited continent, with
a highly variable climate and great susceptibility to
drought. Shifting rainfall patterns in particular have
severe environmental impacts in Australia and damage
our agricultural industries.

Global action to mitigate climate change can
temper its future impacts. The burden of responsibility
falls particularly heavily on the major emitters. Twenty
countries are responsible for 80 per cent of global
greenhouse gas emissions.

Australia is committed to playing its part. We
have already dedicated billions of dollars to develop,
prove and deploy low-emissions technologies in
Australia. We are supporting more efficient energy use,
the uptake of renewable energy and reductions in land
clearing. As a result of those and other policies and
measures, Australia is tracking well to meet the target
it agreed to at Kyoto.

Australia is a founder and major contributor to
the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development
and Climate, which aims to develop and spread low-
emissions technologies and practices through practical
public-private action. We will work with others,
through our recently announced Global Initiative on
Forests and Climate, to reduce deforestation, which is a
source of some 20 per cent of global greenhouse
emissions. Australia has pledged $200 million as part
of that Initiative.

Australia will also look to other global
opportunities to make progress. Our Prime Minister has
written to his counterparts in the Asia-Pacific region to
put clean development and climate change at the top of
the agenda for this year's meeting of the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) leaders in
September in Sydney. The APEC economies account
for 60 per cent of global energy demand and include
the world's four largest energy consumers. And we will
do more in the future, working internationally in the
interests of more effective global mitigation action on
climate change. That action must involve all of the
major economies. In the actions we take, we must

avoid disruption to energy supply, as reliable energy
trade is vital to energy security and political security
more generally.

A degree of climate change is already inevitable.
Action to adapt to the impacts of global warming in the
coming years is therefore vital if we are to reduce our
exposure to the risks implicit in a changing climate.
The anticipated regional variations in those impacts
demand that adaptation measures be tailored and
localized. For example, Australia has already
committed $10 billion to improving the sustainability
of water use in Australia and, just last week, the Prime
Minister announced an initiative to establish a national
centre for climate change adaptation, primarily to study
the coastal, regional and atmospheric impacts of
climate change in our country.

We will also help others to adapt to the future
impacts of climate change, cognizant that the least
developed among us are likely to be less able to
respond to the impacts of a changing climate. Australia
therefore welcomes the multilateral support that the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change brings to adaptation.

Our world is dynamic and challenging. Natural
disasters have the potential to devastate communities
and can threaten the very viability of countries,
particularly small island States. Each year, more than
200 million people are affected by disasters, such as
earthquakes, tsunami and pandemics. Those disasters
are unrelated to climate change, but they do highlight
the vulnerability to environmental impacts that all
countries face. For that reason, improving resilience to
climate-related and other natural disasters must form
an integral part of national development strategies.

We encourage all countries to further strengthen
their support to disaster mitigation, preparedness and
response. We commend the work of the United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction in
coordinating the implementation of the Hyogo
Framework for Action. The Framework represents a
global blueprint for building the resilience of nations
and their communities to the impacts of disasters.

This is a different sort of threat to that usually
debated in this place. Nevertheless, a failure to act now
on climate change would exacerbate the risks in the
future, and so a concerted and intensified commitment
to both mitigation and adaptation is warranted. The
challenge is to find ways to achieve those goals in a
manner that supports economic growth, that is fair and
effective, and that recognizes economic disparities. It is
in all our interests that we meet this challenge together.

