Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First,
allow me to thank Special Representative Fall and
Ms. Ghelani of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their very
clear briefings today. Let me also thank their teams for
the very important work that they are doing.

I will focus on three issues today: first, the situation
in Cameroon; secondly, the need to have comprehensive
risk assessments for the root causes of conflict; and,
thirdly, the importance of coordination among the
different United Nations offices in the region.

Teachers and lawyers in the Anglophone region of
Cameroon asked for their minority rights to be protected
in a peaceful protest two years ago. Today the health
and education sectors are shut down. Indiscriminate
violence has led to civilian deaths, reportedly by the
Cameroon army and the armed groups. There are over
437,000 people displaced, and there is a clear risk of
spillover to the wider region. The escalation of violence
shows that conflict prevention requires more than just
words; it must be followed up with action.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the territorial integrity of Cameroon. We call on
the Government to start a meaningful and inclusive
dialogue with all relevant parties, including with
women representatives. We fully support the work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
and call on the Government of Cameroon to implement
confidence-building measures, including the release of
political prisoners. We thank the Special Representative
for his recent visit to the country and for giving this
crisis the attention it deserves.

Human rights violations by all parties need to
be investigated and the perpetrators should be held
to account. We call on the Government of Cameroon
and armed groups to grant full access to human rights
observers and humanitarian workers to the Anglophone
regions. To address the needs of the displaced
population, increased funding of the humanitarian
relief plan is essential.

With regard to my second point, on the need to
strengthen joint and comprehensive risk assessments
for all root causes of conflict, the situation in the Lake
Chad basin continues to be a matter of concern. As
highlighted in the two briefings today, the situation
provides a breeding ground for organizations like Boko
Haram and causes instability and displacement.

During our presidency of the Council in March, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands organized an open briefing
on the root causes ofconflict in the Lake Chad basin (see S/PV.8212). Briefers, Council members and affected
countries confirmed the urgent need to address the root
causes of conflict, including climate change and water
stress in the Lake Chad basin. Presidential statement
S/PRST/20l8/l7, on UNOCA, which was adopted in
August, highlights the needs for risk assessments and
long-term strategies to support stabilization and build
resilience in the Central African region.

As confirmed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1065) in a section specifically addressing the
topic, the adverse effects of climate change continue to
be a threat to regional stability. UNOCA has an important
role to play in developing sound risk assessments and
ensuring conflict- and climate-sensitive programming.
We encourage UNOCA to continue to work with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the African Union, the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
the Economic Community of Central African States and
other relevant organizations to build on the information
in the report of the Secretary-General through further
joint risk assessments for climate- and water-related
security risks.

That brings me to my third and final point, on
cooperation among the United Nations offices in the
region. Given the complex situation in Central Africa, it
is important that the different United Nations offices in
the region maximize their cooperation and complement
each other. It is essential that each office focus on its
niche role. The Kingdom ofthe Netherlands sees a clear
role for UNOCA to focus on conflict prevention, given
its unique position as a regional office. In that light, we
welcome the Special Representative's engagement on
the process of peaceful elections in countries that are
not served by other United Nations offices, including
in Sao Tome and Principe and Gabon, as well as on
cross-border issues, including transhumance and
farmer-herder conflicts. It is important that the Special
Representative be allowed to use his good offices in
the best possible way in the countries he focuses on.
We encourage all United Nations offices in the region
to consider how to further increase cooperation and
efficiency in the future.

In conclusion, the important work of UNOCA and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
show us that there are situations in Central Africa that
are at risk of becoming a threat to international peace
and security. We hope that, the next time the Council
meets on this item, we can see that joint efforts by the
United Nations and Governments in the region will
have led to tangible results.

