Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank you, Madam
President, for the information you have provided in your
capacity as Chair of Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for the hard work he has
carried out in the context of his responsibilities and
especially for the excellent briefing he delivered. In the
same vein, we would also like to thank Mr. Ismael Wais,
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and Ms. Jackline Nasiwa of the
Centre for Inclusive Governance, Peace and Justice.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea once again
commends the hard work and outstanding efforts of
IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to bring the warring
parties closer to constructive and direct dialogue
in search of peace and stability in South Sudan. We
believe that the participation of the parties in the round
of consultations to be held in Addis Ababa from 10 to
12 May will be crucial in providing continuity and
reorienting the dialogues during the third phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum.

However, it should be noted that the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is entirely dismayed and concerned
by the content of the latest reports and statements
received on the situation in South Sudan. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations submitted an
information sheet on violations of the UNMISS status
of forces agreement, in which, among other obligations,
the Government of South Sudan undertook to take

"all appropriate measures to ensure the security
and safety ofUNMISS, its members and associated
personnel and their property and assets".

Without going into each of the violations set out
in the information sheet, we would like to remind
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and
the other parties involved that, in addition to seeking
peace, there is a humanitarian obligation to save lives
and help the millions of South Sudanese who are
facing poverty, food insecurity and a shortage of basic
services. The fulfilment of that responsibility will be a
success only if humanitarian operations are facilitated
and the threats and risks faced by humanitarian
assistance organizations and their courageous staff are
eliminated. Therefore, the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea urges the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan to cooperate with UNMISS,
so that together they may achieve the sole objective,
which is none other than to grant the peace and stability
that the people of South Sudan deserve.

For my country's Government, the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan remains unacceptable. The
constant, increasing and ongoing violations of human
rights, and especially the violations perpetrated against
children in armed conflicts, which are even used as
tools of war, were confirmed by the report presented on
11 April by Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). That practice must
cease immediately. To that end, we urge the department
of child protection to carry out its work to monitor and
denounce these serious violations in South Sudan and,
in collaboration with the Government of South Sudan,
to combat impunity for the perpetrators.

As we have done on previous occasions, we reiterate
that it is important that the parties to the conflict refrain
from taking actions that could worsen the situation and
that they take action to implement and honour the signed
agreement, which entails the cessation of hostilities,
the protection of civilians, access to humanitarian aid
and an immediate return to the negotiating table. In
that regard, we understand that it is of vital importance
that the international community continue to support
existing mediation efforts, especially those of IGAD
and the African Union, and look for ways to ensure the
success ofthe new phase ofthe High-level Revitalization
Forum on the peace agreement.

I will conclude by expressing the joy felt by my
Government at the news of the liberation of more than
200 children by armed groups in South Sudan, bringing
the number of children released this year to more than
500. My Government also welcomes the news of the
liberation of seven humanitarian organization workers
in South Sudan, days after being detained by Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition forces in
Morobo county.

