Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
strongly supports the efforts of the Quartet to work
towards a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute through the road map. We are very concerned
at the tragic increase in violence that has occurred over
the past few months. An appalling example is the
recent attack in Haifa, where, again, innocent people,
including women and children, were maimed and
killed. New Zealand expresses its deepest sympathy for
all the victims of violence, both Israeli and Palestinian.

This needless suffering highlights once more the
need for both sides, with the support of the
international community, to focus on finding a
resolution to this conflict. We call on Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to commit to the peace process and
to implement their respective obligations under the
road map. They must not allow the acts of a few to
destroy the hopes of all for peace.

Israel has the right to act to preserve the security
of its people, but the construction of a security wall
taking in areas of the West Bank serves only to
undermine the peace process and the trust needed for
constructive negotiation and dialogue. We urge Israel
to reconsider its decision to proceed with this wall.

Now is the time to show leadership through
restraint and to break the escalating cycle of incident
and response, which is eroding the prospects for the
road map. Extremists are cynically using violent
attacks to disrupt efforts to bring about peace.
Assassinations, settlement activity and heavy-handed
military responses help to ensure that this tactic
succeeds.

New Zealand welcomes statements from
Palestinian leaders condemning the Haifa attack and
renouncing terror. The Palestinian leadership must take
tangible steps to demonstrate its commitment to
stopping extremists from committing such acts. New
Zealand has been encouraged by the efforts that have
been made at reform this year, including the
appointment of the first Palestinian Prime Minister.
That progress must not be allowed to falter and we
look forward to further steps at reform under the new
Prime Minister.

