Mr. Inzko: Mr. Heusgen asked me some very
difficult questions about the rule of law, the Sejdic' and
Finci case and other issues, and on how to improve
the situation. Of course, there is no magic wand or
magic solution, but I think that certain procedures
can be simply copy-pasted from our experience. Who
is on the Supreme Court in our countries? Who sits
on the constitutional courts in our countries? The
best. That should also be a simple solution for Bosnia
and Herzegovina; for example, the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council should appoint simply the best
people - not party people, not people who are related
to someone, but based on merit.

I think that we will soon learn about the report of
Mr. Priebe, a highly respected German lawyer who also
worked in the European Union. Mr. Priebe will make
some recommendations; he made some for Macedonia
a few years ago, and now he is working on the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I believe that once we have
a better High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council and
a better and more independent judiciary, we will be
speaking about a different country. It is not only about
money or about the economy; it is about the rule of law
and justice.

One of the methods that has also been used by the
international community is vetting. In Albania, judges
and candidates for the Prosecutor's Office underwent
a vetting procedure, and quite a few were eliminated
because they were not competent enough. We now have
a situation where the Constitutional Court of Albania
has only one person, because after the vetting procedure
only one person was left who was competent enough and
who was not involved in a conflict of interest or in any
corruption. But we hope that by next April, Albania will
have a normal Constitutional Court once again, through
vetting procedures and Mr. Priebe's recommendations.

One anniversary that I did not mention: exactly
10 years ago, regretfully, I would say, we sent home
international judges and prosecutors. I can say that
because the Allied Forces were present in my own
country, Austria, for 10 years. We had a large number
of Nazis. We also had no Parliament before the Second
World War, as it had been eliminated. All of that then
changed. We introduced democracy under the control
of the Allied Forces; the Nazis did not return and the
Marshall Plan was a success. The Allied Forces then left
after 10 years. They stayed longer in other countries.
That is a good model that could work.

That also touches on other issues, which we
discussed, such as war criminals, gratitude marches
when Mr. Kordie returned. I am Catholic, but I am
ashamed that a gratitude march was held for him. As we
know, he is a convicted war criminal. We have heard that
a student dormitory has been named after Karadzie. We
have heard about concerts being held in support of war
criminals in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All of that must
stop. There is no place for convicted war criminals in
public life. There are quite a few countries around the
table that solved that issue after 1945.

With regard to the Sejdie-Finci issue, Mr. Stephan
Fuller is the former European Union Commissioner
who worked for three years in an attempt to resolve it.
Regrettably, he did not succeed, but, needless to say,
every citizen who has a passport can be elected for any
function. The President of Romania, Klaus Werner
Iohannis, is of German heritage. There is a Mayor in
London with foreign roots, but he is a citizen. In Bosnia
and Herzegovina it is not enough to be a citizen. There
is no egalite - one of the most sacred principles of the
civilized world.

As I said earlier, Mr. Alkalaj, a respected
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, cannot even
be a candidate, in theory, for the Presidency of the State.
That is outrageous. It is equally outrageous that for 10
years the decision of the European Court of Human
Rights has still not been implemented. I also believe
that we, as the international community, must be
ashamed that we are turning a blind eye to the situation.
We should ensure that human rights are implemented in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and that double standards are
not allowed. If in our own countries any citizen can be
a candidate for any job, it must be the same in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is the essence of Sejdie-Finci.
Of course, to a certain extent, it would also change the
Dayton Peace Agreement. But we have a judgment from
the European Court of Human Rights, and we must
respect it. In that connection, I would like to mention
two minor issues. First, it is about implementation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; we have so many verdicts
now. Secondly, there is a sense of urgency.

With regard to women and development and women
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I am fully in favour of not
only 40 per cent, which is provided for in law in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but of 50 per cent. However, that
quota must be implemented. It is not enough if there
is a mention of 50 per cent only on paper. The quota is
now 40 per cent, but even that is not implemented. If
a year after a Government is formed I say that women
should be part of the Government, people would say
that Valentin Inzko is a disturbing factor and a nuisance
in asking for women to be in the Government. But there
are no women - only men - in the Government, and
that is a great injustice.

I will not comment on Euro-Atlantic integration. I
would just like to say that it is the self-declared foreign
policy goal ofBosnia and Herzegovina. As you, Madam
President, have said, article 84 of the Law on Defence
refers to the future ofNATO. I am not the one speaking
about the future of NATO; it is in the Law on Defence.
Of course, one could change the Law on Defence and
declare neutrality at the State level, but that law does
not yet exist. It exists in my own country; we have
declared neutrality. But in Bosnia and Herzegovina it
is the Law on Defence and its article 84 that address
NATO membership. It is true that, politically, there
are those who disagree and those who agree with the
law. Nonetheless, it exists. It is codified and must
be implemented.

As far as the Office of the High Representative is
concerned, I agree with the Russian Ambassador that
it should be shut down. However, after a successful
mission, we should not repeat the mistake we made
in other countries when the international presence
left too early. We should leave behind a monitoring or
supervision mechanism. We should not leave too early
or abruptly, as the foreign judges and prosecutors did 10
years ago. Withdrawal should be done gradually.

