Mr. Djinnit: I am honoured to brief the Council
on the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA) over the past six months. In spite of
the great complexity of country-specific and cross-
border issues in West Africa, UNOWA continues to
implement its mandate with determination and faith in
the immense opportunities for subregional peace.

West Africa continues to show a mixed picture of
hope and concern. Since my last briefing to the
Security Council in July 2009 (see S/PV.6157), there
have been improvements in West Africa in the areas of
conflict prevention, recovery and peacebuilding.
However, that progress is threatened by insufficient
guarantees and assurances for sustainable progress.
UNOWA has been raising attention and working in
synergy with other United Nations entities in West
Africa to address that situation. Our action is focused
2

on a number of priorities, including encouraging
recovery efforts in countries affected by crisis,
consolidating good governance and the rule of law,
promoting human rights and gender mainstreaming in
those countries that are stable but still at risk, and
raising awareness of the imperative need for economic
growth and the fair distribution of wealth.

Through our contacts with subregional
organizations, the region's main stakeholders and
leaders and our partners, we are continuously raising
awareness of those priorities and of the importance
both of addressing the prevailing causes of violent
conflict and mitigating the structural causes of
instability. By strengthening its political institutions
and seeking better prospects for economic growth and
development, West Africa should be able to improve
the quality of life for the majority of its population, and
thereby minimize the possibility of frustration, social
tension and, ultimately, violence.

In our collaboration with other United Nations
entities in West Africa, inter-mission cooperation
remains high on UNOWA's agenda. I am proud of the
growing collaboration we have developed. Similarly, I
am pleased with the close cooperation that UNOWA
has been able to build with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union in our common objective to address the daunting
challenge of establishing peace and security in the
subregion. That close collaboration has allowed our
three institutions to develop a common and coherent
position and strategy to address some of the region's
most pressing problems, in particular unconstitutional
changes of Government and other political crises.

The prospects for long-term peace in West Africa
will very much depend on how effective our efforts are
in sustaining the progress achieved thus far, both
before and following the withdrawal of the United
Nations peace operations from the subregion.

The march towards democracy and the rule of
law has made giant strides over the past few years.
However, national institutions remain weak and
unstable. In some countries, including those that are
considered stable, positive trends towards
consolidating democratic processes remain fragile and
reversible, as evidenced by the recurrence of
constitutional reviews, as we have observed in Niger,
and election-related instability, which we are trying to
avoid in Togo. Those challenges continue to undermine
the stability of States and their institutions and, as
such, must be addressed in a sustained manner.
10-20643
On the economic side, the prevailing
vulnerability of the West African region to external
economic and financial shocks and their negative
impact on the livelihood of populations have
contributed to social unrest and political violence in
some countries. The increased vulnerability of the
region to natural disasters - essentially those induced
by climate change - is becoming a major source of
conflict and violence, in that it generates humanitarian
emergencies and exacerbates competition for
dwindling natural resources.

As the Security Council and the Secretary-General
have stated on several occasions, security sector reform
(SSR) remains a major condition for durable peace in
West Africa. The situation in Guinea is yet another
illustration of how the defence and security sector is key
to stabilizing the country, both because of its still-
predominant political role and the potentially explosive
tensions prevailing within the security architecture. In
Guinea and elsewhere, therefore, security sector reform
has become a priority area for our conflict prevention
efforts. UNOWA's SSR strategy is directed at supporting
and advising ECOWAS While ensuring that the United
Nations approach to SSR in West Africa is harmonized.
Obviously, much remains to be done on both aspects, but
signs of progress within institutions are already
encouraging.

Also encouraging are the efforts being conducted
at all levels to raise awareness of the threat to peace
and stability posed by drug trafficking and organized
crime in West Africa, including the menace of
terrorism - especially in the Sahel band. In that
regard, the ongoing efforts to implement the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem
of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime and Drug
Abuse in West Africa, with the strong backing of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
UNOWA, have gained momentum with the donor
conference held in Vienna on 3 December 2009. As an
initial step in international support for the Regional
Action Plan, the implementation of the West Africa
Coast Initiative (WACI) project has been accelerated,
with joint assessment missions having been conducted
in Sierra Leone and Liberia in November and
December 2009. Missions to other countries will
follow this year.

In parallel to the establishment of transnational
crime units in the countries concerned, I wish to
highlight the critical need to increase awareness of and
galvanize commitment to the ECOWAS Action Plan
among senior Government officials in the region.
UNOWA will continue to play its important role in
promoting cohesion and mobilizing support at all
levels, in liaison with other stakeholders, so that that
the Initiative can achieve its ultimate goals. As the
United Nations entity charged with mentoring and
monitoring the implementation of the WACI project on
behalf of the Organization, UNOWA will continue to
seek creative and cost-efficient ways to enhance its
technical capacity in the area of drug trafficking,
including by making use of inter-mission cooperation
mechanisms and extrabudgetary resources.

The prevailing situation in Guinea, which shares
borders with all the United Nations peace missions in
the subregion, is an embodiment of the combined
challenge of ensuring sustainability, stability and
security sector reform in West Africa. If left
unaddressed, the crisis in Guinea could spill over to the
subregion and threaten prospects for lasting peace and
the significant investments and achievements made by
the region and the international community in countries
with United Nations peace missions in particular. That
is the very reason that UNOWA has devoted
considerable attention to the situation in Guinea and
spared no effort in encouraging an early solution.

The current developments in Guinea are
encouraging, especially following the recent statement by
the interim leader reaching out to the opposition to
participate in charting a road map for the resolution of the
political crisis. This consensual approach proposed by the
interim junta leader, combined with the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry on the 28 September
violence, provides a new window of opportunity that
should be seized by all stakeholders in order to put the
peace and reconciliation process back on track. For its
part, UNOWA is committed to continuing to play its
proactive role and to make its contribution to the search
for a lasting solution to the crisis in Guinea.

Allow me to conclude my statement by
expressing my appreciation for the attention the
Council continues to devote to West Africa and for its
continuing support to UNOWA.

