Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Madam President, for taking the
initiative to organize this open debate. Luxembourg,
like Australia, believes the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism is a priority. We commend the
presidential statement we have just adopted at Australia's
initiative, aimed at strengthening action on the part
of the international community (S/PRST/2014/23). I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing on the United Nations response to the
threat of terrorism, which highlighted the value the
United Nations adds in this area. I also thank Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Permanent Representative of Australia and
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and resolution 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and Ms. Raimonda Murmokaite, Permanent
Representative of Lithuania and Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, for their informative briefings
and determined action. I welcome the presence here
today ofmy Argentine colleague, Mr. Hector Timerman.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.

The threat of terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front
and Al-Qaida and its affiliates is a source of growing
concern. While the terrorist phenomenon is certainly
not new, the problem that such groups ravaging Iraq
and Syria pose differs in nature and scale from threats
that the international community has faced in the past. I
thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) for
its most recent report (see S/2014/815), which does a
goodjob of analysing that what distinguishes the threat
posed by such groups is the nexus they have established
between funding and control of large areas of territory
and populations, as well as the support they get from
the more than 15,000 foreign fighters, from more than
80 countries, who have joined their sinister cause. Last
year, a young couple and their child left Luxembourg
for Syria, where the father of the family very quickly
died in fighting between terrorist groups - such a
waste, such a lack of respect for human life and such
a terrible message for that man's child. The groups'
extreme ideology is exacerbating sectarian tensions and
helping to destabilize the region even more. Indeed, it is
difficult to understand the attraction of such barbarity
to anyone.

The atrocities committed by those terrorist groups
have shocked us all. I will mention only the most recent
example, ISIL's disgusting execution of an American
humanitarian aid worker, Abdul-Rahman Kassig, who
was captured while he was working to help the Syrian
people. We must act together to combat this threat, and
our response must be commensurate with the challenge.
In the Security Council, the adoption of resolutions
2170 (2104) and 2178 (2014) has helped strengthen
the international counter-terrorism framework aimed
at containing the threat posed by ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and the influx of foreign fighters. We must now
work together to ensure that the measures outlined in
those resolutions can take full effect. In that regard, I
would like to thank the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate for their preliminary
analysis and actions supporting the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2104).

For its part, Luxembourg has just completed a
review of its entire legal framework in the light of the
provisions of resolution 2178 (2014). Based on that,
we have begun to review and adapt our legislative and
regulatory framework in order to take full account of
the Council's measures addressing the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. The goal is to prevent those
who want to leave to fight alongside terrorist groups
from reaching conflict zones. We must also ensure that
acts preparing, training and recruiting for terrorism
are effectively prosecuted and punished. Lastly, our
relevant authorities are working on a strategy to combat
extremist radicalization based on both preventive and
punitive measures, which will include establishing a
mentoring and outreach network in close consultation
with educational institutions and religious communities,
and with the support of our National Red Cross Society.

Data-collection aimed at preventing the travel
and transit of foreign terrorist fighters also involves
strengthening information-sharing and cooperation
among Member States. The European Union is already
working on this, including through information
exchange within its Schengen Information System
and its work on providing data on passenger records.
We intend to continue such efforts, particularly when
Luxembourg assumes the presidency of the Council of
Europe in the second half of 2015.

The Monitoring Team's report rightly emphasizes
that we must redouble our efforts to block terrorist
groups' sources of financing, such as oil smuggling,
donations, trafficking in antiquities, taxing populations
living under their yoke and, worst of all, the despicable
trafficking of women and children. Luxembourg has
adopted a complete and consistent set of legislative and
regulatory measures in the struggle against money-
laundering and terrorist financing. We pay particular
attention to their effective implementation. Those
measures fully take into account the declaration adopted
by the Financial Action Task Force on 24 October
in Paris, expressing deep concern at the financing
generated by and provided to the terrorist group Daesh.

I would like to conclude by reiterating a point that
the Prime Minister of Luxembourg already made two
months ago at the Security Council summit held on
24 September (see S/PV.7272), which was echoed today
by the Secretary-General. This point seems essential
to me: that respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law need to be an integral
part of our counter-terrorism strategy if we want that
strategy to achieve its aim. Otherwise, we run the risk
of promoting a sense of injustice and impunity, which
in turn fuels radicalization and the spread of terrorism.
Now is not the time to fan the flames of violent
extremism. On the contrary, we need to use all of the
tools at our disposal at the international, regional,
national and local levels to extinguish the noxious fire
of terrorism.

