The Russian Federation was once again compelled to vote against the draft resolution (S/2020/667) on the extension of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria, submitted by Belgium and Germany. The new draft by the co-penholders is like the old one, with the same one- sided approach and disconnection from the reality on the ground. None of us should forget that the mechanism was established in 2014 as an urgent, temporary and exceptional measure. There is no doubt that it contradicts international humanitarian law and undermines Syrian sovereignty. For the war-torn country, the proposal was a difficult but necessary compromise to provide relief to people in need. We have repeatedly pointed out the problems in the functioning of the cross-border mechanism monitoring system, including its accountability. Those problems remain unresolved. Bearing that in mind, our position on the mechanism has always been clear - the crossing points should be gradually closed and the whole mechanism should be phased out based on the assessment of the situation in the country. The closure of Al-Yarubiyah last January stimulated cooperation between the United Nations and the Government of Syria. It allowed the dispatch of four World Health Organization convoys to the north-east. The most recent one, as of 4 July, had delivered 85 tons of medical supplies from Damascus to Al-Hasakah province. The amount of essential medical material that has delivered to the north-east through those four convoys alone exceeds the amount of aid that was previously delivered to that area by all routes, including through Al-Yarubiyah when it was open. Such modalities are what should be fully supported and promoted instead of continuously relying on temporary and extraordinary mechanisms. We definitely cannot ignore the negative impact of sanction regimes, which recently became even more severe for the Syrian people and territories under Government control. They are in a total disregard for the Secretary-General's call for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. An increased shortage of food, medicines and basic commodities, as well as rising inflation are their direct consequences. However, what is more important is that, in reality, they de facto void exemptions to sanctions. Humanitarian workers in Syria privately admit those facts but are obviously scared to speak up about it in fear of retaliations. At the same time, areas beyond the control of the legitimate Syrian authorities fully enjoy a sanctions-free regime. Such an approach leads to further isolation of those areas from Damascus, including economic distancing; for instance, in Idlib and to the east of the Euphrates River, local authorities have started using currencies other than the Syrian pound. It inevitably results in the rupture of internal connections and the disruption of supply chains. Unilateral sanctions must be lifted and international humanitarian assistance for Syria should be governed by a universally agreed framework in line with the United Nations guiding principles on such assistance, as stipulated in General Assembly resolution 46/182. If what matters to us all is to keep humanitarian aid flowing to Idlib through the cross-border mechanism for another year, then the new draft resolution presented by Russia should be supported. One year of uninterrupted functioning of the cross-border mechanism, taking into account the current epidemiological situation, would guarantee the necessary assistance for the inhabitants of north-western Syria.
