Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to thank Mr. Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his excellent
briefing, which brought home the need to recognize
that much remains to be done if the United Nations,
including the Security Council, is to be effective in
protecting civilians who find themselves immersed in
various armed conflict throughout the world.

We therefore express our concern at the
dangerous situations that continue confront civilians in
conflicts, where they fall prey to insecurity, violence
and the violation of their human rights. The cases we
have seen in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Gaza, Iraq, Darfur, Chad, Afghanistan and
Kosovo - to name just a few - show that, despite the
good intentions of the international community, the
Security Council and the respective Governments
involved, the civilian population, and the displaced
above all, remain without improved protection and are
often the direct targets of attacks and gender-based
violence.

Given the situations described in the briefing, it is
necessary to reaffirm the responsibility of all parties
involved in armed conflict to respect their obligations
under international law regarding the protection of
civilians. Likewise, parties must ensure humanitarian
access to populations affected by conflict. They must
also provide protection for the staff of humanitarian
agencies providing necessary assistance.

We share the Under-Secretary-General's concern
about the high and ever-increasing number of refugees
and internally displaced persons, who need effective
humanitarian responses to meet their needs. The needs
that arise from the cases described by the Under-
Secretary-General in his briefing, which no one would
like to see repeated in the future, will require that the
Security Council and the United Nations system
intensify their efforts to make a real difference in the
protection of civilians and to ensure the protection of
their human rights. In that connection, Peru would like
to highlight some considerations that may useful in that
regard.

First, the Security Council must seek to ensure
the full implementation of resolution 1674 (2006),
which contains crucial provisions for the improvement
of the international system to protect civilians in armed
conflict. That includes the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Secondly, the Council must continue to support
bodies and international organizations providing
humanitarian assistance, especially those present on the
ground, in order to improve the efficiency of the
protection of civilians, including internally displaced
persons.

Thirdly, the Council must continue to seek new
ways to address growing humanitarian challenges. That
must be done in cooperation with other bodies of the
United Nations system. An innovative example in this
area is the Central Emergency Response Fund, which is
intended to provide support to populations in need of
humanitarian assistance.

Fourthly, the Council must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court to combat impunity.
Effectively punishing those responsible for serious
violations of human rights is both an obligation of the
international community and a way of sending a strong
message about the rule of law.

Finally, the Council must continue to work with
the Peacebuilding Commission.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that Peru
believes that overcoming crises and restoring long-
desired peace to countries in conflict pose a challenge
to the Security Council: to bridge the gap between
good intentions and implementing concrete measures
to protect civilians. We must therefore above all
recognize that strengthening post-conflict protection
for civilians requires decisive steps to build sustainable
institutions in affected countries, including the
establishment of stable economic conditions and
development strategies, with a view to preventing
social exclusion, which in many instances is the main
cause of domestic conflict in the first place.

