Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The conflict that degenerated into violence in the former
Yugoslavia in 1991 forced us to come to grips with a
virulent nationalism and an undemocratic power struggle
that was an assault on our fundamental values.

Yesterday, in Paris, a historic Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, aimed at putting an end to the
bloodshed in that country, was signed. We hope that it
will pave the way to lasting peace. We can now turn to
the task of building a democratic society that fully
respects human rights.

In marking this achievement, it is important to
recognize the contribution of the international community.
The role of the United Nations and its Blue Helmets
merits special mention. From the outset, the presence of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
helped to moderate the scope, intensity and consequences
of the conflict, in many, often unheralded, ways.
UNPROFOR allowed peace negotiations to proceed. It
was UNPROFOR personnel who made it possible for
humanitarian organizations - in particular the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -
to bring essential food, medicine and other humanitarian
supplies to the long suffering, isolated and needy civilian
population.

For the past three and half years, United Nations
Blue Helmets and other personnel have served

 

courageously under dangerous and often degrading
circumstances. Many, including 10 Canadians, have given
their lives. Many more will bear the scars of their all too
often thankless task for the remainder of their lives. As we
look towards the end of UNPROFOR's mission, my
delegation joins others in paying tribute to every one of
these dedicated individuals from more than 35 countries
who participated in and supported this operation.

(spoke in English)

The difficulties experienced by the United Nations in
the former Yugoslavia provide important lessons for the
future. We welcome the views and observations of the
Secretary- General in his report on the implementation of
the Basic Agreement on Eastern Slavonia. His remarks
strongly echo the views we and a number of others have
expressed in a wide variety of United Nations forums over
the past many weeks.

As we begin the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, it is clear that the challenges facing us are
daunting and complex. Most importantly, it will require
from the parties sustained commitment and the willingness
to make and adhere to difficult compromises. It will also
require the continued and active involvement of all of us.
Canada will contribute to this process, working closely with
allies and friends. The Security Council has given the
Implementation Force (IFOR) the key task of carrying out
the military aspects of the Peace Agreement. Through our
participation in IFOR, we will be working to help ensure
the full success of the Force in fulfilling its mandate.

Moving forward rapidly and effectively on the civilian
component of the Peace Agreement is equally important to
building lasting peace. In this regard, we regret that it was
not possible to authorize today the United Nations civilian
police mission and the United Nations civilian office
recommended by the Secretary- General. We look forward
to early action by the Security Council in this area.

For its part, Canada will continue its engagement on
the humanitarian front and in providing assistance to
refugees. We will engage ourselves fully in the
multinational efforts aimed at economic reconstruction and
social rehabilitation in the former Yugoslavia.

Implementing the Peace Agreement involves more
than just separating the forces and economic reconstruction.
We must also use the next year to press forward urgently
on the political and humanitarian aspects of the Agreement.

 

As peace, justice and good governance take root, a return
to war will become ever less likely.

The international community has made great
sacrifices over the past four years in the former
Yugoslavia. The cost in resources and in people has been
enormous. This demonstration of international solidarity
will continue, but in the end it is for the parties
themselves and their neighbours to consolidate and ensure
the peace. It is for the parties themselves to take
advantage of the opportunities at hand and of the
willingness of the international community to help.

Canada would like again to congratulate all those
whose efforts and sacrifices have brought us to this
historic moment. We are hopeful that the will for peace
will prevail. We are hopeful that armed conflict in the
former Yugoslavia has finally ended and that the building
of civil societies, truly just and democratic, can at last
begin.

