Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, and your delegation for
organizing this timely debate and for honouring us with
your personal participation this morning. In particular,
I would like to extend to you the warm and fraternal
greetings of our President, Mr. Otto Perez Molina,
who has asked me to reiterate his admiration for your
national and regional leadership, which honours your
country, Latin America and the women of the world. The
long, deep and fraternal relations between our peoples
and Governments have been further strengthened by
Argentina and Guatemala in 2013 by the Latin American
and Caribbean presence in the Security Council, where
we share strong commonalities in our actions aimed at
maintaining international peace and security.

We also appreciate the presence this morning of
Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon and the representatives
of regional and subregional organizations from all parts
of the globe. I also welcome Ambassador Samantha
Power, whom we know to be committed to human rights
and humanitarian law, and who has written books on
Sergio Vieira de Mello, a Brazilian and Latin American
hero in the fight for human rights and international
multilateralism. I thank Ambassador Power very much
for her presence.

I come from a country, Guatemala, and a
subregion, Central America, that have accumulated
more than 60 years of successful experience in the
realm of intraregional cooperation, driven by common
multilateral organizations. The degree of economic
interdependence among the countries of the Central
American Common Market and the Central American
Integration System is high in terms of trade and
reciprocal investment, and the ever wider and greater
integration of our markets and societies. In addition,
we have adopted a culture of intraregional cooperation
aimed at resolving common problems through
joint action, supported by a web of institutions and
intergovernmental mechanisms. One manifestation of
that network is the daily communications between our
Heads of State and other senior officials.

In addition, having overcome the internal
conflicts that affected our Central American region so
adversely in the 19705 and 1980s, the emphasis today
is on spurring our economic and social development.
Not only do we consider our region's peace to be an
irreversible achievement, but the many affinities
and common interests between the countries of our
subregion have also contributed to strengthening
respect for the principle of resolving all conflicts or
misunderstandings among us by peaceful means, with
priority given to diplomatic-political dialogue.

I would further add that our culture of intraregional
cooperation extends to our entire region of Latin
America and the Caribbean. It should be recalled that the
so-called Contadora Group, which eventually became
the Rio Group and today inspires the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, was born of
the interest of brotherly neighbouring countries in
resolving Central American conflicts themselves.

Latin America, together with the United Nations,
contributed significantly to the establishment and
maintenance of peacekeeping missions that supported
El Salvador and my country in their return to the
institutional and democratic path. At present, as we all
know, the only specific item on the Council's agenda
concerning our region, which enjoys the extraordinary
support of Latin America and the Caribbean, concerns
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in
which several Latin American countries and my own
country have the honour of participating with our
troops.

The fact that our region is no longer a threat to
international peace and security does not mean that
we are absent from the indispensable activities of the
Council at the international level. In that respect, since
we became a member, we have supported, as a general
objective, cooperation between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, each in
its respective purview and based on their comparative
advantages. The long and fruitful association between
the Council and the African Union, which has even
given rise to joint efforts in peacekeeping, has provided
tangible and valuable benefits. Those benefits are being
reproduced at the subregional level by organizations
such as the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Southern African Development
Community, as well as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. The same is happening in the
Middle East, where the Council has collaborated with
the League of Arab States and the Gulf Cooperation
Council on some matters.

Naturally, the content and scope of the partnerships
of the Council with other organizations will vary from
one situation to the next, and could even vary over
time in the same situation, depending on changing
circumstances. Our general position of support for this
type of partnership is nuanced by the acknowledgment
that there are no universally valid formulas in this
matter. Rather, the exact characteristics of the
partnerships must be defined on a case-by-case basis.

In addition, it must be recognized that those
partnerships are not always exempt from difficulties,
which normally arise either from differences with
regard to the territorial issues of the parties or from
different criteria with regard to the course of action to
be followed. When there is no mechanism to reconcile
those differences through dialogue and understanding,
they can become serious obstacles to the proper
functioning ofjoint activity. That suggests that there
is a need to reconcile decisions taken by regional
organizations with those adopted by the United Nations,
including those of the Security Council, in light of the
provisions of Article 103 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

What is clear, in light ofthe experience ofhistory, is
that regional and global efforts must acknowledge that
the overcoming of conflicts and the path to sustainable
peace depend on a joint endeavour intertwining the
agendas of security, justice, the respect for human
rights and sustainable development. In each of those
areas, there are diverse strengths and complementarities
among the United Nations and regional organizations,
and the acknowledgment of those strengths and
complementarities will open a distinct and fruitful
space for institutional cooperation at the multilateral
level among regional and global entities.

The twenty-first century is giving rise to
increasingly stronger and more responsible regional
institutions. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, should be pleased with that trend.
It reflects a slow but definite transition from the post-
war world, which gave birth to the Council, towards
a multipolar world where dialogue and peace are
increasingly urgent and basic in order to preserve the
planet and the life on it, maintain human development
and overcome poverty. That is in addition to the need to
preserve peaceful coexistence based on mutual respect
and face the common challenges that threaten peace
and security at the global level. Regional organizations
are called upon to be active partners in this multipolar
world by shouldering their responsibilities vis-a-vis
the international community to ensure peace and
sustainable development, thus complementing the
efforts made though the United Nations. This is a world
with more shared responsibilities, and therefore greater
demands on international cooperation - a world that is
more interconnected, not a fragmented one.

I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
you, Madam President, for the informative concept
note circulated by your delegation (S/2013/446, annex),
which helps guide today's debate. I am also pleased to
express our full support for the presidential statement
that was adopted today (S/PRST/2013/l2), which
reflects the content of our deliberations.

