Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Serry for his very useful and
detailed briefing and my Israeli and Palestinian
colleagues for their statements.

Two days after a debate focused on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, and despite our ongoing concern
over the humanitarian and security situation on the
ground, especially in and around the Gaza Strip, I will
avoid repeating the detailed position of Belgium on the
issue, especially since it was broadly reflected in the
statement made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union, to which my delegation
fully subscribes. I would rather take advantage of the
briefing we have received to forecast the opportunities
and challenges in the Middle East that await us in
2009.

The first observation is that we are seeing
international commitment at a level unseen since the
beginning of the millennium. There have been five
summit meetings of the Quartet in a single year,
including a meeting with the direct briefing of the
parties on the status of negotiations. That included the
direct involvement of the international community with
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, already reflected
in the reactivation of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
and in the discussion of Palestinian reform plans.

In support of those two forums, four successive
ministerial conferences have been convened in
Annapolis, Paris, Berlin and London to give the
greatest possible political and economic support to the
negotiations, alongside the investment conferences in
Bethlehem and London and the economic recovery
plan of Tony Blair, Representative of the Quartet.
Finally, after having been too long the symbol of
paralysing disagreement on the part of the international
community, the Security Council - our Security
Council - recalled last Tuesday that it remains seized
of the matter. We thus welcome the adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008), in that it confirms the
Council's responsibility to help in the realization of the
solution of two viable States living side by side in
peace and security.

In a period of transition that is inevitably more
fragile, Belgium, along with its European partners,
advocates maintaining this international commitment.
We could begin by seeing to it that the adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008) does not remain window
dressing without a future. On the contrary, it should
strengthen the ability of our Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and see
to it that its previous resolutions are implemented.

Our second observation touches upon the
reaffirmation of the regional commitment in the quest
for stabilization and a complete, just and lasting peace
with Israel. Resolution 1850 (2008) recalled the
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. We can once
again hail the commitment of the sponsors of the
Initiative to reaffirm it at the Riyadh summit in March
2007. But the sense of responsibility of the regional
players does not stop there.

Under the aegis of Turkey, indirect negotiations
have begun between Israel and Syria. There has been a
renewal of contacts after eight years of silence. We
hope that a fifth session will soon bring them close to
direct discussions with a View to a peace agreement.

In Lebanon, after violence that we feared would
lead to a new civil war, mediation by Qatar helped in
the election of a new President and in renewing
national dialogue. Since then, a constructive dialogue
has begun with Syria. We encourage the fulfilment of
the commitments entered into in Damascus for the
normalization of bilateral relations, including the
establishment of diplomatic relations. Beyond that, and
in view of the impact on regional peace and security,
we emphasize increased cooperation for the monitoring
of the Lebanese-Syrian border and respect for the arms
embargo approved in resolution 1701 (2006). On this
specific item, and more generally because of its role in
the region, we call upon Iran to use its influence
constructively and in support of peace.
Finally, with regard to Palestinian reconciliation,
Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Egypt have successively
shown the Arab commitment to reunifying the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank within the fold of the
Palestinian Authority. Based on the observation that we
cannot have a lasting peace without involving the
entire Palestinian people, we urge the continuation of
these Arab efforts, and we encourage Hamas to have a
sense of responsibility for not depriving Gazans of the
peace dividends.

In this context, Belgium welcomes the
confirmation of the organization of an international
meeting in 2009 in Moscow. Without prejudging the
progressive stabilization of various hotbeds of regional
tension, we hope that that meeting will allow for the
identification of the way in which we can integrate
them into a comprehensive and mutual stabilization in
the Middle East. Already, together with our European
partners, we are prepared to work with the parties in
order to offer them the international safeguards
necessary for making progress in this direction.

