Judge Byron: I, too, am greatly honoured to
present to the members of the Security Council the
ninth report on the completion strategy of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

In 2003, the Security Council called on the
Tribunal to

"take all possible measures to complete
investigations by the end of 2004, to complete all
trial activities at first instance by the end of 2008,
and to complete all work in 2010" (resolution 1503 (2003), para. 7).

Since then, the Tribunal has substantially complied
with its completion strategy while upholding trial
fairness and the rights of the accused.

Of the 92 indictments issued by the Prosecutor,
41 have been disposed of. Of the remaining 51, four
have been earmarked for referral and 13 accused are
still at large. Despite the recent additional workload in
connection with five accused, the evidence phase of all
but four remaining cases will be completed by the end
of 2008, with judgements expected at the latest in
2009.

The recent additional workload in connection
with five accused includes an indictment for contempt
of court, an accused whose referral to the Netherlands
was revoked, and three accused who were recently
arrested.

Both the contempt and the case for which referral
was revoked have been scheduled for trial and
judgement delivery in 2008. Because the three newly

arrested are considered to be high-level accused, their
trials ought to take place at the Tribunal. In view of the
current workload and the occupancy rate of
courtrooms, the scheduling of those three new single-
accused cases will necessarily extend into next year. As
a result, the evidence phase in four cases - Karemera
and the three recently arrested fugitives - will spill
over into 2009.

We have projected that seven permanent and
eight ad litem judges could progressively dispose of
those remaining cases during 2009. Two permanent and
one ad litem judges will complete their assigned cases
and resign by November 2008. No arrangements for
their replacement are considered necessary due to the
current and anticipated workload.

As members can see, those new developments
will require some adjustment to the terms of service of
the judges. It is my intention very soon to submit to the
Presidents of the Council and the General Assembly a
request for consideration of that matter.

In a few minutes, the Prosecutor of the ICTR will
address this Council and request it to urge Member
States to secure the arrest of the 13 remaining fugitives
as soon as possible. The speed and efficiency with
which that request will be executed will have an impact
on the Tribunal's work. Another element that may have
an impact on our work is the outcome of the five
pending requests for referral that have not been put on
our judicial calendar. Although a trial chamber
rendered a decision on one of them last week, if an
appeal is lodged, it will take three to four months
before the Appeals Chamber will issue its ruling.

Maintaining high performance standards while
achieving the goals set by the completion strategy does
not come easily. There is a high turnover of staff,
which requires constant training and reorganization.
Decisions from the relevant United Nations organs in
support of the management and maintenance of our
resources are instrumental to the Tribunal's completion
strategy. Once again, I ask the Council to authorize the
Secretary-General to take all reasonable measures to
ensure that the Tribunal is able to retain its experienced
staff in order to achieve its mandate.

While on that subject, it would be remiss of me
not to pay special tribute to the judges. Their
commitment to the ideals of the Tribunal and their
dedicated service have been exemplary and are
essential to the attainment of our mandate. In
particular, I would like to acknowledge the ad litem
judges who, despite the differences in their terms of
engagement, have wholeheartedly undertaken the same
workload and served for a similar duration as
permanent judges.

During the reporting period, the Tribunal has
benefited from the cooperation of many States. Rwanda
in particular has continued to provide support in
facilitating the presence of witnesses in Arusha and
providing other essential services for the effective and
expeditious management of the trials. The United
Republic of Tanzania provided assistance in securing
the arrest of Callixte Nzabonimana earlier this year. It
must, however, be reported that the relocation of two
acquitted persons has not yet been resolved, despite the
strenuous efforts deployed by the Registrar to find a
country of residence for them. That issue, as well as
that of the relocation of those convicted persons who
will complete the service of sentence, is increasingly
becoming crucial as the Tribunal moves towards its
completion. On behalf of the Tribunal, I respectfully
call upon Member States to provide support and
assistance in finding and imposing sustainable
solutions.

The Tribunal has continued to work with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on the
development of arrangements for the performance of
essential activities after closure of the Tribunals. It has
conducted internal and external consultations with
various stakeholders. The work of the Committee on
Archives is progressing and is expected to produce
recommendations shortly. The Tribunal has also
continued to actively contribute to capacity-building in
Rwanda and has delivered programmes that have
benefited the judicial sector, civil society and academic
institutions.

On behalf of the Tribunal, I would like to thank
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the Members
States for their steadfast support to the work of the
Tribunal. The continued assistance of all Member
States is necessary for the Tribunal to accomplish its
mandate to bring justice and restore peace and security
to Rwanda and the Great Lakes region. Its results will
set an example and demonstrate that States are
determined to fight against impunity for the most
serious international crimes.
