I thank Ms. Ingrid Hayden, Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Officer in Charge of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her comprehensive briefing today. The increasingly complex global security landscape continues to challenge us all. The dire humanitarian consequences of conflict in Afghanistan necessitate urgent action. In addressing the sociopolitical and economic arrangements underlying this crisis, the international community must work together. There is no alternative to multilateralism. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains concerned about the volatile security situation in the country. We condemn, in the strongest terms, all forms of terrorism and violence against civilians, including the recent killings at the Sikh Temple in Kabul. We are deeply saddened by these deaths and express our deepest condolences to the bereaved families. We reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We support an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned process to ensure lasting peace and stability. In this context, we encourage all parties to fulfil their commitments under the joint declaration and agreement signed on 29 February. We commend UNAMA for its engagement with national, regional and international stakeholders to advance intra-Afghan negotiations. We also welcome the efforts to support women's leadership roles in the Government and future intra- Afghan negotiations. In this regard, we continue to stress the importance of the political inclusivity of all stakeholders to create a more just and equitable society for the benefit of all Afghans. In closing, let me welcome the appointment of Deborah Lyons as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA and encourage her to continue dialogue with representatives of the Taliban in order to resolve all outstanding issues related to the peace process. We reiterate our full support to the people of Afghanistan as they lay the foundations for a peaceful and prosperous future.
