We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, and the Coordinator of the Association for Indigenous Peul Women and Peoples of Chad, Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, for their briefings. We share the concerns expressed by Mr. Chambas regarding the further deterioration of the security situation in West Africa, especially in the Sahel. The geography of terrorist activity, inter-ethnic and intercommunal conflict, drug trafficking and organized crime is expanding in the region. Extremist ideology is attracting new adherents. Almost every week, we receive reports of the tragic loss of life caused by heinous terrorist activities. Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger have literally become front-line States. We are concerned that the Boko Haram terrorist group has become more active in the Lake Chad basin. We reaffirm our full support to all those who are engaged in a difficult struggle against terrorism in the region. A new and extremely dangerous factor for security and stability in West Africa is the coronavirus pandemic. The disease hits indiscriminately, in both stable and the most vulnerable countries. Social services and schools cease to function and health-care facilities are under tremendous strain. Only those who are interested in further destabilization of the region - terrorists and other disruptive elements - capitalize on this disturbing situation. The consequences of coronavirus for West African countries have yet to be assessed, but it is already clear that more and more people will need humanitarian assistance and other forms of support. Despite a number of problems, the developments in the political life of the countries of the region show that, even in the present difficult circumstances associated with the pandemic, the African States and public institutions have managed to cope successfully with their tasks. In this regard, we hope that parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for the second half of 2020 in many countries of the region will be held democratically, transparently and legitimately and with strict respect for national sovereignty, as was the case during the period covered in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/585). Interference in those processes by external players also should be excluded. The United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) faces large-scale, difficult tasks: promote the resolution of regional crises, participate in political mediation, help to strengthen State institutions, implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and coordinate other United Nations presences on the ground. In addition, the efficient functioning of the Office directly depends on how well it coordinates with regional organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. Some issues, including combating piracy and the demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria border, require close cooperation between UNOWAS and its southern neighbour, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa. To conclude, I would like to highlight that Russia welcomes Mr. Chambas' personal commitment and efforts to help countries in West Africa, the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin to overcome current difficulties. There is no doubt that UNOWAS deserves credit for important achievements in the region.
