Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Congo
welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, in organizing
today's debate on a very important and topical theme.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
continues to pose a threat to humankind, and the risk of
their falling into the hands of terrorists remains real.
Indeed, as recently as 16 February the General
Assembly followed up on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy; at
that meeting Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon presented
the first version of the Counter-Terrorism Online
Handbook created by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

While noting that United Nations organs can play
an important role in this area, he pointed out that the
success of counter-terrorism activities depends first
and foremost on the role played by Member States,
which can be strengthened only through international
cooperation.

He also pointed out that collective and concerted
action was necessary to prevent terrorism from
threatening the very existence of humanity, because, in
his View, a race is now on to overcome this destructive
phenomenon, whose actors are fully prepared to use
the most lethal means available. Those words give
today's debate particular importance, as they stress the
ongoing nature and persistence of the phenomenon and
therefore the need to strengthen and coordinate our
actions, in particular to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling into the hands of terrorists.

In that context, my delegation fully appreciates
the considerable amount of work that your delegation
has been doing at the helm of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) since
January 2006 with respect to Member States as well as
to international, regional and subregional
organizations. This is clear from the regional seminars
held recently on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) at Beijing, Accra and Lima, respectively; the
Vienna workshop organized by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe; and, more
recently, the workshop held by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum,
from 12 to 15 February 2007, at San Francisco, to
which the American delegation has just referred. Those
meetings illustrate the Security Council's will and
determination to enhance its cooperation with
international organizations. We welcome also the
Council's continued focus on civil society
organizations through the 1540 Committee.
14
In paragraph 8 of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Security Council calls upon Member States

"To promote the universal adoption and full
implementation, and, where necessary,
strengthening of multilateral treaties to which
they are parties, whose aim is to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear, biological or chemical
weapons".

Those States are also asked to renew and fulfil
their commitment to multilateral cooperation, in
particular within the framework of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention, as important means of
pursuing and achieving their common objectives in the
area of non-proliferation and of promoting
international cooperation for peaceful purposes.

Along those same lines, the Security Council, in
paragraph 5 of resolution 1673 (2006), calls upon the
1540 Committee to intensify its efforts to encourage
States fully to implement resolution 1540 (2004)
through a work programme which provides for, inter
alia, outreach activities, dialogue, assistance and
cooperation, particularly on aspects concerning border
controls, law enforcement efforts and export and trans-
shipment controls, including controls on providing
funds and services such as financing to such export and
trans-shipment.

These are all areas for concrete action that will
enable us to work in a coordinated manner and at all
levels - national, regional and international - in
order to prevent weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the hands of terrorist groups.

However, recent meetings held in Africa, Asia
and in other areas of the world have shown that much
remains to be done. Not only are reports not being
submitted on time by Member States; when they finally
are submitted, they do not always meet the
requirements of the Committee.

The obstacles we have noted in connection by
cooperation by States include not only shortcomings
linked to States' performance, but also and, most
importantly, the question of the priorities to be
assigned in dealing with issues related to threats to
international peace and security.
While this may not be the most opportune
moment to tackle the issue of small arms and light
weapons, this meeting does provide an opportunity to
recall this legitimate concern on the part of those
whose very existence is daily threatened by such
weapons.

We agree that counter-terrorism is our common
mission. However, let us not lose sight of the fact that
small arms and light weapons are today the primary
means used by terrorists to carry out their crimes. Let
us be aware of that fact, despite the fact that,
comparatively speaking, their potential for destruction
is less than that of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons.

Having said that, Congo fully supports the
strengthening of the work of the 1540 Committee and
hopes that the donor conference to be held in New
York in March 2007 on the implementation of
resolution 1540 will be successful.

Once again, Mr. President, we wish you every
success in conducting your sensitive mission, and we
endorse the draft presidential statement crafted by your
delegation.

