Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): It is a great honour
for me to have the opportunity to participate in an open
debate in the Council on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. At the outset, I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for pursuing the timely initiative to hold
another open debate in the Council on this important issue
with the participation of United Nations Member States
and to have the Council adopt a bold resolution.

My delegation's thanks and appreciation also go to
the Secretary-General for his report to the Council
prepared in response to the Council's previous open
debate held on this item last February and to the alarming
general situation to which, yesterday in the debate, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
once again drew the attention of the Council and, indeed,
the international community. My delegation shares the
general assessment of the situation and supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on how the Council and Member States should act
in order to improve the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, in which innocent civilian

 

populations, in particular women and children, suffer in
great numbers.

This century has been the bloodiest one that
humankind has ever known. The next century should be
different. We all know the appalling statistics of human
suffering as a direct result of armed conflict, or indirectly,
as a consequence of violence against innocent civilians,
refugees or displaced persons. Today more than 90 per cent
of armed conflicts take place within, rather than among,
States. That means that in most cases it is the civilian
population that is targeted. As a result, the world is
witnessing various kinds of violence, including intimidation,
brutalization, torture, killing, mutilation, genocide, "ethnic
cleansing" - all used against helpless civilians in different
parts of the world. Therefore, it is my delegation's strong
belief that the subject of today's debate is crucially
important and that the Council should search for more
efficient and comprehensive ways to address this issue. It
would be accurate to say that the question of the physical,
moral, economic and other terrible sufferings of civilians in
situations of armed conflict arises in almost every meeting
of this Council and in other important United Nations
meetings on the issue of international peace and security.
This fact alone testifies to the serious and critical nature of
the issue.

In this context, my delegation would like to note with
satisfaction that the Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, has always paid attention to the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, the
question has always been addressed in the context of a
particular emergency situation or a particular case.
Addressing this question specifically should result in an
action-oriented resolution or decision of the Council
addressed to the entire membership of the United Nations,
the United Nations family and civil society.

N o conflict or crisis is the same. Therefore, we believe
that a serious and constructive approach towards emergency
situations could be workable and thus productive. The
international community has a fresh example of such a
constructive yet firm approach in the case of East Timor.

In this regard, my delegation duly appreciates the steps
taken by the Council in addressing the emergency situation
in East Timor by sending its mission to Jakarta and Dili,
holding an open debate in the Council and adopting, three
days ago, resolution 1264 (1999), authorizing, as a priority
measure, the establishment of a multinational force to
restore peace and security in East Timor, to protect and
support the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) and to facilitate humanitarian assistance
operations there. My delegation fully supports the
Council's action aimed at halting and reversing, as soon
as possible, the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in
East Timor. My delegation welcomes such a style of
work and expresses the hope that it will be, where
appropriate, pursued by the Council in the future.

In the meantime, we welcome the cooperative
approach displayed by the Government of Indonesia
towards the establishment of a multinational force, as was
suggested by the Secretary-General and supported by the
majority of the international community, to restore peace
and security, protect the people, and honour and
implement the results of the popular consultation as
painlessly as possible. We express the hope that the
multinational force will be established and dispatched as
soon as possible.

Allow me, in this light, to express my delegation's
strong belief that international involvement in this case
will be in the interest not only of the Indonesian and East
Timorese peoples, but also in the interest of stability,
peace and security in the region.

The reason I mention here the case of East Timor is
not because that it is the most recent one, but because
such a swift international reaction to unfolding tragedy
represents the kind of response by the Council that is
expected of it in such emergency situations.
I should like, therefore, to repeat my delegation's
belief that the most efficient means of protecting civilians
would be to prevent conflict situations and tackle their
root causes, as they result in untold suffering for such
vulnerable segments of the population as children,
women, the elderly and so on. This is the central theme
of the introduction of this year's report of the Secretary-
General on the work of the Organization. Many
instructive and constructive ideas are reflected in this
report that the Council may find useful when preparing
the draft resolution on this issue.

On the other hand, the international community must
be concerned with the disrespect for, and even Violations
of, international humanitarian and human rights principles
and norms in many, if not most, of the affected areas.
This was rightly pointed out in the Secretary-General's
report as the gap between law and reality. Therefore it is
my delegation's belief that the international community
should do more to strengthen international legal

 

enforcement mechanisms, under which the parties to the
relevant international Conventions on international
humanitarian and human rights law would strictly comply
with their obligations. In this connection, we believe that
the speediest creation of an International Criminal Court, as
a global legal mechanism to address impunity and serve
justice, would be instrumental in punishing the perpetrators
of such grave crimes as well as in serving to deter the
commission of such crimes in future.

Though the Preparatory Committee for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court has made
some progress in drafting the rules of procedure and
evidence, and the elements of crime, for application by the
Court in future, much more remains to be done if the
deadline of 30 June 2000 set by the Rome Conference is to
be met. Bearing in mind this year's tragic developments in
many parts of the world, my delegation expects the third
session of the Preparatory Committee, to be held later this
year, to be fruitful in moving the international community
closer to establishing an independent, competent and viable
Court. In order to achieve that goal, genuine political will
by States is crucial.

Many of the previous speakers have referred to
another important aspect of human security: the physical
protection of persons. Since this issue has been extensively
covered in the Secretary-General's report, I would like only
to inform the Council that my country, Mongolia, will sign
in 10 days, here in New York, a Memorandum of
Understanding with the United Nations concerning its
contributions to United Nations standby arrangements,
whereby it would be contributing staff officers, military
observers, doctors and other medical officers. Mongolia will
also soon be acceding to the 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
delegation's support for the Secretary-General's
recommendations to the Council on this item as well as for
the United Nations efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We hope that, as a result of today's debate, a
weighty and viable resolution will be adopted to adequately
deal with this important issue. Thus the Council should not
only strongly condemn the deliberate targeting of civilians
in situations of armed conflict; it should also call upon the
international community to take practical measures, such as
acting forcefully in situations where civilians are targeted;
including in the mandates of peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peace-building operations special protection and
assistance provisions for groups requiring such protection;
making use of targeted sanctions; raising the minimum age
for recruitment and participation in hostilities to 18; and
so on. The draft resolution that is being discussed among
the members of the Council contains concrete measures
that need to be taken. We believe, therefore, that these
could serve as a good basis for such a resolution.

