Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
start by thanking and congratulating the delegations
of Peru and the United Kingdom, as President of the
Council and penholder on Colombia, respectively, for
leading a very successful mission to the country last
week. The visit by the Council was aimed at improving
its understanding of the status of the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the challenges
faced by the country. South Africa agrees that the
mission was successful.
I would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, to
today's meeting. We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, for his informative briefing and the good
work he and his team are doing in the country.

The consolidation ofpeace after decades of conflict
and mistrust is not an easy task. We wish to commend
the Government of Colombia for its efforts aimed at
implementing the peace agreement. South Africa's
position is informed by its principled stance that the
only viable sustainable solution for the conflict lies in a
negotiated and inclusive political settlement that is in the
interests ofand nationally led by the people ofColombia.
South Africa therefore fully supports the final peace
agreement that was signed between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016 and
believes that it must be implemented in its entirety and
in a comprehensive manner, ensuring the inclusion of
youth, women and civil society and the protection of
their interests.

South Africa has also noted the progress made
on the demobilization and reintegration process of
members of the FARC-EP, which should be commended.
In this regard, we call on all political parties to fully
respect and remain committed to the agreement and
continue to desist from any actions that may undermine
its comprehensive implementation. In this context,
South Africa also welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the Government in enacting the statutory law
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and approving
the national development plan. This plan lays the
foundation for the Government to continue its initiative
to integrate the former members of the FARC-EP and
ensure that they have decent lives.

South Africa also agrees with the Secretary-
General's observation that the integration of Colombian
society means that even historically excluded areas in
Colombia need to be brought into the fold in order to
ensure a smooth transition into the new era. The new
plan can be used as a basis for identifying peace-related
activities within a broader set of public investments in
all the regions affected by the conflict. In this regard,

South Africa agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment that such efforts, especially the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, are the last missing pieces of
the legal framework for Colombia's transitional-justice
model. Although there is a lot of work to be done going
forward, the country is on a positive trajectory towards
lasting peace and reconciliation.

It is important to deepen efforts to de-escalate
tensions and advance the reintegration process. We
remain concerned about the security of all stakeholders.
It should be noted that integration cannot be achieved if
all parties to the peace process are not guaranteed their
personal security. South Africa is concerned about the
increased killing of FARC-EP members and social and
community leaders. We urge all parties to refrain from
any actions that could undermine the building of the
much-needed trust among all communities and to make
positive efforts in this regard, which can be achieved only
with the cooperation of all communities - particularly
the youth and women in these communities,
who are most disproportionately affected by the
conflict - the Government, former combatants and
institutional mechanisms and frameworks designed to
prevent future violence and tensions.

It is our responsibility as the international
community and, in particular, the United Nations
through the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, to support full compliance with the
agreements reached between the parties concerning the
monitoring and verification of the bilateral and definitive
ceasefire, as well as the cessation of hostilities and the
laying down of arms. It became increasingly visible
during the visit of the Security Council that the work of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is
important and invaluable for the peace process and the
implementation of the peace agreement.

It is encouraging that the Government has taken
a flexible approach in relation to the FARC-EP with
respect to the arrangements on the future of the 24
territorial areas for training and reintegration when
the reintegration status ends on 15 August. It is
encouraging that the Government has extended the
date to clarify the status of these territorial areas
for training and reintegration because it is a positive
step towards addressing the security concerns of
these communities. However, to ensure that the
former combatants have adequate access to economic
opportunities, the Government must swiftly approve
plans for the disbursement of funding for economic
activities and initiatives.

South Africa's own experience with its Truth and
Reconciliation Commission confirmed that its process
was crucial for achieving national unity. Hearing the
different views and versions of events of all communities
in Colombia will ensure that the road to peace is based on
an inclusive political process. A lasting comprehensive
peace can be achieved only with the involvement of all
stakeholders. It is also important for the Government to
speak with one voice in an effort to consolidate national
unity and reconciliation. South Africa therefore calls
on all parties to respect the constitutionally mandated
mechanisms and frameworks established to assist the
political and judicial transition.

Let me conclude by stating that South Africa urges
States Members of the United Nations and international
partners to support and encourage the people of
Colombia to preserve and fully implement the final
peace agreement in a comprehensive manner, address
the concerns and rights of victims to truth, justice,
reparations and non-repetition, as well as inclusive
dialogue and a peaceful settlement. We also support
and look forward to the extension of the Verification
Mission for a period of one year.

For Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia and his
delegation, I would like to note that a Nelson Mandela
peace bench was unveiled yesterday by the South
African, Norway and the Nobel Peace communities to
mark the one-hundred-first anniversary of the birth of
Nelson Mandela. This bench, which is located at the
visitor's entrance of the building in which we sit today,
has a simple quotation from Nelson Mandela inscribed
on it: "The best weapon is to sit down and talk". We
hope that the people of Colombia will continue to sit
down, talk and negotiate, because we believe that by
doing so lasting peace will return to their country.

