Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): At the outset, I should
like to say that the Japanese Government welcomes the
continued and steady progress in the peace process in
Bougainville since the previous open meeting on this
matter, held in August of this year. We are pleased that
the implementation of the 2001 peace agreement is in
its final stage. Stage III, in which the final disposition
of the collected weapons is to be decided, is in
progress. It is the wish of the international community
that once security has been restored through
completion of the weapons disposal plan, the first
elections for an autonomous government in
Bougainville, as provided in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, be held promptly, so that the people of
Bougainville will be able to live in peace and start the
restoration and development process through their own
volition.

My Government appreciates the steady execution
by the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) of its mandate, including the collection of
weapons, since its establishment in 1998. Now that the
peace process is in its final stage, it is crucial that the
peace that has been attained in Bougainville, after the
end of the long-term conflict that lasted a decade, be
definitively and irreversibly consolidated. In order for
UNPOB to complete the work that is yet to be done, we
support the extension of its mandate, to the extent
necessary.

At the same time, however, I must add that Japan,
as a Member State which is obliged to share as much as
19.6 per cent of the United Nations budget, is gravely
concerned about the continuing expansion of the
United Nations budget. Therefore, we request that after
its mandate is extended, UNPOB provide evaluation
reports at an appropriate time, so that countries
concerned, including Japan, will be able to verify the
effectiveness of its activities. In addition, we believe
that closer coordination and cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other relevant organs of the United Nations system that
are conducting activities in the field, would be
conducive to an early completion of UNPOB's
mandate. In that context, my delegation would like to
welcome some suggestions made earlier in this forum
on the downsizing of UNPOB's structure and the
sharing of office space between UNPOB and UNDP.
Support for the consolidation of peace in the
aftermath of a conflict is one of the pillars of Japan's
foreign policy. In this context, I would like to mention
that, at the Third Japan-Pacific Islands Forum Summit
Meeting, hosted by my Government in May of this
year, Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi, Prime Minister
Somare of Papua New Guinea and other Pacific Islands
Forum leaders identified enhanced security in the
Pacific region as one of the priority policy objectives
that must be addressed jointly by Japan and Forum
members. As one concrete effort in pursuit of that
objective, my Government began this October to
provide assistance for improvement in such areas as
education, public health and transportation
infrastructure, with a View to ensuring stability in the
daily lives of the people of Bougainville and
strengthening their economy.

It is the intention of my Government to continue
to pay close attention to developments in the peace
process in Bougainville.

