Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Following the death of
our colleague, Ambassador Churkin, I would like to
begin by expressing my most sincere condolences to
his wife, Irina, his family, the entire Russian mission
and the Russian people for their great loss. In addition
to his exceptional legacy here at the United Nations,
Vitaly Churkin left many good memories during his
time as ambassador to Canada between 1998 and
2003. A few weeks ago I was having a discussion
with Prime Minister Chretien who was the Prime
Minister during that period. Prime Minister Chretien
told me that he fond memories of his relationship with
Ambassador Churkin.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate. The simple fact is that security and
stability in Europe are in the interest of us all.

Canada's history as a nation has been defined
by the struggle for peace, security and democracy in
Europe. More recently, we have proudly participated in
United Nations peacekeeping missions on the continent
and remain engaged through our upcoming leadership
of a NATO multinational battalion in Latvia, as well
as our bilateral military capacity-building mission in
Ukraine. I have three key points that I wish to convey.

First, we all have a stake in a stable, peaceful
and prosperous Europe. Canada's commitment to
European security remains steadfast, as demonstrated
by our long-standing participation in key institutions,
such as NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and partnership with
the European Union and the Council of Europe.

As Canada's Minister of Foreign Affairs affirmed
at last week's annual Munich Security Conference, the
international security environment is more complex and
challenging than ever, with increasingly unpredictable
dynamics between major Powers and established
institutions under sustained pressure. In that context,
alliances and the rules-based international order matter
more than ever. As Prime Minister Trudeau said to the
European Parliament, European security is buttressed
by trade and prosperity. In that regard, we are delighted
to have concluded the Canada-European Union
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement.

Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations must work together to best leverage their
comparative expertise, knowledge and capabilities in
the pursuit of peace in the region. The United Nations
has learned many lessons on prevention, mediation
and sustaining lasting peace. Under the leadership
of its Secretary-General, the United Nations can be a
powerful voice for peace and stability. But the United
Nations cannot and should not go it alone. The European
Union has successfully contributed to stability in the
region by fostering institutions, structures and norms
that embrace diversity and advance the rule of law.

Similarly, the OSCE deserves our recognition and
support for its role in preventing and managing conflict
in Europe. Canada especially values the OSCE's current
efforts in Ukraine, where the Special Monitoring
Mission has served as a critical confidence-building
measure. Canada looks to the United Nations to work
with the OSCE and the European Union to facilitate
the Mission's access and, ultimately, to help resolve this
festering conflict.

Thirdly, European security need not be a zero-sum
game, but the sovereign rights of countries to determine
their future must be respected. Canada does not and will
not recognize Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea.
That breach of international law has heightened tensions
across and beyond Europe. Furthermore, Russia's
material and political support to illegal armed groups in
eastern Ukraine only fuels instability in the region. Our
sanctions, like those of our partners, are tied to the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements and respect
for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Canada supports the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia, including South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, which have been under Russian military
occupation since 2008. Ultimately, peace and security
in the region can be achieved only when sovereignty
and territorial integrity are respected, preserved
and restored.

Having identified the challenges, I would be remiss
ifI did not highlight recent successes.

The work of the United Nations, NATO and the
OSCE in the Balkans has achieved considerable
results. Much more remains to be done, of course, but
it is important to remember how far we have come.
Recent efforts towards a reunified Cyprus offer another
important example. Its communities have been divided
for too long. The peace talks deserve full support
from the international community. Lasting peace can
be achieved. Canada welcomes Secretary-General
Guterres' personal involvement in the process, as well
as the diligent work of the United Nations on the ground.

Canada's security is fundamentally and inextricably
linked to peace and security in Europe. Our support for
the United Nations and regional political and security
institutions remains unwavering. The Security Council
can count on Canada to work tirelessly to foster our
collective security, both within Europe and worldwide.

