Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2011/250), Ms. Coomaraswamy for her outstanding
work as his Special Representative and Germany for
organizing this debate during the month of its
presidency, thus giving us an opportunity to influence
the Council's consideration of the issue of children and
armed conflict, including through the informal event it
hosted on 30 June.

For the Council's decisions to be effective, the
commitment and investment of the wider United
Nations community is also required. For the 177
countries that cannot sit at this table, participation in
the Council's work ensures that commitment, and
regard to our voices encourages that investment.

It is important to remember that, as we sit in the
Chamber today, children are still being forced out of
classrooms and playgrounds and onto battlefields. They
are suffering the vilest forms of sexual abuse and rape.
They are being disfigured, maimed and even murdered.
The Council's actions can improve the lives of those
children, as has been demonstrated through its
institutional innovations, such as the creation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and through the
consolidation and implementation of the protection
framework. But, as always, more concrete action can
be taken that will improve the lives of children affected
by conflict, including girls, minorities such as
indigenous children and children with disabilities.

To that end, New Zealand fully endorses the
recommendations made a short time ago by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. Given the
time constraints, I will not repeat those points except to
say that New Zealand welcomes the addition of a new
educational and medical trigger. We support
strengthened sanctions and other targeted measures to
punish and deter persistent perpetrators. And we urge
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
more effectively to follow-up on its recommendations.
I will expand, ifI can, on just three points.

First, the Council can better target persistent
perpetrators. As well as asking the Secretary-General
again to list persistent perpetrators in his annual report,
the Council could designate child-protection criteria in
the mandates of the relevant sanctions committees and
request child-protection expertise in its expert groups.
The Council could also seek the advice of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General more often
and more systematically emphasize the cross-cutting
nature of this issue by including concerns about
children in its reports.

Secondly, more effective action can be taken to
ensure the implementation of the Council's resolutions
and conclusions. The Working Group could, for
example, use the full range of tools at its disposal, as
well as emergency meetings, to respond to crisis
situations and to follow up on its recommendations.
Child protection provisions could be more
systematically included in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

It is not just the Security Council, however, that
must act to protect children. Member States and the
various United Nations organs also have a vital role to
play. We urge those countries concerned, for example,
to allow United Nations country teams to contact
non-State actors so that they can prepare action plans
and carry out other protection measures. We ask the
Council to take a more active role to ensure that
context.

Those are just a few steps that could be taken to
protect children affected by conflict even more. There
are others. It is to the Council's credit that its actions
over the past decade have improved the lives of
hundreds of thousands of children. But hundreds of
thousands are still affected. It is our collective duty to
take bold and effective action to protect them all. That
duty is one for each and every one of us.

