The President (interpretation from French): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Council, to extend deep sympathy to the Government and
the people of China for the great loss of life and property
suffered as a result of the recent floods in China.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) (S/1996/503)

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Malawi, Mozambique, Portugal, Tunisia, South Africa, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carneiro
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Amorim (Brazil),
Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Rubadiri
(Malawi), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Jele (South Africa), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Mapuranga
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), document
S/1996/503. Members of the Council also have before
them document S/ 1996/536, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1996/494, which contains the
text of a note verbale dated 26 June 1996 from the
Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a letter
dated 17 June 1996 from the President of the Republic of
Angola addressed to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker is the Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of Angola, His Excellency General Higino
Carneiro, whom I welcome and on whom I now call.


