Mr. Valdes (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), I would like to speak
briefly to thank all speakers for their statements; they
have been most helpful in enriching our vision of the
determination of the Security Council and the
international community with respect to our task in
Haiti. I would like especially to thank everyone for the
very generous - and undeserved - words addressed
to me personally. I shall take them as an expression of
trust in the United Nations Mission, in the soldiers and
the police officers who are helping support the
restoration of security in Haiti, and in the United
Nations officials who, on a daily basis, provide support
to Haitian society in so many different areas to bring
about development and reconciliation.

Throughout today's statements, I could note that
delegations spoke of the priority that MINUSTAH
attaches - and must attach - to the disarmament of
all illegal groups within Haitian society that continue
to possess weapons. I noted also that delegations
underscored the need for Haitians to begin a process of
national dialogue and reconciliation, as well as the
need for the United Nations Mission to provide Haitian
society with technical and political support to ensure
that the dialogue yields positive results for the
elections that will take place this year and for the
improved governance that will be required to establish
a democratic, legitimate Government in early 2006.

I have already had an opportunity to tell you, my
dear friend Rafael Bielsa, how much I value this
meeting, as well as Argentina's decision to convene
this open Security Council debate to discuss the
situation in Haiti. This meeting is being held at a time
when the United Nations Mission, with the support of
the Transitional Government of Haiti and the growing
participation of Haitian society, has effectively halted
the disintegration of that society and its spiral towards
the abyss. We now need to climb back up the slope. To
do so we need to promote a process of reconciliation
and dialogue among Haitians, strengthen institutions,
fine tune the work of the police and, as has often been
said at this meeting, maintain the international
community's economic support for projects that will
have a positive impact on the quality of life of the
Haitian people in the coming months and throughout
the year. This meeting once again confirms that the
main contribution of the Organization in support of
developing countries experiencing internal
disintegration depends on ongoing work and support
and on the ability to reassure such countries that they
themselves have the capacity to extricate themselves
from their predicament, given that there is international
support for them.

