Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President,
Ghana too joins other speakers in commending you for
your initiative to hold this Council debate so soon after
the conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Given the prominent role played by your
country in the discussions leading to the Conference
and during the Conference itself, the decision to make
this a priority issue for consideration by the Council so
early in Colombia's presidency is an eloquent
reflection of your country's keen desire to bring about
the eradication of this menace, and of its commitment
to that goal. We are confident that this debate will
enhance consideration of the outcome of the
Conference later this year by the General Assembly,
which mandated it.

Allow me also to congratulate the Secretary-
General and the Department for Disarmament Affairs
on their supportive role in ensuring the successful
conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and the adoption of a realistic Programme
of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate that
phenomenon. Despite its deficiencies, the Programme
of Action sets out in a comprehensive manner not only
measures to be implemented at the national, regional
and global levels to manage and control the illicit
proliferation of small arms, but also options for dealing
with problems associated with the trend. Since the
Security Council is charged primarily with the
maintenance of international peace and security, it
should play a role that focuses on the following aspects
of the Programme of Action.

The first of these is lessons learned. There is no
doubt that the early integration of former combatants
into mainstream civilian life is a critical element that
promotes reconciliation and prevents the recurrence of
conflict. My delegation feels that the Security Council
can contribute to that process through the inclusion,
where applicable, of relevant provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
in the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping
operations. Such mandates must be broad enough and
sufficiently well resourced to enable missions to
execute the critical DDR components of their
operations. The new logic should be one that calls for
emphasis on preventing a former combatant from
taking up his or her gun because of a failed
demobilization and reintegration effort. The Council
must be seen to be working to make that thinking a
reality.

Secondly, ensuring the effective implementation
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council is one sure
way of curbing the supply of small arms and light
weapons to conflict areas, particularly to non-State
actors. We know that such embargoes have in the past
been broken with impunity by arms brokers often
acting with the connivance of State actors. We would
like to see the Council demonstrate greater cohesion,
vigilance and decisiveness in monitoring, exposing and
censuring breaches of its embargoes once such conduct
is exposed.

The third aspect is the strengthening of regional
and subregional mechanisms. The Council's
recognition of the complementary role of regional and
subregional mechanisms in the maintenance of global
peace and security has been evident in its many reports
reviewing the progress of various peacekeeping
missions. Yet the lack of resources and appropriate
technology to make it possible to consolidate initiatives
at those levels to encourage activities such as
intelligence sharing, transparency, cross-border
weapons collection programmes and the coordination
of national armaments regulations has hindered the
further development and consolidation of existing
mechanisms, such as arms moratoriums.

The Council's support and initiative in the
establishment of funds, such as the Small Arms Fund,
which could support regional initiatives, as envisaged
in the Programme of Action, would go a long way
towards helping strengthen those mechanisms at the
regional and subregional levels.

The fourth aspect relates to follow-up
mechanisms. The Programme of Action highlights the
promotion of conflict prevention mechanisms as one
measure for curbing the need or demand for small arms
and light weapons. The Council's involvement, through
the use of its good offices to encourage affected States
to solicit assistance from other States and from
regional and international organizations in the pursuit
of negotiated solutions to conflicts, would be pivotal in
helping to avert conflict.

The delegations of Member States, particularly
those from Africa, demonstrated the necessary political
will and flexibility that ensured a successful outcome
of the Conference two weeks ago.

Following the Conference, the Council can
facilitate the process for the development of an
international instrument on small arms by also
exhibiting the necessary cooperative support in
promoting initiatives such as workshops in various
regions and subregions on the small arms issue that
would serve as a platform on which to launch the
process. The Council, acting in this way, can justify its
efforts to participate and contribute in this area.

