Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, and the Foreign Ministers of
Serbia and Kosovo for their statements.

During the period under review, we have registered
positive developments in the Belgrade/Pristina
dialogue, facilitated by the European Union. These
include the positive steps taken by both parties to
reduce tensions and normalize the relationship between
them, such as the interpretation of agreements between
them on integrated border management and regional
cooperation.

In this regard, a particular mention should be made
of the role of the European Union. The reconfiguration
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the extension of the Mission's
mandate until June 2014 are a clear acknowledgement
of its contribution and efforts in the Kosovo context. At
the same time, the relative calm in Kosovo, particularly
in the north, is noteworthy and requires the further
encouragement and support of the international
community.

This must not, however, draw our attention away
from the serious obstacles to freedom of movement that
still persist. Incidents associated with the limitation of
free movement and the overall activity of UNMIK and
EULEX in the north of the country continue to be of
particular concern, and Portugal calls upon the parties
to cooperate constructively to facilitate movement in
the north.

On a different note, albeit one that is as important
to the future of Kosovo as any of the previous ones, I
would like to underline two issues that are central to
coexistence and reconciliation between Kosovo Serbs
and Albanians. The first pertains to religious and
cultural heritage. Portugal deeply regrets and condemns
the recurrent attempts to damage religious, historical
and cultural heritage in Kosovo. Echoing the words of
the Secretary-General,

"promotion of this valuable cultural and spiritual
heritage on the basis ofethnic and religious tolerance
remains central to achieving peace and a prosperous
future for Kosovo" (5/2012/818, para. 42).

It is incumbent on Kosovo's authorities to protect such
heritage, and we are encouraged by the celebration
without incident of Orthodox religious festivities in
Kosovo.

The second point is about the right of return. The
relevance of the work being undertaken by various
entities, most notably the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, regarding the return
of refugees and displaced persons to their homes in
Kosovo should be highlighted. Much has been done,
and what has been achieved must be applauded and
duly supported. Nevertheless, an immense task is still
ahead of us. The perception of a peaceful and secure
environment for returnees in Kosovo will be decisive
to the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia, as well as a gauge of the progress achieved by
the Kosovo authorities, not only in the area of security
or economic development, but also in terms of the rule
of law and human rights.

That leads me to my final point, which is the recent
activity of EULEX, and particularly that of the Special
Investigative Task Force. Portugal commends the
efforts already undertaken by EULEX, and welcomes in
particular the most recent efforts of the lead prosecutor
and head of the Special Investigative Task Force.
Portugal takes note of the reported level of willingness
to cooperate on the participation of all quarters
contacted so far by the lead prosecutor, including the
willingness to cooperate shown by the Government of
Montenegro, as well as that of other countries of the
region, which, we are sure, would contribute to an
adequate investigation on the horrifying allegations
contained in the Marty report and to any concrete and
credible action that it may require in terms of countering
impunity and promoting justice and peace.

These are noble and fundamental goals that my
country considers essential to pursue, not only in
Kosovo but also in the wider Balkan region as a whole.

