Mr. Hyseni: I would like to make a brief
explanation. Kosovo is composed of the ethnic groups
that make it up. Regardless of whether one is Albanian,
Serb, Turk, Bosnian or Egyptian, we sometimes refer
to them as Kosovars. This refers to the name of the
land, of the country, not by the name of the ethnic
group. So there is nothing wrong with referring to a
Kosovo citizen as a Kosovar. I do not see anything
wrong in that. Otherwise, speaking along ethnic lines,
Kosovo is composed of the ethnic groups that we all
know.

The community service centre is not Pristina's
office. It is an office of the Republic of Kosovo in
Bosniak Mahalla that has been opened after profound
deliberations and profound assessments of need to offer
citizens in the North the services they need. Again, I can
assure the Council that the opening of this community
service centre is directed against nobody; it is aimed at
serving every single citizen in that part of Kosovo.

We have heard again about terror on Friday. What
we saw on Friday was an isolated criminal act that
occurred amidst a protest rally - an apparently quite
violent protest rally - with, evidently, a number of
well-armed protesters. That is what the investigation
will show at the end of the day. But let us wait for the
conclusion of the investigation.

This violent protest rally was organized to further
the aim of undermining any positive process in that
part of Kosovo. I have to emphasize once again that,
unfortunately, it was organized with the backing and
support of the authorities in Belgrade, who offer
overwhelming support for the hardliners in the North
of Kosovo.

Serbia is welcome to work with us as two
sovereign and neighbouring States. I am certain that
the day will come when the two countries will work
together for the benefit of peace in the Western
Balkans and for the benefit of the European perspective
of all seven countries of the Western Balkans. I am not
certain when that will occur, but I am also very
confident that the day will come when the Republic of
Serbia will have an embassy in Kosovo.

I do not expect that to happen tomorrow or the
day after tomorrow. But I am confident that the day
will come that it will happen. There is no other way
forward but by mutual recognition - if not official,
formal recognition now, at least practical recognition
that Kosovo does exist; and that roughly 2.5 million
Kosovars - we will take a census soon and see how
many we are - of Albanian, Serb, Turk, Bosnian and
Egyptian ethnicity, and so on and so forth, do exist in
our country, just as they do in Serbia with its
honourable citizenry in Serbia.

Therefore, I am not willing to talk about history.
The Council can rest assured that many in Kosovo like
to refer to history in order to not forget what happened,
so that the future is not a repetition of the past.
Otherwise, we are not willing to refer to history
because we have suffered so much, and everybody who
has paid close attention to the history of our part of the
world is aware of the immense suffering of the
Albanian population there in the first place.

The former Yugoslavia is gone for good, and not
because of us. If it had depended on us, it might still be
there. It is gone because of the efforts of the Republic
of Serbia to put everyone else under its domination -
all its constituent units, and Kosovo was a constituent
unit of the Federation - with the right of veto at the
federal level. Whatever the Council hears these days
about how it is only the Republic of Serbia that still
cherishes the values of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
can assure it that that is not true.

In conclusion, that is why I call on all members
of the Security Council to exercise their influence so
that Kosovo receives further recognition as an
independent and sovereign State. By recognizing
Kosovo, in the long run the Council will help to
establish peace, safety and security throughout the
Western Balkans.

