Mr. Shen (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of all,
I would like to thank the President for arranging
today's public meeting to consider the question of
Kosovo, of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and I would like to thank Mr. Kouchner, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed briefing. Mr. Kouchner, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the international security force (KFOR) have done
a great amount of work under very difficult
circumstances. We would like to commend them for
their efforts. The Chinese delegation supports their
efforts towards the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

A year ago, on 10 June, NATO stopped its
bombing against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999)
here which authorized the dispatching of a civilian and
military presence to Kosovo. The Chinese abstained on
that resolution. The events of the past year have proved
that the reservations and worries of the Chinese
delegation were not unfounded.

The situation of Kosovo is critical today. Kosovo
Serbs have suspended their participation in the Joint
Interim Administrative Structure in a gesture of
protest. During the one year anniversary today, we are
not in a mood to celebrate. We are of the View that it is
a time for in-depth reflection. The Security Council has
the political responsibility and moral obligation to face
this reality and it should seriously seek solutions to the
serious problems faced by Kosovo. Otherwise, the
credibility of the United Nations will continue to be
impaired.

Firstly, the international presence in Kosovo must
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. UNMIK must
respect the laws of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
It should seek the cooperation and participation of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Resolution 1244
(1999) has clear provisions with regard to the status of
Kosovo, and among the members of the Security
Council, no country recognizes or supports the
independence of Kosovo. Therefore, the work of
UNMIK, the general direction of UNMIK, is very
clear. However, what worries us is that this
commitment still remains an oral commitment; it has
not been implemented in our actual work. At present,
some of the administrative measures adopted in
Kosovo have impaired the sovereignty of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and this has created a false
impression that Kosovo is moving toward
independence. I would like to emphasize here that any
attempt to lead Kosovo to independence is dangerous
and illegal. It would deprive the Balkan region of
permanent peace. The ultimate victims would be the
peoples of the countries of the Balkan region. UNMIK
cannot afford to make the slightest mistake on this very
important policy issue.

Secondly, we are very concerned with the
security of the Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo.
Yesterday a delegation of Kosovar Serbs gave us a
briefing that left us in a state of shock, despair and
disappointment. Three days ago, on 6 June, there was
another hand-grenade explosion in a supermarket in
Gracanica. We understand that UNMIK and KFOR
have made tremendous efforts. However, despite the
efforts by KFOR, with its 10,000 well-equipped
soldiers, and those of UNMIK, with its thousands of
soldiers, incidents of persecution attacks against Serbs
have continued to take place. Do we not think that this
fact deserves our in-depth reflection? This is something
that the Security Council cannot and should not shy
away from.

We firmly oppose any form of "ethnic cleansing".
The flagrant violations of basic human rights in
Kosovo, no matter where they take place or which
ethnic group is targeted, cannot be accepted by the
international community. All human rights violations
are crimes, and these crimes, be they major or minor,
cannot be tolerated. In the same vein, it is irresponsible
to use past events as excuses to explain away today's
critical situation.

We are concerned as to how KFOR and UNMIK
are going to turn the situation around. What also causes
us particular concern is the fact that a large number of
non-Kosovar Albanians have entered Kosovo, which
will change its demographic composition. Since
ancient times, people of different ethnic groups have
coexisted in Kosovo, and its multinational character
must be respected. Kosovo should be a place where
people of different nationalities can coexist peacefully.
This should also be UNMIK's goal.

We find regrettable the uncontrolled entry of
large numbers of people into Kosovo. Furthermore,
many Serbs have been prohibited from returning to
their homeland. We hope that this situation can be
redressed.

Finally, I should like to point out that we have
always advocated equality, unity, harmonious
coexistence and common development for the people
of countries with a multinational character. We are
against any prejudice and oppression based on race. We
are opposed also to any effort to create ethnic division
or sabotage national unity.

The Kosovo problem can be resolved only within
the framework of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
through substantial autonomy and a good ethnic policy
that guarantees the rights and interests of all ethnic
groups.

Achieving autonomy should be done by way of
negotiations and solutions acceptable to both sides.
Only in this way will it be possible to restore national
harmony, which the Balkan region once enjoyed, and
enable it to achieve genuine and lasting peace and
prosperity.

