Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Honore, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her efforts and her
briefing, which has enabled us to better understand
the political, economic and security situation in
Haiti and the activities carried out by United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). At the
core of the Mission, there are police staff from Senegal,
a sign - as if there were a need for one - of Senegal's
commitment to its brother nation and the attention that
we pay to the ongoing situation there.

We have followed developments in Haiti with
great concern, following the announcement that the
date for the presidential elections that were originally
scheduled for 27 December 2015 with the departure
of President Martelly remains undetermined. For
that reason, we welcome the agreement concluded on
5 February 2016, which enabled Haiti to overcome the
unprecedented political situation of having a vacancy
in the Presidency and established a road map seeking to
ensure institutional continuity. My delegation therefore
calls on all political actors in Haiti to work to ensure
that the transition process takes place peaceably, and
we call on the interim President, Mr. Privert, to take
all measures, within the framework of that process, to
break the current impasse in which the country finds
itself. On that account, it is fitting to commend the
efforts that he has carried out to nominate an interim
Prime Minister, put in place a 15-member cabinet and
revive the Provisional Electoral Council.

In order to hasten the implementation of measures
that could lead to the return of constitutional order, we
call on the National Assembly to fully carry out its role
in the implementation of the agreement of 5 February
by proceeding without further delay on the vote for
Prime Minister, in order to facilitate the conclusion
of the electoral process. The successful outcome of
a transparent and credible electoral process seems
to us to be the only way of ensuring the sustainable
restoration of the unity and stability of the country.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/225)
mentions, the security situation in Haiti, though calm
at the moment, remains precarious. While the level of
crime remained generally at the same level as during
the periods covered in the two previous reports of the
Secretary-General, it is nevertheless troubling that
there is a greater number of homicides, which reached
567 for the period from 1 September 2015 to 1 March
2016. The number of reported cases of rape, which
reached 218, is just as troubling.

My delegation welcomes the commendable efforts
carried out by the Haitian National Police to confront
the security situation. We particularly welcome the
support and training that MINUSTAH brings to the
National Police. MINUSTAH must nonetheless further
bolster its work to promote stability in the country, in
particular by supporting the ongoing political process
and strengthening institutions and the rule of law,
with a particular focus on promoting and protecting
human rights.

Mydelegationechoesthe Secretary-General's appeal
to States for contributions to humanitarian assistance.
We note with concern the increasing difficulties
encountered by the United Nations in supporting the
activities of the Haitian authorities. That is especially
worrisome because, as we all know, the country finds
itself in economic difficulties characterized by low
growth and decreasing investment. The country also
continues to be exposed to such crises as drought, lack
of safe drinking water, poor infrastructure, health care
and sanitation, and endemic diarrhoea.

In conclusion, my delegation commends the progress
made by MINUSTAH and offers its thanks and support
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, Ms. Honore, as she carries out her
work. My delegation eagerly looks forward to receiving
the Secretary-General's recommendations on the future
of the Mission before the expiration of its mandate
in October.

