Mr. Lamek (France): I would like to thank
President Agius, President Joensen, President Meron
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
briefings.
France once again thanks, and reiterates its support
for, all the staff of the Tribunals for the work carried
out in order to successfully conduct the Tribunals'
judicial proceedings. We recognize the importance
of mobilizing everyone to meet the timetables set by
the Security Council. The International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) branches of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals are well under way in the transition so that the
work ofjustice can be pursued and brought to completion.
In that regard, we welcome the comprehensive review
of the temporary Mechanism's report currently being
undertaken by the Council. We encourage, as we did
with the French initiative in favour of an external
audit of the functioning of the International Criminal
Court endorsed at the recent meeting of States parties
to the Rome Statute, the continuing and deepening of
this approach with respect to all international criminal
courts.

In the context of completion strategy, France
attaches great importance to the Tribunals continuing
to render justice in full compliance with the procedural
safeguards and with respect for the diversity of legal
systems. While there are many reasons for the delay
with respect to the deadlines set by resolution 1966
(2010), this delay makes it all the more critical that
greater attention be paid to the efficiency in the work
and the use of allocated resources. The credibility of
international criminal justice as a whole depends on
it. With these two goals in mind, France reaffirms
today that it might support the extension of the current
mandates beyond 31 December 2015.

Today's debate should be an opportunity for the
Council to welcome the significant work conducted
by the Tribunals to combat impunity, promote
reconciliation and identify the work that States must now
undertake so that the effor to render justice continues
to move forward in the long term. Immediately after
the genocide in Rwanda, and in the 21 years since then,
the ICTR has been at the forefront of the global fight
against impunity by prosecuting those most responsible
for the most serious crimes committed in 1994.

The Tribunal's legacy provides the basis for a
new era in international criminal justice. The closing
ceremony, held on 1 December in Arusha, set the stage
for recalling the importance of the work of the ICTR,
the first international criminal tribunal on African
soil and the first jurisdiction to interpret concept of
genocide established by the 1948 Convention; it has
placedjustice at the heart of national reconciliation and
reconstruction.

France continues its support for the ICTR and
the Mechanism, including in apprehending fugitives
subject to arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal.
France recalls the obligation of all States to cooperate
with the Tribunal and the Mechanism in that regard. In
addition, I would to note that the two cases transferred
by the ICTR to French jurisdiction - concerning
Mr. Bucyibaruta and Mr. Munyeshyaka - are being
taken up with due diligence and all the rigour required.

This year we commemorated the twenty-second
anniversary of the founding of the ICTY. The Tribunal,
guarantor of the right to truth, the fight against impunity
and the duty to remember, was a major player in the
momentum of reconciliation at the regional level. It is
now up to the States concerned to continue building the
rule of law with full respect for the independence of the
judiciary. The adjudication of so-called intermediary
criminals should remain a national priority and be the
subject of cooperation and enhanced regional support.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda constitute a major step in the fight against
impunity. While the ICTR will conclude its work
on 31 December and that the ICTY is pursuing its
completion strategy, it is time for us to appreciate the
Tribunals' jurisprudential achievements in addition to
their work in doing justice, which we must strive to
keep alive from both a cultural memory and academic
standpoint. It is also necessary to maintain vigilance at
all times in the protection of witnesses and to give due
attention to the rights of Victims.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Chile, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and his entire team.
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
International Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat for their efforts to implement the
transition plan set forth in resolutions 1966 (2010) and
2193 (2014).

