Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union, which
will be delivered later by the Irish Presidency.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/l2l7), and we also welcome this debate on a
subject that has quite a peculiar relationship to
international peace and security because small arms,
unlike weapons of mass destruction, are mainly held by
private individuals, and yet they kill more human
beings than any other type of weapon.

There are two key areas where small arms and
light weapons have played a prominent role in past
deliberations of the Security Council: the disarmament
of ex-combatants as part of peacekeeping missions and
the imposition of arms embargoes. Perhaps less
obvious, but of equal importance for the work of the
Council, may be a third area: the prevention of armed
conflict through disarmament measures. Let me briefly
touch on these three areas.

As a consequence of the increasing complexity of
peacekeeping, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants has become a
standard element in almost every peacekeeping
mandate the Council has issued in the past few years.
There are various approaches to the disarmament of ex-
combatants. One approach has been to offer payments
for giving up weapons. Such an approach may work in
limited cases where there is no likelihood of renewed
weapons purchases. Another probably more sustainable
approach would be to provide incentives that are more
in line with the goal of transforming combatants'
military life into civilian life. This can be done by
exchanging weapons for development or by providing
ex-combatants with opportunities to earn their
livelihood through community-related work. Therefore,
ways and means to create work for ex-combatants need
to be found. This is a top priority in peacekeeping in
order to keep ex-combatants away from arms.

Furthermore, we also need to focus on arms
stocks, be they of weapons collected from ex-
combatants or of weapons held in army depots. Stock-
taking, guarding depots and, if necessary, destruction
of weapons are essential pre-conditions for successful
peacekeeping. The Council must consider this
whenever it is working on a mandate for a
peacekeeping operation.

Guarding and possibly reducing existing stocks,
however, is but one side of the coin. These measures
will remain of little effect unless the influx of new
weapons is prevented. The Council therefore must
continue to intensify its arms embargo policy when it is
preparing mandates for peace operations.

However, embargoes serve their purpose only if
everyone observes them meticulously. Effective
measures must be taken in the field to control possible
points of entry for weapons shipments. Peacekeeping
units may play an important role in this context.
Member States that might be countries of origin or
transfer of weapons shipments must be aware of their
responsibility under international law to guarantee
arms embargoes through measures to control and, if
necessary, interdict arms shipments by non-State
actors. When monitoring the effectiveness of arms
embargoes, the Council has to observe all segments of
illicit arms shipments, notjust the receiving end.

Efforts are underway in the General Assembly to
work out an international instrument on marking and
tracing small arms, which will be extremely useful in
monitoring illicit arms flows. Germany applies strict
national standards on licensing small arms transactions
and transfers and has a transparent reporting policy for
such licenses. Germany therefore intends to actively
support the work of the open-ended working group on
marking and tracing, which is about to convene. The
Council will no doubt profit from such an instrument,
which will facilitate the implementation of arms
embargoes. Likewise, efforts to find ways to regulate
arms brokerage, which has the full support of Germany,
should be continued and intensified. Internationally
approved standards on brokerage would also work as a
useful tool towards more effective arms embargoes.

In line with the increased awareness for the need
of the prevention of armed conflicts, which the Council
acknowledged in resolution 1366 (2001), I would like
to recall the importance of two elements: first, the
elimination of surplus weapons stocks; and secondly,
strict governmental control over licit weapons. These
are first and foremost these are the responsibility of
Member States themselves. Regional organizations
may also play an important supportive role. The
Programme of Action on Small Arms, mapped out at
the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, provides excellent guidance in this respect,
and numerous organizations, including the United
Nations Development Programme, national aid
organizations and non-governmental organizations are
prepared to provide know-how and funds for this
purpose. The Group of Interested States in Practical
Disarmament Measures, chaired by Germany, tries to
make its own modest contribution towards that end.

If there are clear indications of massive arms
flows into regions with heightened political tensions,
the Council, acting under its mandate to secure
international peace, should carefully scrutinize the
situation and take the necessary action. The imposition
of an arms embargo sooner, rather than later, might
help to keep things under control. Likewise, the
Council may want to consider the freezing of funds
used by non-State actors to acquire small arms in large
quantities. In any case, preventing uncontrolled flows
of small weapons into areas of tension is one of the
most important tools of conflict-prevention, of de-
escalation and of post-conflict peace-building.
