Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and their Prosecutors for their
inclusive briefings.

Lebanon appreciates the efforts made by the
leaders of the International Tribunals to implement the
completion strategies for their work as soon as
possible. We take stock of the progress that has been
made throughout all phases of the trials. We understand
the difficulties that the Presidents of both Tribunals
have not been able to overcome. These difficulties have
made it impossible for the Tribunals to complete their
work within the given deadlines, due above all to staff
attrition. Staff attrition has had a negative impact on
the capacity of the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates.
Lebanon thus reaffirms the need for the Security
Council to adopt necessary measures to enable the
Tribunals to complete their work as soon as possible
without sacrificing the judicial requirements. We call
for a transfer of a greater number of cases to national
jurisdictions that meet the necessary conditions for
holding just and fair trials. That in turn would ease the
workload of the ICTR and the ICTY and would help
expedite the implementation of the strategy.

Lebanon welcomes the cooperation demonstrated
by the majority of States with the two International
Tribunals, above all by the States of the former
Yugoslavia and the countries neighbouring Rwanda.
We call on those countries to extend their full
cooperation. The role played by those States is
essential in locating individuals who are at large,
leading to their arrest and extradition. Those States can
also provide information and evidentiary
documentation, making it possible to reach the truth to
ensure that justice is done.

Furthermore, Lebanon appreciates the efforts
made by the Informal Working Group on the
International Tribunals under the chairmanship of
Austria. Here we commend the Permanent
Representative of Austria and his team for their good
management of the Group's work.

Lebanon hopes that the residual mechanism will
be established, as that will complete the work of the
two Tribunals. That mechanism will guarantee the
protection of witnesses, the arrest of fugitives and the
preservation of the archives of the proceedings, which
constitute a valuable reference framework for
international criminal law.

The establishment of two International Tribunals
expresses our rejection of the killing of innocents, of
impunity and of subversive actions. We believe that the
Tribunals' success in achieving the anticipated goals is
the keystone for the protection of civilians, as it will
bring perpetrators to justice and ensure the rule of law,
at both the national and international levels.

That is therefore a mandatory right of passage to
turn a painful page in the history of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, to bring about solid national
reconciliation, to maintain stability and deter future
criminals, to render justice to the victims and to ease
the suffering of their close family members. Lebanon
supports all initiatives and endeavours to ensure that
justice is done.

