China supports Russia's initiative of convening this Security Council ministerial meeting on the Gulf region and is pleased to see Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov presiding over it. I listened attentively to the remarks by Secretary-General Guterres and wish to express my appreciation for his contribution. The Gulf region is a focal point of the world's attention. The ongoing tensions in the region are taking a toll on peace and security in the region and beyond. China hopes that this ministerial meeting will provide a new opportunity to ease the situation and bring new prospects of peace and tranquillity in the region. All Security Council members and countries of the region should truly focus on the theme of the maintenance of international peace and security with good faith and goodwill. They should seriously examine the root causes of tensions, work hard to find the key to the door leading to peace and be more responsive to the expectations of the international community and in particular the people in the region. With that in mind, I should like to share with the Council some of my views. First, it is vital to uphold the rule of law to jointly build peace in the Gulf. When addressing the flashpoints in the region, it is key to follow the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and abide by the basic norms governing international relations, including respect for sovereignty and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is equally vital to oppose unilateral sanctions, denounce the imposition of pressure by force and reject double standards in selective application of international law. The United Nations should be allowed to carry out good offices fully to encourage dialogue, and mediation efforts by the Gulf Cooperation Council and other regional organizations should be supported. All parties should earnestly implement the relevant Security Council resolutions and fulfil their international obligations. Secondly, it is key to uphold good-neighbourliness to jointly realize security in the Gulf. The Gulf is the common home of all countries and ethnic groups in the region. Because no country can choose its neighbours, seeking harmonious coexistence is the only right option. The Arabs, the Persians and other splendid civilizations, as well as other ethnic groups, all have a long history, and. importantly, the great wisdom to resolve problems. The parties need to seek common ground while recognizing their differences, rise above the differences in their systems and set aside disputes between religious sects. They should, through dialogue and consultation, seek to balance the pursuit of interests by various ethnic groups, religions and countries so as to create conditions for security in the region. Thirdly, it is imperative to uphold fairness and justice to jointly ensure stability in the Gulf. The Gulf region belongs to Gulf countries, and the local people are the true masters of the region. On family matters of Gulf States, non-regional countries may offer constructive help, but should not overstep, much less manoeuvre for selfish gains. They should bear in mind the overall interests of peace and stability across the region, abandon the practice of pitting one side against another, take an impartial and balanced position, sincerely promote peace and dialogue and help stabilize the situation on the ground. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is raging around the globe, it is crucial to step up cooperation with Gulf States to beat the virus, promote economic recovery, improve people's well-being and consolidate the foundation for stability in the region. The Iranian nuclear issue is a key factor in the dynamics of the Gulf region. We have noted that, despite the groundless suppressing and threatening, the great majority of Security Council members remain committed to an objective and fair position, firmly uphold the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) and resolutely safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the Council and the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. The first phase of the implementation of the resolution was completed on 18 October. We hope relevant parties will continue to take a responsible approach so that any future action will facilitate the implementation, help address the concerns of different parties and contribute to peace in the region. China attaches great importance to the legitimate security concerns of the Arab States in the Gulf region. As such, China has proposed to establish, while upholding the JCPOA, a platform for multilateral dialogue for the Gulf region, where parties can discuss current regional security issues and manage crises through collective consultation. Such a platform will help dispel misgivings in implementing the JCPOA, lend impetus to de-escalation and contribute to shaping new consensus on maintaining peace and stability in the region. It will be a platform of equality and openness. We suggest all parties follow the principle of mutual respect, mutual understanding and mutual accommodation, join the dialogue process and address respective concerns through consultation on equal footing. While the JCPOA signatories and the Gulf States are natural participants in the dialogue, countries outside the region with legitimate concerns may also positively contribute to viable solutions and security and stability in the region. It will be a platform of action. We suggest all parties follow the principles of reciprocity, taking synchronized steps and working in the same direction. Parties need to jointly take confidence-building measures and show goodwill to gradually nurture greater confidence in negotiations. As early steps, parties may first commit to ceasing hostilities and not resorting to military means for settling differences, thereby moving towards the shared goal of maintaining peace and stability in the region. The Security Council should support and help such conducive actions by all parties. It will be a platform of continued advancement. We suggest all parties follow the principle of taking on easier tasks first and seeking incremental progress. Parties may start from specific issues where they can easily find converging interests, and initiate dialogue on energy, shipping, trade and other relatively less sensitive areas. When more consensus has been reached, the dialogue agenda may be gradually adjusted in the light of the changing situation to cover sensitive areas of regional security. The Security Council may endorse the outcome of the dialogue in a timely manner, encourage sustainable progress in the dialogue and ensure the irreversibility of its outcome. China is flexible with respect to the ways to implement the initiative. It can start from track 1, and then move on to track 1.5 and track 2. China is also ready to seek greater synergy between our initiative and similar ideas and proposals by Russia and other countries. Dialogue will not be smooth sailing, and neither will it reach its goal overnight. Yet no matter how long the journey might be, step by step, we will eventually reach the destination. The first courageous step, even a small one, by the parties concerned will be one giant step towards peace. China is always a good friend and partner of the Gulf States. Over the years, China has taken an active part in regional affairs and committed to easing the situation. We have been deepening mutually beneficial cooperation with the Gulf States and helping consolidate the foundation for development and stability in the region. China has also been working actively with regional countries to fight COVID-19, and will provide vaccines, once they have been developed and deployed, to the Gulf States as needed. We will work with all countries in the Gulf region and with the international community to contribute more to regional security and stability. Together, we can build the Gulf region into an oasis of security.
