Ms. Tan (Singapore): We thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Chairs of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their briefings.

We commend Australia for convening this timely
open debate. Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
established a solid foundation for an international
counter-terrorismframeworkfordealingwiththelslamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra
Front, and today's debate is a useful opportunity for the
international community to continue developing that
framework. Singapore was a sponsor of resolution 2178
(2014), which deals with halting the international flow
of terrorist fighters.

We condemn the atrocities committed by ISIL
and Al-Nusra against innocent civilians, Muslims
and non-Muslims alike, in the strongest possible
terms. Singapore remains committed to supporting
international counter-terrorism efforts. We will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and
international partners to curb material and financial
support for terrorist organizations.

Singapore is an international hub and a multireligious
society with a sizeable Muslim community. Extremist
groups such as ISIL infect vulnerable individuals with
their ideology. Battle-hardened returnees may carry out
attacks at home, exacerbating the threat from existing
terrorist networks in our region such as Jemaah
Islamiyah. Self-radicalization and spontaneous acts of
terror are also major concerns given the prevalence of
information and communications technology and social
media platforms. In this regard, approximately 350
South-EastAsians, including a handful of Singaporeans,
are reportedly in Iraq and Syria. The long-term risk to
social harmony is also clear.

As part of our integrated counter-terrorism
approach, Singapore has joined other countries in
offering to contribute assets and personnel to Operation
Inherent Resolve, the United States-led multinational
coalition to combat ISIL. These include liaison and
planning officers, a KC-l35R tanker aircraft for air-to-
air refuelling and an imagery analysis team from the
Singapore Armed Forces. These assets have proved
effective in our previous contributions to multinational
coalition efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan.

However, we recognize that it is also critical to
counter the extremist ideology used to recruit foreign
terrorist fighters and which fuels the violent agenda of
groups such as ISIL. As such, Singapore's integrated
approach to combating terrorism also emphasizes
religious-based and community-led rehabilitation
efforts. Our religious and community leaders have
condemned Al-Qaida and ISIL unequivocally. The
Religious Rehabilitation Group, a voluntary group
formed by individual Islamic scholars and teachers
in Singapore, debunks misconceptions of extremist
ideology in one-on-one sessions, offers offenders robust
ideological counters to misinterpretations of religious
teaching, and rehabilitates them back into society.

As families play an important role in the
rehabilitation of offenders, other community
organizations also weigh in to provide support for their
families where necessary. Those organizations also
help secure jobs for offenders when they are released.

It is our view that the weed of violent extremism
can be blasted, but its ideological roots will continue
to proliferate unless extirpated. To this end, in 2015
Singapore will convene a symposium for East Asia
Summit countries to exchange views and share
best practices on de-radicalization and religious
rehabilitation. We hope that the symposium will be a
useful contribution to international efforts to tackle the
ideological roots of extremism and thereby weaken the
lure of terrorist groups such as ISIL.

