Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie for
his briefing today and for his diligent work on this
controversial issue.

We meet today to discuss the work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and the timely report of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. After weeks of
Russian disinformation and propaganda, the report
gives us yet another opportunity to focus on facts. The
independent and impartial reporting we have heard
today is essential to prevent the kind of distortions that
may lead to further instability in an already combustible
situation, a situation that continues to grow more
dangerous every day.

Today's remarks by the representative of the Russian
Federation, in which the independent report provided
by the United Nations was disparaged - indeed,
slandered as biased and unfounded - is deeply
worrying. If we do not like the message, the Russian
strategy appears to be, metaphorically, shoot the
messenger. Even if those attacks are attacks on the
entire international community, which asks the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide
independent reporting, we urge the United Nations to
continue to provide independent reporting and not to
be deterred by slander and intimidation being practiced
by those who do not like facts that have proven
inconvenient and truths that credibly repute Russia's
false and self-justifying claims.

Let us be clear: the actions the world witnessed
in Crimea and the denials of Russian involvement in
the lead up to its illegal annexation and occupation
are repeating themselves in eastern Ukraine. Again, a
region has been transformed almost overnight from a
state of relative calm to manufactured unrest. Over the
last several days, heavily armed pro-Russian separatists
have seized the city administration, police stations and
other Government buildings in 11 cities in Donetsk
oblast. Every major city in the region has at least one
building under occupation. It is clear that those actions
were not a set of spontaneous events or home-grown,
but rather a well-orchestrated professional campaign of
incitement, separatism and sabotage of the Ukrainian
State. And there is substantial evidence of involvement
from Russia, which is now diverting attention from its
own actions, its own territorial expansion, its own fear-
mongering, by trying to change the subject. Well, it will
not work.

The contrast between the actions of the Ukrainian
Government and those of the Russian troops could not
be starker. Ukrainian security forces have responded
more carefully and in more measured ways to
provocations in the east that would be difficult for any
of us to accept in our own countries. The Ukrainian
Government has repeatedly sought to negotiate with
the armed groups that have seized public buildings
and established unauthorized road blocks in eastern
Ukraine, in an effort to resolve the situation peacefully
through dialogue. Ukrainian officials have offered
amnesty. We appreciate the Government's statements
that any actions it undertakes will be gradual and
responsible. Contrary to the conspiracy theories put
forth by the Russian representative today, we continue
to call for restraint, privately and publicly. Obviously,
the best way to de-escalate the situation is for the armed
militants to leave the buildings that they have seized.

While the report speaks to an earlier period in the
crisis, it is important to note that even several weeks
ago the monitoring mission had already received
allegations that some ofthe people stoking unrest in the
region were not Ukrainian citizens, but in fact agitators
coming from the Russian Federation. Obviously, it is
a critical question whether Russia is continuing its
policy of seeking to destabilize and ultimately annex
land from its neighbour. For purposes of establishing
the truth, it is essential that the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission go forward with its work
and that it have full access to every part of the country,
including Crimea.

The United States commends the Ukraine
Government for facilitating the mission's activities
and for supporting the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe's (OSCE) ongoing efforts to
monitor every aspect of the scheduled 25 May elections.

Now let us consider some of the truths set forth
in the High Commissioner's report. From December
2013 until February 2014, the Berkut special police and
other elements of the federal security apparatus used
excessive force against anti-Government protesters.
That deadly violence did not end until former President
Yanukovych abandoned his office and fled the country.
Since late February when the new Government assumed
office, evidence of human rights abuses has decreased
dramatically, except in Crimea, where Russian policies
threaten the rights of Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars and
other minority groups. Let me emphasize that according
to the new independent report, the only region of
Ukraine that has suffered a rapid deterioration in human
rights is the part over which the Government in Kyiv
has least control. In Crimea, where the role of Russian
authorities is as profound as it is illegal, journalists
and human rights defenders have faced harassment
and torture, censorship is common and the presence of
paramilitary and soldiers "widely believed to be from
the Russian Federation" has sharply inhibited freedom
of expression. The report raises valid concerns about
the introduction of Russian citizenship in a region that
does not belong to Russia and about discrimination
against Ukrainian citizens inside their own country
and a plethora of practical issues related to property
ownership, pensions, wages, health care, labour rights,
education and access to justice.

The new report also examines the allegation
repeated over and over again by Russian officials
that there have been systematic attacks against ethnic
Russians in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine and that
Jewish communities have also come under threat. The
reality is that there have been a few isolated incidents
against individual members belonging to minority
groups, and we should and do condemn those incidents.
But the report makes clear that those incidents were
neither widespread nor a reflection of Government
policy. On the contrary, the report presents vivid
evidence that the Ukraine Government has sought
actively to safeguard the rights of all citizens within its
jurisdiction.

It is revealing that while Russia has sought to deny
the realities cited in the United Nations latest report,
the leaders of Ukraine are making a good-faith effort
to implement its recommendations. Among other
initiatives, they are moving ahead with constitutional
reform, plans to decentralize power, preparations for
the election and initiatives to curb the corruption that
flourished so blatantly under the former President.
Overall, the new Government has acted with tremendous
restraint under extraordinarily difficult conditions.
There will always be more to do, but the allegation that
the Government is primarily to blame for the present
tensions is completely baseless.

Before moving to my conclusion, I want to draw on
the even-handed recommendations in the United Nations
human rights report in order to show that the charges
against the United Nations are inaccurate. Among
the report's recommendations to the Government of
Ukraine are the following: ensure accountability for
all human rights violations during the unrest, ensure
inclusivity and equal participation in public affairs
and political life, prevent media manipulation, combat
intolerance and extremism and implement measures
to eradicate corruption. The recommendations to the
authorities in Crimea include: actively resolve cases of
missing persons, take all measures needed to protect the
rights of persons affected by the changing institutional
and legal framework, including citizenship, disarm
and disband paramilitary units and investigate hate
speech and media manipulation. Those are not the
recommendations of a biased report.

The release of the human rights monitoring report
should remind us all of our responsibilities. The
Government of Ukraine has a responsibility to continue
its reform initiatives and to ensure inclusivity and
respect for the human rights of all groups. The people of
Ukraine have a duty to cooperate with their Government
and fellow citizens in seeking to resolve disputes
through peaceful means. The Russian Federation has an
obligation to fulfil its commitments under international
law, to respect the rights and the territorial sovereignty
of Ukraine and to back its professed desire for stability
with actions designed to achieve that goal, instead of its
opposite. The Russian Federation must move its troops
back from the border region, withdraw its forces from
Crimea and cease all efforts to destabilize Ukraine.

The international community has a responsibility to
support the people of Ukraine in their desire to build a
strong and united country with a robust democracy and
effective national and regional institutions. We have
a collective responsibility as well to do all we can to
prevent further bloodshed and to find a peaceful andjust
conclusion to what has been a tragic and unnecessary
crisis. Tomorrow in Geneva, senior representatives from
Ukraine, Russia, the European Union and the United
States are scheduled to meet to discuss de-escalation,
demobilization, support for elections and constitutional
reform. My Government looks forward to participating
in that meeting as an opportunity to resolve the crisis
through diplomacy before it is too late.
