Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation joins other Council members
in expressing our sincere congratulations to you, Sir, as
you assume the presidency. We would also like to
reiterate our appreciation and congratulations to the
Permanent Representative of Romania, the previous
President, for the work he accomplished.

We would particularly like to thank Mr. Annabi
for his introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General (8/2004/613) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome the recent appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, whom we have known for many years, since
he held the high post of Assistant High Commissioner
for Refugees. We know well the many personal
qualities he brings to the task at hand. Spain will
cooperate fully with him in the fulfilment of his
functions at the head of UNMIK. I would like to pay
tribute to the work carried out by the former Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, and by Mr. Brayshaw,

We welcome the Minister of Public
Administration and Local Self-Government of Serbia,
Mr. Zoran Loncar.

Spain also associates itself with the statement that
will later be made by the Permanent Representative of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
much still remains to be done to repair the physical and
psychological damage that resulted from the violence
that took place in March. A number of positive steps
have been taken, such as the beginning of the
rebuilding of homes and schools, and the commitment
to this that is reflected in the joint declaration that
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders signed on
14 July. However, the representatives of the people of
Kosovo still need to demonstrate, through concrete
actions, their genuine commitment to creating a truly
multi-ethnic and democratic society in which the rights
of all will be respected. The leaders of the Albanian
community have a particular responsibility to redress
the situation created in March so that the 2,400 people
who had to flee the violence can return to their homes
as soon as possible. Moreover, they must create the
conditions necessary for the sustainable return of the
very large numbers of displaced persons, mostly
Kosovo Serbs, who have not yet returned.
Unfortunately, we note that today minorities do not
enjoy real freedom of movement and that their security
conditions and access to public services are fragile, to
say the least. We reaffirm the appeal that we made on
11 May in this Chamber (see S/PV.4967), that all those
responsible for inter-ethnic violence be brought to trial
and sentenced, and we welcome the first steps made in
this direction.
We are, however, concerned that UNMIK's
efforts to create a multi-ethnic justice system that is
accessible to all communities have been seriously
undermined by the violent events of March. Likewise,
it is disquieting to note that the Kosovo media, with
certain honourable exceptions, have not yet begun to
apply the principles of tolerance, impartiality and
veracity set out in the implementation plan.

The working group on local Government,
established in line with the 30 April presidential
statement of the Council (S/PRST/2004/l3) so as to
make local Government more effective by devolving
powers to local authorities, has come up with a number
of interesting recommendations for the reform of
municipal administration in the territory of Kosovo.
This municipal reform proposal, for which the main
frame of reference is the European Charter of Local
Self-Government, envisages a fundamental
contribution to establishing and building genuinely
democratic institutions, which, let us not forget, is one
of the standards for Kosovo. We believe that the
recommendations of the working group deserve to be
put into effect.

At the same time, the Provisional Institutions
need to implement all the priority steps established in
the revised Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan. If
this is done properly, it will undoubtedly bring about
tangible changes that will benefit the entire population.
In this regard, we hope that the next report of the
Secretary-General will include a detailed assessment of
what has been accomplished in standards
implementation, as called for by the Council in
December 2003 (see S/PRST/2003/26) and in April
2004 (see S/PRST/2004/l3).

However, attempts such as that by the Kosovo
Assembly on 8 July to go beyond the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework are unacceptable and counterproductive.
We reaffirm the validity of the principle of "standards
before status" and recall that there is still a long way to
go to achieve this. For its part, the Kosovo Serb
community cannot remain on the sidelines of political
life in Kosovo and should get involved in its
development by participating in it in a more active
fashion, including, of course, in the upcoming elections
in October. For this purpose, all the necessary
conditions must be put in place. In addition, we feel it
is vital that direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade resume and be strengthened. Both parties
must make every effort in that direction, and the
working groups should begin meeting again.
In conclusion, Spain, which contributes to the
maintenance of security through its participation in
KFOR, will continue to support the commendable work
done by UNMIK. We once again appeal to the
Provisional Institutions and all competent actors to
work, within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999),
to establish a multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo, based
on the rule of law and integrated into Europe.

