Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Hans Corell for his briefing. I wish also to
thank the Russian Federation for its proposal to devote
today's meeting to consideration of the implementation
of resolution 1269 (1999), adopted more than a year
ago. That resolution unequivocally condemned all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable. Its adoption was the culmination of a
process of evolution in the treatment of terrorism by
the Security Council, which long refrained from
tackling the question of terrorist practices in an
appropriate manner. Early in the 1990s, as a result of
changes in the international situation, we saw the
adoption of the first decisions Viewing such practices
as a threat to international peace and security.

The adoption of resolution 1269 (1999) also
marked the conclusion of a process of clarifying the
Security Council's competence in this sphere. Above
and beyond the fact that these are unjustifiable crimes,
irrespective of their motivation, it is undeniable today
that certain terrorist acts pose a direct threat to
international peace and security, which means that the
Council may consider them and adopt measures on
them. The Security Council's adoption of such
measures, combined with the endeavours of other
United Nations organs in this field, contributes to the
Organization's fight against terrorism.

Argentina has always been well aware of the
urgent need for the Council to address this matter,
because my country was the victim of two grave
terrorist attacks, the first in 1992 against the Israeli
Embassy in Buenos Aires and the second in 1994
against my country's main Jewish organization, the
Asociacion Mutual Israelita Argentina. Speaking
before the Security Council, my delegation indicated
that it had turned to the Council after that attack,
although the Council agreed to consider it only in an
informal meeting. We said at the time that we were

S/PV.4242

 

convinced that the fight against terrorism had to be as
intense as the fight against other serious crimes; we
called for such an item to be included on the Council
agenda. We are therefore grateful to the Russian
Federation for its 1999 initiative and for its constant
concern with respect to dealing with this crime.

It is disturbing to note the increasingly close
relationship between terrorism and new forms of
organized crime, drug trafficking and other criminal
activities; this poses a growing threat to world peace
because it uses state-of-the-art technology and crosses
State borders to become a global problem. We welcome
the recent adoption of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its two protocols,
and look forward to the adoption of a third draft
protocol. Argentina worked actively for the adoption of
those instruments and expresses its great satisfaction at
this recent advance in the fight against international
organized crime.

The international community has responded
firmly to terrorism by formulating conventions to
prosecute and punish its specific manifestations. Those
instruments address the problem pragmatically and
effectively. We hope that it will very soon be possible
to overcome remaining difficulties in the negotiation of
a draft international convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, which was proposed by the
Russian Federation. We will lend our full support to the
achievement of a positive result. We urge all States to
accede to these conventions and to play an active part
in their implementation. We are also grateful to India
for introducing a draft comprehensive convention on
terrorism, which the General Assembly has begun to
study carefully; the advanced thinking behind it has
aroused great interest.

Terrorism is an unjustifiable crime. Some terrorist
acts indeed pose a threat to international peace and
security and therefore, in accordance with the Charter,
fall within the competence of the Security Council. My
country believes that the Council must continue to be
involved in addressing this problem by strengthening
the practical implementation of international law. We
reaffirm our gratitude for the convening of today's
meeting, and believe that, like last year's meeting, it
will reiterate the unambiguous political message that
we must send in respect of this crime.

