Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Foreign Minister
McCully, President of the Council, for convening of this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.

This quarterly debate is important in that it gives
us an opportunity to take stock of developments in the
Middle East peace process. More important, however, is
the response by the Security Council. We have seen that
the Council has at best been a standby witness to phases
of escalation and relative calm, which has become
characteristic of this unsettled issue. The effectiveness
of the Council has consequently been brought into
question. We join others in urging the Council to step
up its efforts and take the lead in resolving this problem.

India's deep association with and continuing
commitment to Palestine is rooted in our modern
history, which goes back to our own struggle for
independence. India's position on the issue of Palestine
has always been firm and clear. We reaffirm our support
for the cause of Palestine and our solidarity with the
Palestinian people for their struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine within
secure and recognized borders, side by side and at peace
with Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Apart from its political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to support its development
and nation-building efforts by consistently extending
technical and financial assistance. Earlier this
month, a new school for girls, the Jawaharlal Nehru
Secondary School for Girls, was inaugurated in Asera
Al-Shamalyeh. It is a part of India's larger capacity-
building initiatives in Palestine.

We contribute $1 million annually to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian
Refugees in the Near East. We pledged and contributed
$4 million in response to the National Early Recovery
and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza. We have undertaken
important bilateral development projects in health,
education, skills development and vocational training,
as well as providing budgetary support to the Palestinian
Government. We are also implementing development
projects in Palestine jointly with Brazil and South
Africa, within the framework of the India, Brazil and
South Africa group, and have pledged $1 million for
a new project to reconstruct the Atta Habib Medical
Centre in Gaza.

This debate is taking place a year after the
unfortunate escalation of the Gaza conflict. We are
particularly worried that since July 2014 there has been
a downward trend in the peace process, despite efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties, which
have remained inconclusive. Unilateral actions by the
parties are unfortunately moving them farther apart.
India remains firmly convinced that dialogue remains
the only viable solution that can effectively address
the issue. The imperative need is for restraint so as to
avoid provocation and unilateral actions and to enable
a return to the peace process. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process soon for a
comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian issue.

We express our deep concern about the activities of
outlaw, radicalized and extremist groups in the Middle
East region, especially in the northern parts of Iraq and
Syria, which are critically impacting peace and stability
in the region. The violence perpetrated against civilians,
especially against women and children, on the basis
of religion, ethnicity and sectarianism strikes at our
common humanity. All parties and stakeholders in the
region must undertake efforts to curb those dangerous
trends. We believe that the consolidation of political
processes and solutions, while building durable State
institutions, will be an effective way of addressing such
extremism and radicalism in the region.

We are also concerned at instances of the targeting
of United Nations peacekeepers in the region by outlaw
terrorist groups. The Security Council resolutions
that proscribe terrorist groups operating in the region
must be fully implemented. The early and effective
prosecution of such groups is essential. Only such
action endorsed by the Council will deter such groups
in other parts of the world from committing acts of
terror.

Mrs. Schwalger took the Chair.

With new flash points, such as in Yemen, the
Middle East region is becoming more volatile, and
the stability of the region is being threatened. Besides
having implications for peace and stability as well as for
the humanitarian situation, the conflicts also impose
serious economic costs on the region and the whole
world. Particularly with major shipping lines passing
through the Strait of Bab el-Mandeb, the situation
in Yemen has a considerable impact on the cost of
shipping, and in turn on regional and global trade, apart
from the pressing humanitarian situation and the loss of
lives we are witnessing. We therefore urge all parties in
Yemen to return to the negotiating table forthwith.

India welcomed the conclusion of the negotiations
on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the
Iran nuclear question on 14 July. Now the Security
Council has also endorsed the Plan of Action. India
has maintained that diplomatic dialogue is the only
effective way to resolve issues.

On Syria, we reiterate our support for a Syrian-led,
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis,
in alignment with the Geneva communique of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The humanitarian crisis arising
out of the situation has to be addressed effectively. It
is with that conviction that we pledged and contributed
$2 million to the United Nations Syrian humanitarian
assistance response plan in 2014, and pledged another
$2 million during the third International Humanitarian
Pledging Conference for Syria held in March in Kuwait.
We are also hopeful for and supportive of the efforts
made by the Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. de Mistura, aimed at carrying the political
process forward. We urge all parties to demonstrate the
requisite political will, exercise restraint and commit
to seeking common ground in accommodating their
differences.

