Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate your delegation,
Madam, on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency for the month of May. I also appreciate the
convening of this open debate.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
as a result of the illicit trade and irresponsible transfers
presents an enormous challenge to international peace
and security. Argentina believes that the international
community is duty-bound and has an inexorable
responsibility to step up efforts in order to eradicate this
proliferation through greater control and transparency
in the stockpiling of weapons and by strengthening
international cooperation through the exchange of
information, the establishment of confidence-building
measures and cooperation in order to strengthen the
capacities of States to establish effective arms control
and regulatory measures.

We know that throughout the world violent actions
in conflict and post-conflict situations is carried
out, for the most part, with conventional weapons, in
particular with small arms and light weapons, which
allow those who use them to drastically increase
their ability to project power. In those situations, the
proliferation of weapons has a devastating impact on
civilians, especially on women and children. In conflict
zones, the constant flow of weapons and ammunition
exacerbate violence, they generate flows of refugees
and prolong the duration of hostilities.

In addition, the stockpiling and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons have severe implications for
human development, sustainable economic growth and
peace,becausetheytearthe socialfabric ofcommunities,
divert investment away from infrastructure, health and
education, foster legal insecurity, increase crime and
generate a climate of political instability and impunity.
That is why small arms and light weapons are both
a symptom of insecurity and a factor that fuels that
insecurity.
The excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex),
Madam President, that your delegation drafted to guide
our statements during this debate notes that there are
approximately 900 million small arms in circulation
around the world. Of those weapons, a major part are
accounted for by illicit trade, a very lucrative business
that makes it possible, through the diversion of weapons,
for terrorist groups, rebels, pirates and other criminal
organizations to gain the capacity to exponentially
multiply their power.

That is why Argentina considers it a priority to
strengthen the existing mechanisms to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, such as the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The premise on which we base our position is
that the fight against the proliferation of, and the illicit
trafficking in, weapons depends as much on the policies
that countries are willing to adopt domestically, as on
the periodic review of the measures on export control
and the regulation and adequate controls at the regional
and international levels.

In that context, the effective implementation of
the sanctions imposed by the Council is essential.
The sanctions are not an end in themselves, but their
strict compliance by all Member States, in particular
countries that produce and export weapons, is an
essential factor to reduce the availability of weapons in
conflict zones.

As the Secretary-General recognizes in his report,

"If the weapons situation is not consistently dealt
with, exacerbation or relapse into renewed fighting
remains a paramount risk" (S/2015/289, summary).

A common denominator of all situations considered by
the Security Council is that the availability, ownership
and use of arms and ammunitions determine to a large
extent the dynamics of a crisis. A significant share
of small arms and light weapons available in conflict
zones do not come from illicit trade, but are rather the
result of legitimate transfers to countries in conflict or
to places where they could be used to commit violations
of international humanitarian law or of human rights.

Each authorized transfer of arms implies a huge
responsibility at the international level. That is why the
entry into force in December 2014 of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which covers small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition, will provide an essential additional
tool to reduce the availability of arms in areas of
conflict. States will have an obligation to evaluate the
impact of each transfer prior to authorizing it. Just as
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross reminded us when the Council considered
the same topic in September 2013 (see S/PV.7036),
at three of the International Conferences of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent held in the past 10 years,
the States parties to the Geneva Convention of 1949
acknowledged their obligation to uphold international
humanitarian law and to adopt appropriate measures
to control the availability of weapons. Both those
obligations remind us that it is easier to avoid the flow
ofweapons to conflict areas rather than to try to remedy
the devastating consequences of their irresponsible
transfer and illicit trafficking.

