Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to express my pleasure in seeing you, Sir, preside
over the Security Council this month. I would also like
to thank you for having convened this open debate,
which in the View of my delegation bears witness to the
importance the Council attaches to the fate of children
in armed conflict.

As was well noted by Ms. Radhika Coommaraswamy,
former Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, in the annual report
of 28 June to the Human Rights Council in Geneva,
thousands of children continue to be killed, mutilated
or abducted. They are subject to sexual violence or lack
access to humanitarian aid and health care in many
countries. In several countries, Ms. Coommaraswamy
said, they have even been used to commit suicide
bombings or have served as human shields.

After the democratic elections in 2006 and 2011,
the people of North and South Kivu had every reason
to hope for sustainable peace in that part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The success of the
joint military operations between the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
were instrumental in raising that hope. Progress has
been made in reducing threats to the security of the
people and in improving the Government's ability to
ensure that security. I commend the efforts made by the
Child Protection Section of MONUSCO for protecting
the rights of Congolese children.

Paragraphs 34, 35 and 36 ofthe Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/261) concern acts committed by the
FARDC in its former composition, which included
elements from the Congres national pour la defense du
peuple, which in 2012 became the March 23 Movement
(M-23) rebel group, under the leadership of Jean-Bosco
Ntaganda and Sultani Makenga. It is precisely due to the
M-23 that violence has spiked in North Kivu since rebels
who deserted the Congolese army in early April turned
their weapons against the same army. The basic reason
for this increase in violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the Congolese Government's
determination to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court to pursue perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, and in particular crimes
against children committed by gangs led by Jean-Bosco
Ntaganda, Sultani Makenga and others.

Along these lines, we would remind the Council that
the ongoing war in that area of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in and around the province
of North Kivu, has brought with it a new increase of
violence and other types of crime, whose main victims
are women and children. The most frequent violations,
usually perpetrated in complete impunity, are killings,
systematic rapes, abductions, sexual torture, illegal
arrests and detention, forced displacements and the
conscription of children, as well as extreme forms of
torture and cruelty.

Many of the Secretary-General's reports, including
that before the Council today, underscore serious
violations of human rights committed against children
in North Kivu by M-23 rebels, supported by Rwanda.
According to a report by Human Rights Watch issued
on 11 September, since June 2012 M-23 fighters
have killed in cold blood at least 15 civilians in the
areas under their control, sometimes because these
individuals were suspected to be hostile. They have
also raped at least 46 women and girls; the youngest
victims was eight years old.

There has been an enormous number of
displacements following the violence in North Kivu,
where children continue to be enlisted by the M-23 and
forced to work in the extraction of natural resources.
Other tactics, such as the destruction of agricultural
infrastructure, are used by various armed groups to
force local people to participate in the extraction of
natural resources. Children are also used in quarries to
break rocks for gravel. Once extracted, coltan, which
is used in electronics, the mineral emits high levels of
radioactivity that helps explain numerous respiratory
problems that are often deadly and to which children
who have broken and transported coltan rocks fall
Victim. Those who survive are also traumatized by
vandalism and barbarous acts committed by M-23
rebels. They are forced to watch, powerlessly, as their
families and friends are killed before their eyes. They
are reared in communities that have no familial or
societal structures, in camps for displaced persons, or
they live in the streets or other dangerous situations,
and actively serve these armed groups.

Thousands of child victims of the M-23 have
suffered terrible moral and bodily wounds. This
situation requires reparation to compensate for the
emotional damage these children suffer, including
depression, loss of self-esteem, stress, involuntary
abortions for young rape victims, infant mortality and
sexually transmitted diseases, among others. Here, I
am the voice of these children, whose families, often
in horrible economic situations, would want specific
reparations measures to be implemented. Reparations
should also cover the total damages inflicted on these
individuals. It could be in the form of restitution,
compensation, readaptation, and guarantees that such
crimes will not recur.

Displaced children have Virtually no access to
education, which makes them more vulnerable to being
recruited into armed groups. Here, as emphasized by
Ms. Florence Marshal, the spokesperson for the United
Nations country team during the assessment mission
of UNESCO for the school year 2012-2013, schooling
for almost 85,000 children in North Kivu has been
undermined this year by security issues linked to the
war. She indicated that school rooms in 258 schools
in the province are being used by displaced families,
preventing children from going to school. She noted that,
in some places, furniture for schools had disappeared
and that benches and desks had been used for firewood.
Many schools were unable to resume classes following
clashes with armed groups.

Given the scope of this challenge, the Congolese
Government and civil society have spared no effort
in tackling the situation. It must be noted that the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo has made significant
headway in combating sexual violence. Among
the many activities undertaken by the Government
to deal with the issue, I note that the law of 20 July
2006 contains significant innovations over the formal
Congolese penal code, as follows.

The defining age of Victims of sexual violence has
been raised from 14 to 18; in other words, an 18-year-
old girl is today considered to be a minor. Thus, any
sexual activity to which she may be subject without
her consent is a crime. These new provisions are a
true revolution in customs. Moreover, forced marriage,
forced prostitution, exploitation of children, sexual
slavery, zoophilia and genital mutilation are considered
to be crimes and the perpetrators can be subject to
severe punishments. The violation of a minor, for
example, leads to 10 to 20 years in prison, while sexual
violence is punishable by 1 to 12 years. The new law
on sexual violence, while retaining these infractions,
has also added 16 new ones, drawn from international
humanitarian law.

A new innovation in this law is the relevance of
a perpetrator occupying a post in Government. That
is, no one can claim immunity to escape justice if the
individual has perpetrated an act of sexual Violence.
The law also reaffirms that the situation of children
in armed conflict can only improve if all parties
to a conflict uphold their commitments and their
international obligations and, when necessary, are held
accountable for their behaviour.

Beyond the dismal situation of children in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there is reason to advocate for increased donor support
to establish programmes and policies that will improve
the safety and rights of all Congolese children. My
delegation therefore welcomes the commitment and
positive actions of the Secretary-General who, through
his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, has stressed the obligation to bring to justice
the perpetrators ofattacks against schools and hospitals.
The adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) and the first
verdict of the International Criminal Court in the case
of Thomas Lubanga, which defined the recruitment and
use of children as a war crime, provide a deterrent for
the perpetrators of Violations against children.

It should also be noted that, despite the progress
made, particularly with respect to the ratification
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol, the solutions envisioned are at risk
of remaining dead letter so long as the perpetrators
of the crimes involved continue to go unpunished. It
is important to encourage a process of reparation with
the goal of reinstating children's rights, as well as to
implement protective measures to prevent children
from being attached to armed forces and groups.

To conclude, my delegation is pleased that the
Office of the Special Representative has made the fight
against impunity for crimes committed during armed
conflicts one of its main priorities. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo assures the
Office of the Special Representative that it will fully
cooperate in implementing the action plan for children
that will be adopted by our country.

