Mr. Laclaustra (Spain)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of January. I also wish to associate my delegation fully
with the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

On 29 December 1996 the Government of Guatemala
and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca
(URNG) signed the Agreement on a Firm and Lasting
Peace, bringing an end to a brutal conflict and opening a
new page in the history of Guatemala. On that date the full
set of peace agreements entered into force, having been
concluded following a negotiation process in which the
parties, assisted by the valuable moderation of the United
Nations and the support of the Group of Friends,
demonstrated their firm commitment to peace.

The time has now come to implement the agreements
reached and to apply the will of the parties and the wish of
the entire people of Guatemala to lay the foundations for a
firm and lasting peace, which must be ensured through the
continued support of the international community, and of
the United Nations in particular.

The agreement on the definitive ceasefire, signed in
Oslo, is one of the pillars that will ensure the building of
peace in Guatemala through the verification of the
ceasefire, the separation of forces, disarmament and the
demobilization of the URNG combatants. The mechanism
for the verification of this agreement and for the other
agreements signed between the parties has been entrusted
to the United Nations.

In his report of 17 December 1996 and its addenda of
23 and 30 December, the Secretary-General underscores the
need to deploy United Nations military personnel through
the authorization of the Security Council of an additional
military component of 155 personnel for a period of three
months for the United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA).

The draft resolution before the Security Council,
sponsored by Spain together with the other members of the
Group of Friends, will authorize that deployment and will
make it possible for the achievements of the negotiating
process between the parties to begin to have concrete
results on the ground.

The Security Council, with the decision that it is
preparing to adopt today, must once again exercise the
primary responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security conferred upon its members by the United
Nations Charter. In this way, the presence of United
Nations military observers in Guatemala will make it
possible to verify the implementation of the agreement on
the definitive ceasefire and for Central America to
become a conflict-free region of true peace, freedom and
democracy.
My delegation wishes to stress Spain's readiness to
participate in the exercise of this collective responsibility
by making an important contribution of its own troops to
this military component of MINUGUA.

The firm commitment to the peace process that my
country has shared with the other members of the Group
of Friends remains fully intact in this new and hopeful
stage of reconciliation, reconstruction and development
that is beginning in a climate of peace, freedom and
democracy for the people of Guatemala. The participation
of the President of the Spanish Government, Jose Maria
Aznar, in the signature ceremony of the Agreement on a
Firm and Lasting Peace, and the bilateral cooperation that
my authorities have decided to increase considerably in
pursuit of our assistance to Guatemala, are solid evidence
of that commitment.

I wish to conclude by recalling that Madrid was host
to the signing, on 12 December 1996, of one of the
important agreements between the parties: that on the
basis for the reintegration of URNG into the political life
of the country. On that occasion, my country also
sponsored a forum for reflection on reinsertion and
demobilization in Guatemala, which made it possible to
put forward ideas and proposals to ensure that the
international community was in a position to meet the
requirements of the parties and the immediate needs for
the implementation of the peace accords in that crucial
aspect.

