Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Middle East and North Africa region is
still experiencing a systemic multilevel crisis. There
have been ongoing, bloodthirsty terrorist attacks and
other attacks, including the murder of the Russian
ambassador in Ankara, Mr. Karlov. There have been
explosions in Turkey and Egypt, and the tragedies in
Berlin and Jerusalem. They are all evidence that the
terrorist threat is global. That, once again, shows the need
for a consolidated effort on the part of the international
community to form a broad counter-terrorist front.
That has been called for time and again by the Russian
President, Vladimir Putin. Furthermore, there is a
need for measures to achieve a political settlement in
a number of conflicts, and for the re-establishment of
stability and a peaceful life in the region of the Middle
East and North Africa.

The situation on the Palestinian-Israeli track of
the Middle Eastern settlement remains tense and
explosive, as demonstrated by the periodic spikes in
violence, including the 8 January terrorist attack in
Jerusalem, in which four Israeli soldiers were killed,
and the numerous arrests of Palestinians and violations
of the ceasefire regime around Gaza. The Russian
position on a peace settlement in the Middle East was
and remains fundamental and consistent. We advocate
a comprehensive, fair and stable settlement on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We are convinced that the long-term
solution to the conflict should be sought through direct
negotiations between the parties to the conflict without
any preconditions.

The general position of the international community
has been stated repeatedly. Based on that consensus,
we voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016). We
believe that the resolution provides a consolidated
signal that unilateral efforts are unacceptable, whether
on the Israeli side or on the Palestinian side. It is also
unacceptable to second guess the conclusions that might
be reached in the peace negotiations, and it is important
to maintain the prospect of a two-State solution. In that
context, we note that the concluding statement of the
international ministerial conference on the Palestinian-
Israeli peace settlement in Paris rightly reproduced the
main provisions of the existing international legal basis
for conflict settlement and includes an encouragement
to the parties to the conflict to restate their commitment
to a two-State solution.

At the same time, we remain convinced that
today, as never before, the time is ripe for practical
measures to be taken to bring the peace process out of
its dangerous impasse. With that in mind, we continue
to work to renew direct political dialogue between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. We restate our readiness
to offer Moscow as a forum for that contact. I recall that
that meeting was supposed to take place in September
last year, and that the Palestinian party was ready
for it. Another priority for our work was and remains
facilitating intra-Palestinian reconciliation. A high-
level meeting of representatives of all of the main
Palestinian groups was recently held in Moscow.

We note the key importance of re-establishing the
political and geographical unity ofPalestine on the basis
of the political platforms of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative. If we
manage to solve the intra-Palestinian conflict, then
we have the preconditions for enabling the Palestinian
people to exercise their legal right to an independent
and viable State, existing in peace and security with
their neighbours.

The effective overcoming of intra-Palestinian
discord will also help to ease the situation in Gaza.
There, the humanitarian and socioeconomic situations
remain very difficult and, as a result, Palestinians are
increasingly reliant on the help of the international
community. We therefore welcome the work done by
United Nations agencies in that area, in particular the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Russian
Federation, for its part, has decided to earmark a
voluntary contribution of $2 million to the UNRWA
budget for 2017-2021.

With regard to settling the crises in Syria,
Iraq, Libya and Yemen, Russia has unswervingly
advocated that there is no alternative to a political
and diplomatic process based on inclusive national
dialogue. We continue to strive to support the political
process for resolving the conflict in Syria, while
expanding humanitarian access and the fight against
terrorism, as is stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015)
and the corresponding decisions of the International
Syria Support Group. We welcome the signing of an
agreement on 29 December on a ceasefire between the
Syrian Government and the main groups of the armed
opposition. That took place under the aegis of Russia
and Turkey. And naturally, the terrorists of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Nusrah were
excluded from that agreement. The ceasefire has been
imposed throughout most of the territory.

There are real hopes for the international conference
on a Syrian settlement to be held in Astana on 23 January,
and active preparation for it is under way. It is expected
that it will be attended by representatives of the Syrian
Government and of those armed opposition groups
that have signed the cessation of hostilities agreement
and support a political solution. We are planning the
conference as a concrete step in the implementation of
resolution 2336 (2016), which approved the December
agreements.

In its way, the conference in Kazakhstan represents
a bridge to the inclusive Geneva talks that Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, has scheduled for 8 February. We believe
that this resuscitation measure will help to revive
the abandoned intra-Syrian dialogue. The format for
Astana will involve the participation of United Nations
representatives, who could serve as moderators for
the contacts between the Syrian sides. In general, the
participation of outside invitees, in our View, should be
decided according to the tasks identified. Our Kazakh
colleagues, as hosts, will have a significant role to play.

We need the involvement of forces wielding
influence on the situation on the ground if we are
to create conditions conducive to strengthening the
ceasefire, and that subject will be at the centre of the
talks. It is likely that a number of other important
aspects, such as confidence-building measures,
improving humanitarian access and the components
of the political agenda, will also be discussed. We
are currently finalizing the organizational issues. We
hope that our international and regional partners will
support these efforts. New possibilities are opening up,
and and whatever happens, it is vital that we make the
most of them.

We hope that the forthcoming meeting in Astana
on Syria will enable us to strengthen the cessation of
hostilities and give powerful impetus to the process of
political settlement under United Nations auspices.

