Ms. Keita: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the latest developments
in Darfur. I will provide a brief update on the situation
on the ground and on the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to implement its mandate since the
publication of the latest report of the Secretary-General
of 27 October (S/20l7/907). I will also touch upon the
ongoing reconfiguration of UNAMID.

The political process aimed at reaching a
settlement to the conflict through negotiations with
the non-signatory parties to the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur remains at an impasse. At the same
time, armed clashes between the Government and
those non-signatory parties have subsided, without any
incidents during the reporting period. Meanwhile, the
Government has begun the next stage of its disarmament
campaign - the compulsory arms collection - in
most parts of Darfur, for which it reportedly deployed
approximately 10,000 Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
to Darfur.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
process has brought to the surface tensions involving
militia groups that are not part of Government forces.
Confrontations between Government forces and militias
were reported in Kass, South Darfur, and Kutum,
North Darfur, on 21 and 23 October, respectively.
On 10 November, Government forces supported by
Antonov aircraft clashed with the militia group allied
with Musa Hilal near Korma, North Darfur, resulting
in an unconfirmed number of casualties on both
sides. Government forces entered the Korma camp for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in their search of
the militias, but no one was found or arrested.

In Zalingei, Central Darfur, Government forces
initiated house-to-house searches for weapons. They
attempted to enter the UNICEF compound in search
of weapons on 5 November, and local authorities have
since been warned to avoid such incidents. In South
Darfur, following demonstrations and clashes in the
Kaima IDP camp, which resulted in the death of five
IDPs. On 22 September, RSF in more than 100 gun-
mounted and armoured vehicles blocked roads within
the camp and detained one of the IDPs briefly on
2 November. Local authorities subsequently claimed
that that operation was a reconnaissance mission and
not part of the disarmament campaign.

Intercommunal violence also persists, particularly
in connection with Arab nomadic herders, albeit with
less intensity than in previous years. The number of
intercommunal incidents has gradually decreased from
11 cases recorded from April to June as compared to
10 cases from June to August, and eight cases from
August to October. The total number of casualties
in 2017 thus far numbers 234, compared to nearly
2,000 in 2013. Nevertheless, there were two cases of
intercommunal clashes in West Darfur in October.
In one of the incidents, near Kulbus, on 17 October,
Zaghawa and Rezeigat herders clashed over livestock,
and eight Rezeigat and 15 Zaghawa were killed. In
South Darfur, armed members of the Salamat tribe
killed three Fallata, near Graida, on 24 October, and
Fallata and Fur returnees were once again attacked by
Arab nomads near Menawashei on 27 October, and five
of them were killed.

In Sortony, North Darfur, tensions involving
internally displaced persons, the Arab community, and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Popular Defence (SLA/PD)
continue. On 7 November, UNAMID prevented a group
of armed Arabs allegedly looking for their livestock

from entering the IDP site. During the encounter,
UNAMID observed armed SLA/PD elements assuming
offensive positions in the mountains surrounding
the camp. On 10 November, UNAMID once again
intercepted a group of Arab nomads firing randomly
in the outskirts of Sortony and claiming that their
livestock had been stolen by SLA/PD elements hiding
within the camp. They threatened to attack the IDP
camp unless SLA/PD withdrew from the site.

It is evident that Darfur today is different from what
it was like during UNAMID's initial deployment, given
the overall level of improvement in terms of security.
The armed groups have largely been defeated, and the
ferocity of intercommunal Violence has also decreased
over the past year. No new large-scale displacement has
taken place. However, those positive developments have
not resulted in the voluntary and sustainable return
of IDPs. Nearly one-third of the population in Darfur
remains displaced. That reflects anxiety over security,
uncertainty concerning the occupation of their land
and the lack of confidence regarding their present and
future prospects.

A key reason for that dilemma is the slow progress
that has been made in addressing critical issues for the
people of Darfur, such as land and other scarce-resource
management, accountability and security sector
reform. In that regard, the Government has been less
than proactive in the implementation of the outstanding
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The remaining commissions and the fund of the Doha
Document remain inoperative and lack clear political
guidance and funding from the Government, which is
hampering efforts to address root causes.

UNAMID continues to do its utmost in the
context of its fulfilling its mandate by working with
local authorities and communities to promote grass-
roots reconciliation and stabilization. In that context,
it is equally important to augment the capacity of the
United Nations country team to support longer-term
peacebuilding-oriented activities. UNAMID and the
country team have finalized the integrated strategic
framework for 2017-2019, which sets out common
priorities and the division of labour concerning three
main themes: the rule of law and human rights, durable
solutions, and peacebuilding for human security. The
Secretariat is working with UNAMID and the country
team to develop a joint financing strategy for the
implementation of the framework to ensure that the
drawdown of the peacekeeping mission is accompanied
by adequate transitional support.

With the closure of 11 team sites and the
accompanying reduction of military and police
personnel, the civilian staffing structure has been
reviewed and readjusted according to which the
Mission budget for 2017-2018 was revised. Regarding
the new two-pronged approach of UNAMID, the
Mission is devising State-focused stabilization plans
in cooperation with the United Nations country team,
which will focus UNAMID's activities addressing
the specific needs of the population in the five states.
The Jebel Marra task force will become operational
on 1 January, and its concept is being finalized at
the moment.

In that connection, I regret to report that the
allocation of land for a new team site in G010 remains
pending, despite the intensive engagement with
the Government in Central Darfur, Khartoum and
here in New York. As Council members are aware,
the establishment of a new team site in G010 for the
Jebel Marra task force is an essential component
underpinning the concept of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID, and goes hand in hand with its withdrawal
from the more stable parts of Darfur. Despite the efforts
of the Sudanese Government to combat criminality, the
arms collection campaign and the deployment of the
Rapid Support Forces will require careful management
in order to minimize security risks. A further escalation
of tensions relating to disarmament could also affect
the communal dynamics among the militias, their
communities and other competing groups on the ground.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is one of the
integral instruments for addressing such underlying
communal tensions and issues. Its full implementation
is an entry point for sustaining peace, as it touches
on the causes and consequences of the decades-long
conflict, including land, displacement and relationships
with nomadic herders, among other things.

The level of cooperation between UNAMID
and the Government of the Sudan has been positive
overall, although challenges remain in terms of access
restrictions and customs clearances at Port Sudan.
The Government's commitment to complying with the
status of forces agreement, which also applies to the
allocation of land for a new team site in G010, would
be greatly appreciated. In conclusion, I would like to
thank the Council for its continued support for the work
of UNAMID.

