The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like to acknowledge and welcome the presence
in the Council Chamber of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Her Excellency
Ms. Condoleezza Rice; the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, His
Excellency the Right Honourable Mr. David Miliband,
MP; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov; and the
Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, His
Excellency Mr. He Yafei.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Denmark, Egypt, Germany, Greece,
India, Japan, Liberia, Norway, Somalia, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey and Yemen, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jengeli
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Jama Jengeli, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 December 2008 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
2

of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya to the United Nations,
in which he requests that the Permanent Observer for
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 December 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, in which he
requests that the Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamamra.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/789, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Croatia, France,
Greece, Liberia, the Republic of Korea, Panama, Spain
and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.
08-65219
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1851 (2008).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


