Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting and for the important briefings oer. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Pramila Patten and Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka.

Just a few months after the signing ofthe revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its ratification by the
transitional national legislature, we await expectantly
the initial measures to carry out pre-transition tasks.
We deem positive the meetings held by the various
committees over the past two months, including that
of the National Pre-Transitional Committee and the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee, which
agreed on working modalities and the manner in which
pre-transition tasks will be carried out. We would also
highlight the joint visits of the South Sudan People's
Defence Forces and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition. We believe
that these are important steps in fostering the trust
needed to build sustainable peace in South Sudan.

Nevertheless, we must express our concern at
the fact that the ceasefire is not being fully respected
throughout the territory of South Sudan, especially in
Yei, Central Equatoria and the Wau triangle, in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal. We stress the importance of regional
forums for dialogue and the need for them to be
inclusive and impartial. We call on opposition groups to
participate in national dialogue, as true peace in South
Sudan will be possible only through political will and
inclusive dialogue involving all parties.

We support the call of the Secretary-General on the
leaders of South Sudan to establish transitional security
arrangements and to form the revitalized Government
of National Unity.

With regard to the formation of the Government,
we deplore and call for a review of the appointment of
Mr. Malek Reuben Riak as Deputy Minister of Defence,
as he is the subject of sanctions imposed by the Council
and must be accountable to justice for having armed
groups of young people involved in atrocity crimes.

Peru condemns most emphatically the countless
cases of sexual violence against women and girls in
South Sudan, as described for us by Ms. Patten. The
recent brutal attacks on more than 150 women and girls
in an area close to Bentiu, in the northern part of South
Sudan, cannot go unpunished. This is happening in
a context of ongoing violations of human rights. The
United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting on children in armed conflict documented 90
grave incidents, including recruitment, sexual Violence,
killings and mutilations.

For this reason, we believe that the visit of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict last
November was timely. We hope that it will contribute
to the South Sudanese authorities making progress
and drawing up a comprehensive action plan aimed at
putting an end to the grave Violations of human rights
taking place in that country. We also deplore the gravity
of the humanitarian situation and condemn the acts of
Violence committed against humanitarian workers and
their assets.

We were saddened by the deaths of three
humanitarian workers in September and October,
and call on the Government of South Sudan to make
every effort to put an end to the violence and restore
the dignity of women and girls, as well as punish those
responsible for these atrocity crimes. We are certain
that the setting up of a hybrid court will contribute to
peace and reconciliation. We also note with concern
violations of the sanctions imposed by the Council,
including the arms embargo imposed last July. We
call on the countries responsible for these violations,
as indicated by Ambassador Wronecka, to meet their
obligations.

We acknowledge the work done by the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, particularly the
positive results achieved by the mobile courts, which
will contribute to ensuring justice and security in
protection-of-civilians sites.

Lastly, I would highlight the work and the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the African Union. We reiterate the
importance of the Council remaining united in the
process of ensuring the support and political follow-
up necessary to continue making progress in the South
Sudanese peace process, as well as that of working
closely with the African Union and IGAD.

