Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): | am pleased to brief the Security Council on the most recent report (S/2020/951) of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. At this time of the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, allow me to again begin with a thought for the victims of that health crisis, in particular women and young people, who are paying a heavy price both in the region and elsewhere. As members may expect, throughout the past period the countries of the region have spared no effort in trying to contain the spread of the pandemic and to respond to its negative economic and social consequences. The Governments and the peoples of the region have continued to show resilience and determination in their fight against thisglobal crisis. May they find herein the expression of my wholehearted support. At the same time, I would like to acknowledge the commitment of the Governments of the region to continuing their efforts to improve political, economic and security cooperation, in line with the commitments under the Framework agreement and the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region. As I address the Council, the Chiefs of Staff of the armed forces of States members of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) are meeting in preparation for a meeting of the Defence Ministers to follow up on the implementation of the decisions taken by the Heads of State at the 2017 Brazzaville summit. The situation in the region over the past months has remained stable overall with encouraging progress despite the ongoing challenges. On the political front, I welcome the peaceful transfer of power in Burundi following the May general elections and the prospects for greater regional stability, as illustrated by the return of Burundian refugees from Rwanda and Tanzania, as well as the visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bujumbura on 4 and 5 October. I also welcome the organization, on 7 October, by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of a mini-summit gathering his Angolan, Ugandan and Rwandan counterparts to discuss important issues relating to security and economic cooperation. That initiative demonstrates the sustained commitment among leaders of the region towards joint efforts, which I hope it will be possible to strengthen during the upcoming meeting of Regional Oversight Mechanism for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. I also welcome the fact that the countries of the region are availing themselves of diplomatic means and regional mechanisms to resolve their differences peacefully, as seen in the resolution of the border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia. The commitment of Rwanda and Uganda to proceed in the process of normalizing their relations through the good offices of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo is another positive example. In terms of the security and humanitarian situations, the situation nevertheless continues to be cause for concern. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as recalled in the latest report by my colleague, Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) Leila Zerrougui, which is before the Council today, sporadic cross-border incidents and the activities of armed groups operating in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to cause of intolerable humanitarian suffering. The impunity enjoyed by those responsible for those crimes traumatizes the population and negatively affects relations between those countries. We must therefore step up our efforts to fight impunity. For my part, I intend to continue my advocacy among the countries of the region for them to strengthen their fight against impunity, in particular by effectively implementing the Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance. Let me to say something about the initiatives I have carried out since I last addressed the Council on 22 April, in particular on cooperation with the African Union and the ICGLR with a view to advancing the implementation of the Framework agreement centred around the five priorities that I had identified. With regard to the mobilization of the international community in favour of the countries of the region - my top priority - we asked the Peacebuilding Commission and international financial institutions to provide continuous support to the region, given the devastating consequences of the pandemic. While, to date, significant resources have been mobilized for the countries of the region, the International Monetary Fund considers them insufficient for launching an ambitious recovery. I reiterate the importance of greater support from international partners for countries in the region. We must seek to facilitate their access to options, such as financial relief, most applicable to their needs, including but not limited to debt relief and restructuring initiatives. Turning to support for dialogue efforts - my second priority - the fruitful consultations I had with the authorities of Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda, among others, gave me hope for improvement in good neighbourly relations and for regional stability. Regarding regional security cooperation, my Office remained in close contact with the ICGLR to identify avenues of action for increased support for the efforts of the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the ICGLR. We will also continue to work to promote non-military measures, such as strengthening disarmament, demobilization and_ reintegration programmes at the regional level. With regard to efforts to promote transparent and sustainable use of natural resources, my fourth priority, the preliminary results of a study commissioned by my Office have shown that, even in the midst of a pandemic, illicit trade in minerals in the region, unfortunately, continues unabated, primarily thanks to the strong price performance of gold, the safe haven par excellence during periods of uncertainty. With regard to my fifth priority, I note with satisfaction the decision of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to organize a virtual meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in order to overcome the constraints imposed by the pandemic. The Conference on Investment and Trade will be organized by the Rwandan authorities in 2021. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), I welcome the progress made in the Great Lakes region, whose countries are among the 25 nations with the highest rates of parliamentary representation of women in the world. However, conscious the remaining challenges and in the face of the devastating effects of the pandemic on women, my Office organized, on 28 July and 11 and 20 August, three round tables on women's private entrepreneurship, the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence, as well as women's political participation in the context of COVID-19. The conclusions of those consultations recommend the full integration of the women and peace and security agenda into peacebuilding and development efforts in the Great Lakes region, in particular through strengthened partnerships and effective engagement with women and young people. During my last visit, I referred to the steps taken for the development of the United Nations strategy for peace consolidation and conflict resolution and prevention in the Great Lakes region, at the request of the Secretary-General. I am pleased to inform the Council that, following an inclusive process and thanks to the valuable contributions from all countries and partners in the region, I submitted the strategy here at Headquarters yesterday for the attention of the Secretary-General. Subject to what action the Secretary-General may wish to take, I can already indicate that 10 priorities, structured around three pillars - namely, peace, security and justice; sustainable development and collective prosperity; and resilience to old and new challenges - emerged from the various consultations held. Those priorities aim to provide a comprehensive 10-year road map for United Nations action in the region focusing on a number of concrete priority actions, particularly in the areas of preventive diplomacy, security cooperation, development, the promotion of human rights and strengthening of the role of women and young people by the year 2023, marking the tenth anniversary of the Framework agreement. Of course, the efforts of the United Nations will be effective only if it wins the support of all, not only full ownership by the countries and organizations in the region but also continuous support from the international community. I therefore call for the Council's support in that regard. I would like to conclude, as always, on a hopeful note for a region that has come a long way. There is scope in the Great Lakes region for discreet and progressive diplomacy on certain sensitive issues harming regional relations. My discreet but committed action in support of the initiatives under way by the four countries of the region will continue. Moreover, I will continue working in close collaboration with MONUSCO, the _ Resident Coordinators of the United Nations system, as well as the co-guarantor institutions of the Framework agreement, to promote non-military measures within the fight against spoilers. High-level political buy-in and adequate resources are essential to improve the regional security environment. In that context, the holding of the next summit of the Regional Follow-up Mechanism will be crucial to secure political support at the highest level from the countries of the region. Finally, given the alarming economic impact of COVID-19, it will be just as important to step up efforts for dynamic economic cooperation around cross-border projects and the collective management of natural resources, focusing on a holistic approach, inclusive of all stakeholders and drawing strengthened regional mechanisms, in particular those of the ICGLR.Despite the remaining challenges, not least the pandemic, the people and the countries of the Great Lakes region continue to show great resilience and determination to move forward. I call on the Security Council to remain committed and sustain its support for the region.
