Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I shall be brief, for
two reasons: first, because there has already been a
chance for an initial discussion of the report of the
sanctions Committee, and, secondly, because one of the
important functions of this meeting is to allow Council
members to hear the views of neighbouring States
before the Council itself moves to take action on the
recommendations of the monitoring report.

What I have to say today will not be exhaustive,
but will, I hope, give Council members and others in
this room a good feel for the way in which the United
Kingdom is approaching the discussion on the report.

But first, I think that congratulations are due both
to Ambassador Valdivieso and to Ambassador
Menkerios for the excellent work they have done. It is
good to see Ambassador Menkerios around the Council
table again, albeit in a slightly different incarnation
from last time. It is very good to have him here.

We regard the Committee of Experts' report as a
very thorough, very inventive and very useful
document. We agree with most of the
recommendations, and in particular we agree with the
key recommendation that we should work towards
establishing a monitoring mechanism along the lines
the Panel recommended.

We also agree that there is benefit in having field
teams on the ground to support the efforts of the
neighbouring States. We welcome the commitment of
the neighbouring countries, as set out in the report, to
implement sanctions and cooperate with the monitoring
mechanism. I hope and believe that we will hear more
of that today.

The first step will have to be an evaluation of
what skills are required in each country - in other
words, how best the United Nations can help. It is also
important that the teams on the ground should have a
monitoring role in addition to an advisory role. This is
not just because this two-pronged approach accurately
reflects the main thrust of the problem; it is also
because it is one of the best ways, as we see it, to
achieve a truly cooperative effort, which, as a number
of speakers have already said, will be the key to
ensuring the success of this enterprise.

We have looked at the idea of having a central
headquarters in the light of the wider debate that is
going on on sanctions monitoring. As the Council is
aware, there are a number of proposals on the table for
establishing a centralized global monitoring
mechanism for sanctions. The establishment of a
monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan should not
preclude the development of such semi-permanent
global mechanisms encompassing all the monitoring
regimes.

We do, however, see benefit, in the Afghanistan
case, in setting up a light, flexible headquarters to
coordinate the work of the six teams and carry out
some of the centralized tasks, as described by the
Committee of Experts.

We believe that the team should be established
within, or closely related to, the existing sanctions
team of the Department of Political Affairs. That,
again, points to establishing it in New York. We hope
we can move as quickly as possible to establish the
monitoring mechanism. As the debate proceeds and as
the work continues on the details of establishing semi-
permanent global sanctions monitoring structures, we
will want to look at how the Afghanistan monitoring
mechanism and the other monitoring mechanisms can
be brought into such structures.

On funding, we are looking carefully at how this
can best be done. There are a number of bottom lines, I
think: to ensure that, whatever is done, the monitoring
mechanism is adequately and securely funded; to
ensure that it can be funded quickly; and to ensure that
we do not incur unnecessary expenditure. I have noted
in this context what Ambassador Hume has had to say
about the establishment of a trust fund.

I will leave it there. I hope my statement contains
the essence of the United Kingdom approach. We look
forward to hearing the views of others in this Chamber,
both members and non-members of the Council, and
we look forward to working in the Council to ensure
that the report is properly followed up.

