Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The Palestinian question is now at a very serious stage
when its negative effects may spread beyond the
occupied Palestinian territories. That is the aim of the
Israeli Government, which is attempting to propel the
Middle East into bloody chaos following the heinous
crimes committed by the Israeli occupation forces in
the Jenin camp in Nablus and in other occupied areas.
We have seen mass killings in cold blood, extrajudicial
executions, the destruction of homes on top of their
inhabitants, widespread arrests, robbery and looting,
and the systematic destruction of the infrastructure, the
superstructure and the foundations of the Palestinian
State, along with Israel's attempts to transform the
Palestinian areas into clusters of backward people,
stripped of their history, heritage and culture.

The Israeli Prime Minister, who has stated his
regret at not having killed Chairman Yasser Arafat
when Israeli forces stormed Lebanon in 1982, has also
stated his regret at having promised the President of the
United States not to kill the Palestinian President when
his forces stormed the Palestinian areas in 2002. That
very Prime Minister claims that the attack by Israeli
forces and the siege of the occupied Palestinian areas
are aimed at ending Palestinian resistance, which he
labelled as terrorism. Popular nationalist struggle is not
terrorism. It is indeed a right and a duty that has been
exercised by all States that have been colonized;
through their popular nationalist resistance they have
been able to liberate themselves from colonization and
to gain freedom and independence.

How can the Israeli Prime Minister continue to
seek to put an end to the Palestinian popular resistance,
when this has failed to achieve the security he has
promised? The only thing he has succeeded in doing is
spreading death and destruction, using State terrorism
as a means of terrorizing not only the Palestinians, but
also the Arabs, under the pretext of carrying out
preventive terrorism to stop the Palestinians from
undertaking guerrilla operations and from using
violence against the Israelis.
The Israeli Prime Minister has stopped at nothing
to close off the horizons of peace, beginning with his
storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, insisting on
expanding and increasing the number of Israeli
settlements, destroying homes and fields, preventing
Palestinians from working, laying siege to them and
causing hunger, arbitrary killing and physical
liquidation.

The Israeli Government has made a point of
destroying the very foundations of the Palestinian
State. It has destroyed the airport and the maritime port
in the Gaza Strip. It has closed off the safe passage that
links the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. It has
bombarded Palestinian television and broadcasting
stations. It has attacked the Palestinian ministries and
governmental departments, confiscating all information
and statistics. It has bombarded the power stations and
water pipes. It has refused to pay the Palestinians due
compensation to the tune of approximately $2 billion.

No sooner had the Israeli Prime Minister assumed
office than he began to implement his own personal
agenda, destroying the headquarters of the Palestinian
security forces, which he considered to be the very arm
of terrorism, and the Palestinian preventive forces,
killing or expelling many of their members. The
widespread destruction of the Palestinian refugee
camps and the massacres unleashed therein are
attempts to obviate the problem of the refugees in any
final settlement which may be reached through
negotiation.

How can shedding Palestinian blood and strewing
the streets with the bodies of Palestinian victims or
burying them in a cemetery they have called the
"enemy graveyard" put an end to violence or to
Palestinian resistance? Will the Palestinians be able to
forget their kin who have bled to death beneath the
rubble or others who have been buried alive? Did the
massacres of Deir Yassin and elsewhere persuade the
Palestinians to abandon their legitimate rights or to
surrender to the precepts of certain Israelis based on a
culture of murder, colonization, occupation and
expulsion? Did the massacres perpetrated by the Israeli
Prime Minister in Sabra and Shatila lead to the
submission of the Palestinians or their acceptance of
occupation and humiliation?

The horrible crimes of the Israeli occupation
forces, leaving Palestinian wounded to bleed to death,
not only are among the most horrendous and sadistic of
war crimes, but indeed represent a plan to humiliate the
Arabs and the Palestinians and to compel them to seek
vengeance in order to quash any idea or hope of peace
they may have entertained.

Israel's practices, heinous crimes and genuine
terrorism in the occupied Palestinian territories should
be condemned. They demonstrate to the entire world
that Israel's claim to want peace is false and that it
continues to flout its commitments. The Israeli
aggression has even targeted those who have sought
refuge in mosques, churches and refugee camps. It is
inspiring Palestinian youths to sacrifice their very lives
in defence of their shrines, their land and their dignity.
Israel is working not for the security and peace of its
citizens, but to consecrate its colonization and to
maintain its hold on the usurped Palestinian and Arab
territories. It is practising brazen official terrorism
before the entire international community.

If Israel's acts of aggression in Lebanon and
Tunisia and the Mossad operations against Palestinian
activists inside and outside the occupied territories do
not constitute terrorism, then what does? If such savage
Israeli practices against the Palestinian people are not
blatant violations of every covenant, rule and law, then
what is terrorism? If the siege of Palestinian cities and
towns, the arrest of the Palestinian leadership and the
attacks and massacres in the refugee camps are not
terrorism, then what is? Such Israeli practices should
be considered war crimes and crimes against humanity;
they fully justify the prosecution of their perpetrators.

Israel's non-compliance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1322
(2000), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002)
reflects its contempt for international legitimacy. It also
demonstrates its failure to heed the joint statement
made in Madrid on 10 April 2002 and to respect the
international community's appeals. This requires us to
pressure Israel to implement Security Council
resolutions, beginning with immediate withdrawal from
the occupied Palestinian territories and the lifting of
the siege of Chairman Arafat, the legitimate, elected
President of the Palestinian Authority.

Our delegation fully supports the statement made
by the Secretary-General concerning the need for the
international community to assume its responsibility to
halt the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East
and to protect the lives that are being destroyed every
day. We agree with him that the matter cannot be
addressed solely as a problem of security, and that any
political settlement must secure the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people and peace and
security for all the peoples and States of the region. We
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to send
international forces to the region to work with the
parties concerned to halt the spiral of violence, to
ensure Israel's withdrawal from the Palestinian
territories and to create the stable climate necessary for
resuming the negotiations and for achieving a just and
comprehensive political settlement.

In light of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's full
and consistent respect for a just and comprehensive
peace and for regional security and stability, Crown
Prince Abdullah, the son of King Fahd Bin Abdul-Aziz
Al Saud, submitted the peace initiative adopted at the
Arab summit, which made it a pan-Arab initiative. The
Governments of various States, with the exception of
the current Israeli Government, have welcomed the
initiative. The Security Council also welcomed it
because it is in keeping with international legitimacy
and represents a rational way to stop the daily
massacres in Palestinian territory and to rescue the
region from the spiral of violence. We look forward to
all the parties concerned adopting that worthy initiative
and respecting it with a view to ensuring peace,
security, stability, cooperation and prosperity for all.

