Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank
Ambassador Chowdhury, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee concerning Sierra Leone, for his
work and for the statement he made earlier. I am
grateful also for the presence of the members of the
Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone Diamonds and Arms,
and I thank them for producing such a worthwhile
report.

The Swedish Presidency of the European Union
will be making a statement later in this debate with
which Ireland fully associates itself.

The report of the Panel of Experts gives an
account of the reckless and illegal exploitation of a
precious natural resource belonging to the people of
Sierra Leone. The evidence before us in the report is
detailed, compelling and disturbing. There are
widespread violations of the Council's measures. Sierra
Leone's diamond resources are still subject to illegal
mining. These resources are converted into arms,
which are then used against Sierra Leoneans. The
report also speaks of overwhelming evidence of
Liberia's active support of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) in its campaign against the Government of
Sierra Leone, and of assistance from others both in the
region and elsewhere. The description of the role
played in the conflict by aircraft is salutary, while the
chicanery involved in aircraft registration merely
attests to the brazen resolve of those who profit so
hugely from the arms trade.

The Panel's recommendations are numerous and,
in places, far-reaching. Some of them will be easier to
implement and some will be more effective than others.
However, this should not cause us to shy away from
looking at the report in its totality as we consider the
next steps to be taken. In doing so, we should keep in
mind that concerted action needs to be taken both in
the region and in places far away from West Africa.

Ireland welcomes the introduction of a new
diamond certification system by the authorities in
Sierra Leone. It is a concrete measure to address the
problem of conflict and illicit diamonds. We note,
though, the Panel's comments on the certification
system's viability in the absence of similar controls in
neighbouring countries. The role of Sierra Leone's
neighbours is crucial in this regard. We are also
interested in the Panel's recommendation of an interim
certification scheme for all diamond-exporting
countries.

The problems relating to the origin of diamonds
are not restricted to the producing countries, however.
The case studies and the improbable trading statistics
revealed by the report show that the importing
countries, too, have issues to address. That is why we
support the Panel's recommendation of a global
certification scheme. We know that the "Kimberley
Process" is addressing this topic and we believe it
should work as quickly as possible towards this goal.
In this context, we welcome the workshop on the
envisaged certification scheme, which is to be held in
Namibia in March.

It would not be credible to address the report of
the panel without referring to the truly grave
allegations levelled at the Government of Liberia. The
report portrays the Liberian administration playing a
highly destabilizing and destructive role in the region.
Its multifaceted support for the RUF appears to be
strong and systematic. The role it plays in assisting the
supply of arms to the region is a part of this and the
ease with which aircraft appear to register under the
Liberian flag raises serious questions about its
licensing laws. The report provides further evidence
that Liberia is breaking Security Council embargoes
regarding the import of weapons into its own territory,
which is prohibited by resolution 788 (1992).

Members and non-members will be aware that the
Council is currently considering the introduction of a
draft resolution aimed at bringing an end to the
destabilizing activities of the Liberian Government.
This draft resolution picks up on many of the
recommendations contained in the report of the Panel.
Ireland has already announced its broad support for the
measures contained in the draft resolution. In the days,
ahead we will work to ensure that the Council can act
on these as quickly as possible. Ireland is also now
considering, together with the other members of the
Council, the establishment of a more permanent, broad-
reaching panel to monitor targeted sanctions and illegal
trafficking of high-value commodities in armed
conflicts, such as those measures now under
consideration in the Liberian context.

In resolution 1306 (2000), the adequacy of air
traffic control systems in the region was placed within
the remit of the Panel of Experts. The report shows that
the air traffic control system falls short of being
adequate, particularly given the deadly cargoes being
carried. There appears to be an almost seamless
relationship between poor air traffic control systems
and the importation of arms into the region.

Of course, it should be underlined that the
regional transgressors are not working in isolation. The
suppliers of arms and aircraft are from places far away
from West Africa. There is a responsibility on the
Governments in whose jurisdictions these people reside
and materials originate to vigorously monitor them.
The benefit of dealing with only part of the chain will
be increasingly limited and, in our view, ultimately
damaging to the credibility of the Council and the
United Nations.

The Panel makes a number of recommendations.
We strongly welcome increased collaboration between
the relevant actors and bodies such as the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the World Customs
Organization and Interpol. Some of the
recommendations will require the commitment of
considerable resources by the international community.
Some will also entail an increasingly active
relationship between the United Nations and other
agencies. The Council must therefore continue to act as
the driving force in efforts to bring peace to Sierra
Leone.

It is crucial, too, that national Governments play
a full role in preventing the behaviour detailed in the
report. The Governments in the region must redouble
efforts to bring peace to Sierra Leone. The best way
they can do so is to end the illegal trade in diamonds
and arms.

Some measures might be incremental in effect.
Nonetheless, we should not underestimate the deterring
impact that wider, unwelcome publicity might have on
the personalities involved or the practical and
psychological impact of measures to disrupt the flow of
arms and their carriers into Sierra Leone.

There has been a deterioration in the security of
the region. We are all conscious or the almost
unbearable pressures on Guinea arising from the
enormous numbers of refugees within its borders,
exacerbated in recent weeks by further RUF attacks.
That the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees was forced to search for
tens of thousands of missing refugees is a grotesque
example of the nature of the problem confronting us.
These events are directly linked to the illegal
trafficking of Sierra Leone diamonds.

The report of the Panel of Experts serves to
highlight the extent of the cynical exploitation centred
on Sierra Leone. We are witnessing the plundering of
one of the world's most underdeveloped countries by
an alliance of well-organized criminals. It is a
grotesque commentary that a resource which should be
a foundation stone for national development is being
used against the very people it should benefit.

The United Nations has been grappling with the
conflict in Sierra Leone for almost a decade. The
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, following on from the regional deployment of
forces of the Economic Community of West African
States, signalled an intensified effort to bring stability
to Sierra Leone and to the region. The establishment of
the Panel of Experts and today's consideration of its
report are further important steps in the search for
peace. It is vital that the Security Council reinforce its
efforts to bring peace and stability to Sierra Leone and
its neighbours by acting on the Panel's report.

