Mr. Longchamp (Haiti) (interpretation from French): The honour and responsibility of presiding over
the Security Council for the current month have been
vested in you, Sir, and in your country, Argentina. I am
very pleased to see you conducting the deliberations with
so much understanding and dedication. Your wealth of
diplomatic experience and your professional and human
qualities are tangible contributions to the success of the
Council's work.

The delegation of Haiti welcomes the opportunity
the draft resolution gives us both to express the support
of the Haitian Government for the text itself and to
demonstrate its support for the recommendations
contained in the report (S/1995/46) of the Secretary-
General, dated 17 January 1995, on the question
concerning Haiti.

On 31 July last year, the Security Council adopted
resolution 940 (1994), which authorized the creation of a

 

multinational force whose mandate it was to create
conditions for the implementation of the Governors Island
Agreement of 3 July 1993 - in particular, the creation of
an environment conducive to the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti. Today, we can say that such an
environment exists.

Since the peaceful deployment on 19 September 1994
of the Multinational Force, the Governors Island Agreement
has been progressively implemented. Those who usurped
political power have withdrawn; the legitimate authorities
have resumed their functions; constitutional order has been
re-established; and President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has
resumed his position as Head of State. Currently, an
electoral commission is preparing for the forthcoming
legislative and municipal elections.

The joint United Nations-Organization of American
States International Civilian Mission in Haiti, which has
resumed its activities in Haiti, has noted a considerable
improvement in the human rights situation. It recognizes
that the Haitians now enjoy their fundamental rights - in
particular the freedom of speech, freedom of association
and freedom of assembly. To help establish an atmosphere
of peace, since his return to the country on
15 October 1994 President Jean-Bertrand Aristide has
waged a tireless campaign to promote tolerance and
national reconciliation.

Accordingly, we have every reason for hope in Haiti.
The Haitian Government therefore wishes to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the Friends of the Secretary-General on the question of
Haiti, the States members of the Security Council, the
participants in the Multinational Force and the leadership of
the United States, whose commitment contributed to the
success of the Multinational Force in Haiti.

Nevertheless, the confidence of the Haitian people in
a better future is tempered by what they see as the possible
survival of the coup d 'e'tat regime; the activities of a
network of their former oppressors, including former
members of the Haitian armed forces, paramilitary groups,
such as the terrorist organization FRAPH, and the former
section heads and attaches; the widespread availability of
weapons accumulated during the three years after the coup;
and the inability of the Haitian judicial system to satisfy the
demands of the victims of the coup d 'etat.

The Haitian Government is aware that urgent measures
need to be taken to address this problem. Two commissions
have therefore been established to study the reform of the
armed forces of Haiti and the creation of a police force in
accordance with the provisions of our Constitution.
Reforms are under way in the judiciary. The Government
is waiting only for the United Nations Mission in Haiti to
be deployed in order to assist it in these tasks, as
promised under the Governors Island Agreement and
resolution 861 (1993) of 27 August 1993.

The Haitian delegation therefore sincerely hopes that
the Security Council will unanimously adopt the draft
resolution, as a sign of the continued support of the
international community for the democratization of
Haitian society.

On behalf of my Government, I wish to take this
opportunity to give a cordial welcome to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and to all the members of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti.

