Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Rio Group by the Ambassador of
Costa Rica.

I wish to begin by thanking Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing in his capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his
tireless efforts to maintain standing relations with
Member States and various bodies and forums on our
behalf. This is an invaluable task to which he has been
very dedicated.

Relations with regional organizations are a matter
of priority for the CTC. The exchange of experiences
that the Committee initiated with the Organization of
American States, among others, has allowed it to
familiarize itself with some of the activities being
undertaken at the hemispheric level and with the
instruments that have been adopted effectively to
counter terrorism. It is therefore necessary for the
Committee to strengthen its relations with such bodies,
as indicated in the briefing.

In the next phase, the Committee will have to
embrace a broader vision that encompasses existing
regional accords on counter-terrorism measures with a
View to ensuring regional security. Currently, national
reports are evaluated without being explicitly placed in
a regional context.

We believe that the CTC's competence allows and
requires it to utilize the instruments at its disposal,
such as the group of experts, the technical assistance
directory and the so-called trust fund, inter alia, so as
to maintain a fluid dialogue with regional
organizations. At the same time, it must establish
which of the counter-terrorism tools available to it are
being truly effective at the regional level and, thus,
having a national effect.

My delegation feels that this does not imply that
the CTC may interfere in the functions of regional
agencies, thereby weakening their autonomy and
independence. On the contrary, it strengthens links with
such organizations by sharing information, establishing
effective cooperative mechanisms and activities for
technical and financial assistance to counter terrorism,
adopting effective legal and governmental measures
and strengthening border controls, in compliance with
the international commitments of States to ratifying
international conventions adopted by the United
Nations to eradicate terrorism.

In order to facilitate the technical and financial
assistance required by Member States, it is
undoubtedly important that the team of experts and the
technical assistance directory be established, all of
which is currently being undertaken by the Committee.
In this connection, we must stress the quality and
competence of the group of experts, to which a great
deal of the success of the most recent phase was due.
We also urge that obstacles be overcome to the speedy
appointment of the expert in charge of promoting
relations with organizations and States and of offering
the technical and financial assistance necessary to
combat terrorism. I also wish to stress the importance
of an effective and operative trust fund provided with
the financial wherewithal to offer the technical
assistance that States require in order to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

The results obtained by the Committee over the
first six months of its operations are essentially
intangible or not readily apparent with respect to the
original objective of raising the standards of States in
their struggle against terrorism. However, an analysis
of the reports submitted by States and of the reaction of
regional organizations and States to the requirements
set out in resolution 1373 (2001) undoubtedly reveals
that the objective set out therein is beginning to be
attained.

That is important because, in many cases, we
must build where there was previously nothing. What
is essential, however, is that, given the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
CTC itself, each State be able to show some concrete
and effective results in its struggle against terrorism
and that the CTC demonstrate that it is acting in a
global crusade to counter the gravest threat facing
humankind early in the new century. As Ambassador
Mahbubani pointed out, this is all very significant.

I conclude by appealing that we remain alert to
terrorism, which gives no quarter, is relentless and is
already awaiting the opportunity, the right time and the
right place to demonstrate its power to destroy and to
sow fear and confusion among the people.

