Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Cameroon welcomes Deputy Prime
Minister Covie and Mr. Steiner, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We wish to
convey to Mr. Steiner our full appreciation for his
detailed briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We
followed his briefing with great attention, as we did the
statement of the Deputy Prime Minister.

In our intervention during the meeting on Kosovo
of 21 January 2002, my delegation insisted on the need
to capitalize on all the positive signals in the report of
the Secretary-General in order to strengthen the still
fragile emergence of a resumption of normal activity in
Kosovo.

At that time, we stated that the strengthening of
security, the disarmament of all armed bands and the
encouragement of the return of all minorities were
priority actions that must be undertaken. Today, we
note that, thanks to the dedication of the men and
women working for Kosovo, action on those priorities,
which were incorporated into the work of Mr. Steiner,
have already borne fruit. The weak but positive signs
of the past that had to be built upon have today
between transformed into actual elements, and signal
already the probable success of the United Nations in
Kosovo.

In effect, the formation of a multi-ethnic
Government and of an equally multi-ethnic parliament,
as well of a police service that is one of the best
examples of a modern, multi-ethnic institution, confirm
the current nature of the situation. My delegation
welcomes the importance attached to information on
the return of displaced persons and on missing persons,
to the integration of minorities into institutions and to
the inter-ethnic dialogue for reconciliation. My
delegation also welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and of certain States, such as Ireland and the
United States, in the strengthening of the capacities of
the Kosovar parliamentarians. The experience and
knowledge that those parliamentarians can acquire
from the practical workings of other assemblies, added
to their own wisdom and determination, will provide
the inspiration for a local solution.

Perhaps Mr. Steiner can tell the Council how he
envisages contributing to solving the problem of the
Parliament's disregard for the concerns of minorities.
The creation of the Economic and Fiscal Council is
another reason for satisfaction, as are the various
initiatives calling for and encouraging private
investment and to develop the banking sector.

As well, remarkable progress has been made in
strengthening the rule of law throughout the territory of
Kosovo and in the fight against insecurity and
criminality in all its forms.

My delegation supports the project of regional
cooperation in the fight against organized crime, which
can, however, produce the desired results only if the
police and judicial services just now being created or
restructured live up to the hope placed in them. In this
respect, the current situation leads us to predict a
promising future, although greater cooperation among
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
required on judicial matters.

While the overall evaluation of the situation is
positive and the action of the United Nations in Kosovo
has a positive dynamic in its current stage, there is
reason to remain vigilant, realistic and pragmatic. In
fact, the Secretary-General, while welcoming the
fortunate results obtained, did not failed to underline
his concerns * it is perhaps a strong word, but they are
indeed concerns - about the problem of the clear
distinction between transferred responsibilities and
those reserved for his Special Representative.

After the parliamentary and presidential elections,
Mr. Steiner told us that he considered that the moment
had come, within the framework of the new phase of
the United Nations operation, for authority in Kosovo
to be gradually transferred to the provisional
institutions, without this necessarily affecting the
province's future political status.

We supported him, following the example of
other members of the Security Council. We reiterate
this support today, and we would invite the Kosovo
authorities to abide scrupulously by the provisions in
the constitutional framework. This is the only way to
proceed harmoniously and to implement the
programme and process now under way.

The Secretary-General also highlighted the
difficulties due to budgetary constraints - particularly
in the areas of the return of displaced persons and in
the civil service. Regarding the latter, we wish to
encourage all efforts aimed at enhancing recruitment,
taking into account the necessary balances there. On
the pay scales, we think one has to be cautious and
look at what the actual standard of living is in the
region. One also has to look at the role to be played by
the private sector.

Returning Kosovo to normalcy will take a long
time; it will require patience, perseverance and, above
all, skill. These are all virtues that are required so that
Kosovo can be part of the large Balkan family, free of
the old demons of hatred, violence and war.

To reach this ultimate objective, there are still
crucial middle phases that have to be passed through.
One is the organization of the municipal elections
scheduled for 26 October 2002. We greatly appreciate
what UNMIK has been doing to ensure wide
participation in the elections, including by voters who
are currently outside of Kosovo in an orderly and
transparent manner.

At this stage, my delegation cannot subscribe to
any idea that would hinder the hard work under way
towards the reconciliation of all components of the
Kosovo population. We say "no" to "cantonization",
and the delegation of Cameroon appeals to all the
socio-political component parts of Kosovo to
participate fully, without conditions, in this third
electoral stage.

The extension of UNMIK's authority throughout
Kosovo, notably in Mitrovica, and the perpetuation of
good relations with Belgrade and Skopje, are matters
that, in our View, deserve special attention by the
United Nations in its activities. The success of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo depends now, more than ever before, on
cooperation - cooperation on the part of all of the
socio-political component parts of Kosovo -
cooperation on the part of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia - and cooperation by the international
community, particularly on financial matters.

In conclusion, once again we welcome Mr.
Steiner's commitment and efficiency at the helm of
UNMIK. What he has done in establishing benchmarks
to measure progress can be inscribed in the list of best
working practices here within the United Nations. We
would also like to thank and encourage all international
organizations and the staff of UNMIK itself, working
on a day-to-day basis in Kosovo to bring peace to all
there.

