Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I have
been attending Security Council meetings for a little bit
more than two years now, Sir, and I cannot recall such
lavish praise being heaped on a sitting President as we
have heard today. I surrender in advance in besting my
colleagues in saying anything further about the energy
and skill you have committed to this task. But I wanted
to associate my delegation with those thoughts.

For the first time in more than eight years, the
people of Sierra Leone have an opportunity to enjoy the
prospects of peace. After years of hardship, deprivation,
dislocation and threats to their safety, the Sierra Leonean
people can begin to focus on rebuilding their lives and
their country. The Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community must help them in this
process.

The peace that was established in Lome on 7 July is
a fragile one. The early August hostage-taking incident in
the region east of Freetown serves to remind us of the
tenuous nature of the agreement signed by the President
of Sierra Leone, Mr. Kabbah, and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) leader, Mr. Foday Sankoh. Yet
despite the uncertainties that lie ahead, the Lome
Agreement symbolizes the hope that Sierra Leone has
finally embarked on the path towards national
reconciliation and reconstruction. To help promote the
implementation of the peace accord, we believe it is
absolutely essential that the RUF leader, Foday Sankoh,
return to Freetown. We encourage his immediate return to
Sierra Leone.

The United States congratulates the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front for
having had the courage to begin the difficult process
aimed at ending this great national tragedy. The United
States commends the Governments of the Economic

 

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for their
determined efforts to maintain security in Sierra Leone and
to seek peace. We particularly acknowledge the enormous
sacrifices made by Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Mali, whose
brave soldiers fought for peace and democracy in Sierra
Leone. We congratulate President Eyadema of Togo for his
instrumental role in bringing the antagonists together, and
we commend the important contribution made by the
Secretary-General' s Special Representative in Sierra Leone,
Mr. Francis Okelo, and all the men and women of the
United Nations Observer Mission who worked tirelessly,
under difficult circumstances, to promote the cause of
peace.

The United States remains steadfast in its support for
the Lorne Agreement. My Government stands ready to
assist in its implementation. The United States has been a
leading provider of emergency humanitarian and refugee
assistance to Sierra Leone. We are prepared to consider
additional help as required. The United States also remains
committed to supporting the efforts of the Military
Observer Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG) in implementing
the Lome Peace Agreement.

The objective of the United States is to promote a
regional peace that will end the conflict, relieve the
suffering of the Sierra Leonean people and foster peace and
national reconciliation. While we fully support the Lorne
Agreement, we are concerned, as is the Secretary-General,
by the Agreement's provisions for amnesty. We are eager
to see the early establishment of a credible Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, as called for by the Agreement.
We also remain open to the possible establishment of an
objective international fact-finding mission to document
evidence of atrocities and provide information to the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission as a basis for its work.

The United States remains committed to the pursuit of
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law, wherever they occur. At the same time,
we recognize the need to allow the Lome Agreement to
bear fruit. The successful implementation of the Peace
Agreement is essential to the establishment of peace,
political order and stability in Sierra Leone. The best
guarantee for an end to the immense suffering of the people
of Sierra Leone and a beginning of reconciliation is for this
Agreement to succeed.

The United States supports the deployment of
additional United Nations military observers, medical
personnel and other support staff to help implement the
Lome Agreement in Sierra Leone, as called for in the
draft resolution now before us.

