Mr. Paloue (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential

candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union welcomed the cessation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip. Since then, it has been
using every opportunity to call on all parties to make
the current ceasefire permanent through the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Noting the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza, the issues
which should be addressed without any delay include a
sustained halt to rocket launches towards Israel, the
urgent opening of the Gaza crossings on a regular and
predictable basis, and an effective mechanism to
prevent arms and ammunition smuggling into the Gaza
Strip.

The European Union deeply deplores the loss of
life during this conflict, particularly the civilian
casualties. We continue to remind all parties to the
conflict to fully respect human rights and comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The European Union will closely follow investigations
into alleged violations of international humanitarian
law.

The European Union is gravely concerned by the
humanitarian situation on the ground and calls for the
unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian
assistance to the people of Gaza. Only the immediate
and unconditional reopening of all crossings for the
passage of humanitarian aid will reverse the current
humanitarian deterioration.

The European Union has on several occasions
declared its readiness not only to step up its already
substantial emergency aid contribution, but also to
work towards the rehabilitation, reconstruction,
sustainable economic recovery and future economic
development of the Gaza Strip. The European Union
welcomed the Palestinian Authority's plan for the
recovery and reconstruction of Gaza. We believe that
the recent conference in Sharm el-Sheikh was a
success, both in raising the necessary funds for
reconstruction and economic development and -
maybe even more importantly - in sending a clear
signal in support of the Palestinian National Authority.

The European Union is the largest donor. The
European Commission provided €554 million in 2009,
in addition to the bilateral contributions of EU member
States. The EU is determined to play a substantial role,
alongside the United States and Arab countries, in
alleviating the dire situation in Gaza. The European
Union will continue to support the Palestinian
economy as a whole. While focusing our attention on
Gaza, we must not forget to address the needs in the
West Bank, since both territories constitute the pillars
of a future Palestinian State that is viable, contiguous
and democratic, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.

Unhindered passage of humanitarian aid, people
and commercial goods must be allowed in order to
ensure recovery and reconstruction and provide hope
for a better future. The European Union has constantly
pushed for the sustained reopening of Gaza's borders
on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access and is prepared to reactivate, and possibly
extend, its assistance in the management of Gaza's
borders. Another essential prerequisite for the
sustainable recovery and development of Palestinian
society, both in Gaza and in the West Bank, is intra-
Palestinian reconciliation. The European Union
welcomes the reconciliation process launched at the
meeting of all Palestinian factions, held in Cairo on
26 February, and strongly encourages reconciliation
behind President Mahmoud Abbas. In this respect, we
commend Egypt and the Arab League partners for their
mediation efforts.

We are in a transition period waiting for new
Israeli and interim Palestinian Governments to be
formed. But no matter what their composition, the
European Union clearly expects their representatives to
honour obligations entered into by their predecessors.

The European Union reiterates its condemnation
of the continuing firing of rockets into southern Israel.
The European Union also condemns Israel's planned
settlement activities. The European Union urgently
calls on Israel to reconsider the planned construction of
settlements, which would be in violation of
international law and would run counter to the Road
Map and commitments made by Israel to the
Palestinians and the international community in
Annapolis in November 2007.

The European Union has consistently made clear
that there can be no sustainable peace in the Middle
East without the creation of a viable Palestinian State.
Continued settlement activity severely damages that
prospect. The European Union is also deeply concerned
by the issuing of eviction notices in East Jerusalem,

which, combined with the increase in settlement
activities, further threatens the chances of peace. We
call on Israel to suspend these eviction notices
immediately.

The European Union strongly supports a two-
State solution as the only realistic option to meet the
expectations of both peoples to live in peace and
security alongside each other. This perspective was
also reaffirmed at the first meeting of the Middle East
Quartet with the participation of the new United States
Administration on the margins of the Sharm el-Sheikh
conference.

However, there is no solidified truce around Gaza
at this stage. We continue to support Egyptian efforts
towards this goal and encourage all parties to come to
an agreement as soon as possible. The European Union
is convinced that there is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in Gaza or elsewhere.
Peace in the Middle East requires a comprehensive
solution through a lasting and just settlement of the
conflict on all its tracks, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Road Map and previous
agreements reached between the parties. We consider
the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 to be a solid and
appropriate basis for achieving stability, peace and
security in the region. The European Union stands
ready to actively work towards that goal.

