Mr. A] Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset I wish to thank you, Madam, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. The issue under discussion is of
paramount importance, and this meeting is all the more
important in the light of recent negative developments
at the regional level. Those developments have again
highlighted persistent practices to deny the Palestinian
people the exercise of their rights to self-determination
and to live free from the fear of the occupation and
tragic suffering resulting from the ongoing siege of
Gaza and the West Bank and the recent attack on the
humanitarian flotilla of ships bound for Gaza.

The flotilla attack happened at a time when our
memories were still fresh of the crimes and atrocities

committed by the Israeli regime in its all-out attack
against the people of Gaza in Operation Cast Lead,
during which thousands of besieged innocent
Palestinians, including women and children, lost their
lives or were injured, and civilian infrastructure and
facilities were willfully and systematically targeted.
According to various reliable sources, in the course of
that operation the Israeli army did not hesitate to use
internationally prohibited and restricted weapons
against civilian targets. Since then, the Israeli regime
has continued to defy the will of the international
community, while its inhuman policy of continued
blockade against the Palestinians has caused an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) was an
important step forward towards remedying the
violations of the Israeli regime in Gaza. The report,
when issued, brought hope of swift action by the
relevant bodies of the United Nations, including this
Council, to put an end to the culture of impunity for
Israeli war crimes. So far, this hope has not been
realized. If criminals were brought to justice, perhaps
the barbaric attack on the humanitarian convoy would
not have happened. Impunity for perpetrators of grave
crimes, including war crime, occupation and crimes
against humanity, is in itself a cause of and incentive
for further atrocities.

It is regrettable to witness that the inaction or
weak reaction of relevant responsible United Nations
organs in dealing with the Israeli regime's illegal
policies and practices have emboldened that dangerous
regime to continue with its crimes and cruelty against
the defenceless Palestinian people, especially innocent
women and children. The blatant support of certain
Powers for the Israeli regime is one of the bitterest
realities of our world today. By blocking any single
action against the inhumane policies and acts of the
Israeli regime in this Council and using various tactics
to undermine efforts in other United Nations bodies to
hold it accountable, these criminals enjoy a merciless
impunity in violating the internationally recognized
human rights and humanitarian law.

Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are being expanded much faster than in the
past, and one tangible consequence is that the land of
the Palestinians is shrinking and more and more
Palestinian houses are being demolished, to be
replaced by illegal settlements. This Monday alone, the
Israel regime, in defiance of global calls for halting the
destruction of Palestinian shelters, levelled tents used
by Palestinians as their homes in the northern West
Bank. Israeli soldiers entered Al-Farisiya village and
ordered the residents away before knocking structures
down. The occupying forces also knocked down nine
agricultural structures on the pretext that they had been
put up without permits. The resumption of demolition
work came as the international community strongly
called for an end to the Israeli demolitions, describing
them as illegal under international law.

We believe that the fundamental problem of this
long-standing crisis is not in the lack of peace plans,
which have arisen from time to time, one after the
other, but is rooted in the continuation of the
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories and in the Israeli regime's intransigence to
any single principle of international law. All these
plans were doomed to failure because they all failed in
one way or another to tackle the Palestinian problem at
its root causes, including the occupation itself.
Furthermore, the Israeli regime, since its unblessed
inception, has attempted to cite external elements as
factors in its failure to move to advance the so-called
peace processes. These failed attempts have been
manifestly aimed at diverting attention from the
principled causes of the crisis and at evading
responsibility for the crimes committed in Palestine.

In line with this policy, Israeli officials, instead of
answering to world public opinion for their
unparalleled record of non-compliance with all
humanitarian and human rights principles and their
long and dark history of crimes and atrocities,
including occupation, aggression, militarism, State
terrorism and crimes against humanity, have always
made inflammatory remarks and baseless allegations
against other countries. Now, it is widely recognized
that the Israeli regime's clandestine development and
unlawful possession of large stock of nuclear warheads
and its constant threats to use them against certain
countries pose a uniquely grave threat to regional and
international peace and security.

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating the latter's land, sea and air space
and refusing to withdraw from Lebanese occupied land
in the Shaba'a, the Kfar Shuba Hills and the northern
part of Al-Ghajar village. It also continues its
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. That regime
should immediately and fully withdraw from these
occupied territories in compliance with the most basic
principles of international law and the United Nation
Charter.

Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative to the realization of
a comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. In our view, a lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only through
justice and an end to discrimination and to the illegal
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab occupied
territories. Today, we need to act collectively to
demonstrate our all-out support for the cause of
Palestine and to rally to the assistance of those who
have been deprived of their rights. Let us hope that
oppression and occupation will end and that justice and
freedom prevail in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representative of
the Israeli regime. I would like to place on record once
again that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions made in this Chamber that
have been repeated so frequently that they have
become a practice by the Israeli regime to distract the
attention of the international community from its
nuclear arsenal and its criminal policies and abhorrent
atrocities in the region, including its recent heinous
crimes against the people of Palestine in Gaza and
against freedom-loving people in international waters
near Gaza.

