Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to say that
my delegation is extraordinarily gratified to see you, an
outstanding representative of the People's Republic of
China - a great State that is a neighbour and friend of
Tajikistan - presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council, which is an important and truly historic meeting
for my country. Your diplomatic experience and talent
provide all grounds for confidence in the successful work
of the Council under your leadership this month.

Allow me to express our satisfaction at the highly
substantive discussion that has just taken place on the
final report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan and at the valuable comments made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, Mr. Ivo Petrov. They provide much food for
thought and serve as guidelines for further action.

We are deeply grateful to all members of the
Council for the wishes they have addressed to the people
and Government of Tajikistan in their sincere desire to
see us achieve a lasting peace and flourish in stable
democratic development in the post-conflict peace-
building period.
My delegation would like to thank all members of
the Security Council for their genuine and warm interest,
as expressed in their statements, in a further strengthening

 

of the success achieved during the peace process. We are
particularly inspired by the fact that the members of the
Council have once again shown their solidarity with
Tajikistan and its efforts to move towards building a
democratic and secular State of law.

It is appropriate today to recall the situation that
existed when, more than seven years ago - on 21 January
1993 - the United Nations, on the request of the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, began its
peacekeeping activity in our country by opening its small
political mission in Dushanbe. During that period, the
merciless flames of internal conflict were raging throughout
the country. In conditions of what was essentially a civil
war, the moral and psychological atmosphere of society was
poisoned by the venom of enmity and mutual distrust. The
situation on the Tajik-Afghan border was critical. There
were almost daily Violations, accompanied by casualties. All
of this continued to grow.

Forces linked to international terrorism, religious
extremism, illegal trafficking in narcotic drugs and weapons
and other criminal activities attempted to exploit this set of
circumstances. A real danger emerged that threatened
Tajikistan's very existence as an independent and sovereign
State and its territorial integrity. We faced a clear and ever-
increasing threat to regional stability and security. It was no
easy task to find the only reasonable formula, the only
correct path to peace.

Against that backdrop, on 5 April 1994 at Moscow,
under the aegis of the United Nations, a difficult inter-Tajik
dialogue began. That dialogue continued for 1,171 days. In
the course of over three years, the incredibly complex
negotiating process first led to the conclusion, on 17
September 1994 at Tehran, of the Agreement on a
Temporary Ceasefire and the Cessation of Other Hostile
Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country
for the Duration of the Talks. Ultimately, that led to the
signing at Moscow, on 27 June 1997, of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan.

The length of that period meant that the path we
followed was genuinely one that lasted an entire epoch. As
a direct party to that process, I can attest to the fact that
those were years of intensive, constructive and collective
work dedicated to the achievement of a most noble
objective: the restoration - with the assistance of the
international community - of peace and tranquillity to the
land of Tajikistan.

The venues for the holding of negotiations changed:
Moscow, Tehran, Islamabad, Ashgabat, Almaty and
Bishkek. The members of the delegations of the Tajik
sides changed, as did the intermediaries who were acting
on behalf of the Secretary-General. However, what
remained unchanged was the goal: overcoming all
obstacles to find the road that led to peace, stability and
democracy in Tajikistan. The path from armed
confrontation to national reconciliation was long and
onerous, but it turned out to be the only correct path that
was in fact consonant with the fundamental interests of
Tajik society.

The long-awaited hope for the restoration of peace
to the land of Tajikistan returned with the conclusion of
the Moscow General Agreement, and once again the
highest national priorities were proclaimed to be
cooperation and the unity of all citizens regardless of their
nationality, religious faith or political allegiance. The
gloomiest chapter in the tragic modern history of our
country was closed, and the Republic entered a new era.

Enormous credit for this goes to the Government of
the Republic of Tajikistan and the leaders of the former
United Tajik Opposition, which demonstrated the capacity
to raise their sights, transcend the interests of the moment
and direct their political will at resolving issues that
directly affected the fate of the Tajik people.

The President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, headed the peace process with
personal courage, goodwill, political insight and
organizational ability. To this day, he remains the major
driving force of the process, while relying on the support
of the absolute majority of the population of the country.

The long journey to national reconciliation begun
seven years ago under the aegis of the United Nations has
today reached its logical conclusion. All of the key
provisions of the General Agreement have been
implemented. The major functions of the Commission on
National Reconciliation, which was established in
accordance with the Agreement, have been carried out.

The United Tajik Opposition has announced the
disbanding of its armed units, which has become one of
the most important stages in the implementation of the
Protocol on Military Issues. Some 7,000 former fighters
of the opposition have had the appropriate registration
carried out. More than 6,000 have been integrated into the
military forces of the Republic, and the others have been
demobilized and have returned to civilian life.

 
For the most part, the process provided for by the
general amnesty has been completed. Agreed amendments
have been made to our fundamental law, the Constitution
of the Republic, through the national referendum. A
Government for the country has now been formed on a
broad national political basis with the participation of
representatives of the former armed opposition. Through a
direct secret ballot, on an alternative basis, the President of
the Republic of Tajikistan has been elected.

Taking into account the amendments made to the
Constitution of the country, for the first time in the modern
history of Tajikistan there have been multi-party, pluralist
elections for the Republic's organs of legislative power. As
a result of this, a bi-cameral parliament has been formed
and has begun its work. One of the major achievements of
the inter-Tajik settlement was that virtually all of the
approximately 52,000 refugees in Afghanistan returned to
their homes, and more than 180,000 returned from the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, as
well as more than 680,000 internally displaced persons.

It is well known that during the many years of armed
confrontation more than 50,000 perished, and the total value
of material losses, in an already poor country, amounted to
more than $7 billion. This was compounded by the
requirements for the settling, psychological adaption and
full-fledged integration into the social, economic and
political life of the country of these refugees and displaced
persons, who accounted for nearly one fifth of the
population of the country. These circumstances further
aggravated an already critical economic and social situation
in Tajikistan. The restoration of destroyed social and
cultural sites, the revival and reform of the economy of the
country, the strengthening of State institutions, the
establishment of social conditions conducive to a dignified
life for each member of society - all of that, along with
the objectives of achieving a political settlement, was the
daily concern of the Government of the country.

It is understandable that Tajikistan, acting alone, could
not cope with these and other enormous problems.
Comprehensive international assistance and support played
a critically important role in overcoming the crisis phase of
the development of T ajik society. The United Nations can
rightfully and proudly chalk up as a peacekeeping success
its assistance to Tajikistan in achieving a political
settlement to the armed conflict and in resolving the
humanitarian and socio-economic problems of the country.

With the support and assistance of the international
community in Tajikistan, the bases began to be laid down
for building a modern, democratic State of law with a
socially focused market economy. A philosophy of peace
and constructive thinking won out over a philosophy of
enmity and destruction.

Today in Tajikistan the reign of peace is becoming
ever stronger. The Government and the people of my
country are deeply and fully aware of the plethora of
extraordinarily complex difficulties facing them, and in
resolving them we are counting on the continuing noble
support of the international community. The success,
achieved through the assistance of the United Nations of
achieving a peaceful life has enhanced confidence on the
part of ordinary people of Tajikistan in the United
Nations and raised it to new heights. To maintain that
confidence without dashing the hopes of these people is
something the Organization can do only by reasserting its
authority through specific actions designed to strengthen
peace and stability in our country.

We have responded with gratitude to the proposal of
the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations office
to assist in post-conflict peace-building in Tajikistan. I am
confident that the new United Nations office will also
meet with a positive response from the Government and
the people of Tajikistan, who are looking to it for
energetic coordination of international efforts to bring
about the social and economic rehabilitation of the
country. We are convinced that the provision of carefully
targeted assistance to Tajikistan by the international
community will play an important role in assisting the
strengthening of peace and stability throughout the entire
region of Central Asia.

Today's meeting provides us with an outstanding
opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to all of those
who have made contributions to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan. These are first and foremost the more than 40
States that have been members of the Security Council
during the years of the Council's consideration of the
issue of Tajikistan. Thanks to the unfailing and constant
attention of members of the Council, it has been possible
to design the major parameters and coordinated actions of
the international community for successfully moving the
peace process in our country forward. Superb professional
and human qualities were demonstrated in this respect
both by the former Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali and by his colleague
who is now the highest official of the Organization,
Mr. Kofi Annan.

 

I should also like to mention all of the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the Secretary-
General and leaders of the United Nations groups and
missions who dedicated their talents and in fact gave
themselves body and soul to the cause of peace in
Tajikistan: Liviu Bota, Ismat Kittani, Ramiro Piriz-Ballen,
Darko Silovic, Gerd Dietrick Merrem, Jan Kubis and Ivo
Petrov, who is participating in our meeting today.

Separate mention should be made of the staff members
of the United Nations Secretariat who dealt daily with and
successively resolved the complex problems involved in
Tajikistan. We are grateful to all States - and there are
some 30 of them - that sent their staff members to the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, staff
members who demonstrated outstanding professionalism,
courage and self-abnegation in carrying out their duties.

To our great regret, there were also tragic losses. Four
citizens of Austria, Poland, Uruguay and Japan gave their
lives for the cause of peace in Tajikistan. Their names will
for ever remain in our hearts and in the memory of the
Tajik people.

Impressive work was also carried out in Tajikistan by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, and the agency she heads.
To a great extent they were responsible for the restoration
of some 29,500 of nearly 38,000 homes destroyed during
the course of the hostilities, for the finding of jobs for
133,000 of 140,000 families that suffered from the war and
for the return of Virtually all of the illegally occupied
houses to their former owners.

A great contribution was made to alleviate the drastic
problems facing Tajikistan, and active work is continuing
in our country on the part of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
the International Financial Corporation.

The efforts of the United Nations to restore peace and
stability in Tajikistan were actively promoted by other
international organizations as well, in particular the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and also other
friendly guarantor States for the implementation of the
General Agreement - Russia, Iran, Uzbekistan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Pakistan and
Afghanistan. All of these States and organizations, which
were part of the Contact Group, served as reliable
guarantors of the implementation of the General Agreement.
The experience of the work of this group will no doubt be
applicable and useful in the settlement of other crisis
situations.

We wish to single out Russia among those States,
and to convey our special gratitude for its decisive
contribution to all stages of the inter-Tajik settlement
process.
Russian military personnel, moreover, were the
backbone of the collective peacekeeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), which from
1993 to the present have been playing an important
stabilizing role in our country. Russian border troops, who
at the request of the Government of Tajikistan are serving
on the Tajik-Afghan border, are demonstrating sterling
qualities, carrying out their duties in a selfless, highly
professional way through the difficult years when they
protected Tajikistan from infiltration from neighbouring
Afghanistan, which was torn apart by conflict, terrorism,
criminal elements, drugs and weapons. Our peoples will
never forget the Russian peacekeepers and border troops
who laid down their lives in the cause of the security and
stability of both Russia and Tajikistan.

The people and the Government of the Republic of
Tajikistan are overjoyed and highly elated that, with the
support of the entire international community, it has been
possible for us, at the turn of a new millennium, to break
the vicious circle of fratricidal enmity and to channel the
development of our State and our society into a civilized
course of peace, democracy and a flourishing society.

In Tajik society today there is growing confidence
that Tajikistan possesses all the components of a modern,
democratic, economically viable State. The rich,
centuries-old history of the Tajik people, the vast
intellectual and spiritual heritage bequeathed to us by our
ancestors, and our enormous human potential are an
earnest of that.

