Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We were
pleased to vote in favour of resolution 2476 (2019),
which authorizes the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH). This is a historic moment. Today
we establish a new United Nations special political
mission that replaces the lS-year-long peacekeeping
mission in Haiti. The United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti and its predecessor, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, made important
strides in the areas of stability and security, democratic
governance and institutional development and the
promotion and protection of human rights in Haiti. We
recognize the United Nations peacekeepers' efforts
to support a free, prosperous and peaceful Haiti, and
we thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
whose nations served in those missions.

This transition also demonstrates that, as conditions
on the ground evolve, the United Nations presence
can and should change to reflect the new realities. It
is our hope that this transition in Haiti will serve as
a valuable model that the Security Council can apply
elsewhere. As a long-time friend and partner to Haiti,
the United States is clear-eyed about the challenges that
lie ahead. It is essential for the Government of Haiti,
in partnership with the United Nations and the United
States, to recognize the great opportunity this moment
presents and to seize it on behalf of the people of Haiti.

A successful transition will depend in large part on
the Haitian Government's assumption of responsibility
for the range of issues the Security Council is
mandating BINUH to support. That includes free and
fair elections, the continued professionalization of the
Haitian National Police, the reduction of community
and gang violence, the protection of human rights,
improvements to prison facilities and detainee treatment,
and justice-sector reform. A successful transition will
also depend on close coordination among the many
stakeholders invested in Haiti's success, including,
but not limited to, United Nations entities, Security
Council members, local and international partners,
the Haiti-based diplomatic corps and the humanitarian
assistance community. In the coming months the
United States will continue to call for constructive and
inclusive dialogue among all Haitian actors. We are
confident that compromise leading to a transparent and
accountable Government will lay the foundation for a
sustainable future for all Haitians.

