Mr. Alhakbani (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to respond to the statement made by the
representative of Iran.

We strongly reject the baseless and erroneous
accusations by the representative of Iran against my
country. They are not surprising, coming as they do
from a representative of the Iranian Government, which
is guilty of violating all international humanitarian and
ethical laws and customs.

History has shown conclusively that Iran has
blatantly interfered in the domestic affairs of Arab
countries by supporting armed groups and coup
militias. Any Arab country in which Iran has interfered
has ended up suffering from division, instability and the
spread of armed groups as well as sectarianism. History
has also shown conclusively that the strife, divisions
and conflicts that the Middle East is suffering from
began with the Khomeini revolution in Iran in 1979.
The Iranian Constitution states that it is important to
export the revolution's ideology, along with hatred and
expansive ambitions. Iran's policy is clear, as we can
see from the formation of armed parties loyal to it in
Arab countries that have led to the destruction of State
foundations, including in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen,
where we see examples of its hostile policies. Its
expansionist policies are crystal clear. It is flagrantly
interfering in the domestic affairs of neighbouring
countries, as well as pursuing hostile policies and
persistently threatening to close maritime straits
and international trade routes, in blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
It is also violating Security Council resolutions on
Yemen and supporting the Houthi militias in their
coup attempts, thereby prolonging the suffering of our
brother people of Yemen.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has an independent
judicial system and legislature that respect human rights,
while ensuring justice and equality. The representative
of Iran has attempted to accuse my country in an effort
to distract attention from the crimes committed by
Iran in the region. The Arab region is in dire need of
stability on the security front ifit is to embark on a path
of reconstruction and development in a region that is
still suffering from Iranian interference. It is time for policies in the Middle East if we want to put an end to
the Security Council and the international community "Ch destabilization and divisions.

to take a serious stance against Iran's destabilizing The meeting rose at 4.20pm.
