Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): We welcome
resolution 2265 (2016) to extend the mandate of the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1591 (2005).

Following a brief period of relative calm, the past
few weeks have been marked by aerial bombardments
and ground offensives carried out by the Government
of the Sudan in Jebel Mara. The United Nations has
reported tens of thousands of civilians displaced and
dire humanitarian conditions, yet, the Security Council
has been silent.

We have had a sanctions regime in place for 12 years
and yet we have not been able to muster consensus on
a single designation since 2006. We have had an arms
embargo in place for 11 years and year after year we
receive report after report of arms flowing illegally into
Darfur. We have created a Panel of Experts to provide
this kind of reporting, and yet when it does a member
of the Council blocks the report from being published
because its findings are so disturbing.

Today's resolution is a technical roll-over, not
because the Panel of Experts did not provide findings
on how to respond better to the situation. Indeed,
the Panel has provided a critical flow of information
on the implementation of sanctions in Darfur. Its
report provided information that could have better
informed our decision-making. For example, the
report catalogued numerous violations of the sanctions
regime, underscoring the need for greater enforcement
by all Member States. It also took note of recurring
violations of humanitarian and human rights law. Yes,
today's resolution is a technical roll-over because the
Council could not agree on even modest attempts to
address in the resolution this information on worrying
developments in the Darfur region.

We are particularly concerned that the Council was
unable to address the role ofillicit trafficking in natural
resources in fuelling conflict. The nexus between
gold trafficking and armed groups, as outlined by the
Panel of Experts, is very well known. The Council has
addressed without controversy the role of gold and
natural resources in other conflicts, such as those in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and even terrorism perpetrated by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Today, the Council should have built upon the
excellent international and regional initiatives under
way in this field to tackle this problem in the Sudan
context, but because of the Panel's reporting on this
issue a Panel's report may never become public, and
that is extremely concerning. We urge the Council and
those who value the integrity and transparency of the
work of the Security Council and its Committees to
allow for this report to be published as soon as possible.
Some of the same Council members who speak in
certain contexts of the need, in theory, for transparency
in sanctions regimes - including in a forthcoming
meeting ofthe Council - now seek to block publication
of information related to a real sanctions regime in
practice because they do not like its findings. We cannot
make judgements about what should be transparent
and what should not be on the basis of whether the
information is convenient or inconvenient.

Finally, allow me to reiterate that, as penholder of
this annual renewal, we take seriously our responsibility
to consider the Panel's findings and recommendations,
and also the views of all members of the Council. Some
of those views could not be reconciled with the facts,
including the facts presented in the Panel of Experts'
report that is being blocked from publication. We look
forward to continuing our discussion with colleagues
on how best to increase transparency, reinforce
compliance with Security Council resolutions, and
respond to the findings of the Panel. Truly addressing
the issues facing Darfur will require the Council to
speak with one voice and to take meaningful steps to
help advance peace.

