Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian): I would first like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March and to wish you every success in
the discharge of your very important and responsible
duties.

The restoration of peace, stability and civil harmony
in Tajikistan has been and continues to be the central task
with which my Government has been decisively dealing.
Firm in its resolve to achieve a peaceful settlement of the
conflict, the leadership of my country has moved step by
step, consistently and stalwartly, towards that objective.
The decisive efforts of the President of the Republic,
Mr. Rakhmonov, have made it possible to progress
towards complete national reconciliation.

As is well known, the agreement of 17 September
1994, the protocol on fundamental principles for the
establishment of peace and national harmony in
Tajikistan, dated 17 August 1995, and the agreements
reached in Ashgabat and Khusdeh have marked the way.
The direct talks between President Emomali Rakhmonov
and the leadership of the United Tajik Opposition (UTO),
Sayed Abdullo Nuri gave great impetus towards an inter-
Tajik settlement. The documents they signed in Moscow
on 23 December 1996 opened up a real possibility for the
achievement of national harmony. The subsequent
negotiations in Tehran further strengthened the peace
process. The ceasefire agreement between the
Government forces and the United Tajik Opposition have
not been violated even once since December 1996.

The meeting between the President of Tajikistan and
the leadership of the UTO in Mashhad on 20 and 21
February 1997 - in the course of which definitive
solutions were found for certain controversial issues
connected with the provisions of the Commission on
National Reconciliation - added further impetus to the
peace process, making it essentially irreversible.

An important step in strengthening mutual
confidence was the consideration of the most complex
military issues. The round of inter-Tajik negotiations held
in Moscow from 26 February to 8 March was wholly
devoted to this set of issues. It was successfully
completed with the signing of the Protocol on Military
Issues, which includes an agreement on reintegration, the
disarmament and disbandment of UTO military units, the
restructuring of power in the Republic of Tajikistan and
a timetable for implementation.

 

At the invitation of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the next round of inter-Tajik negotiations
will take place in Tehran, beginning on 9 April 1997.

Such active progress in the inter-Tajik negotiations
was to a large extent possible thanks to the sincere support
and assistance of the Russian Federation, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the observer States and international
organizations, to which we would like to express our
sincere gratitude. We owe particular thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Tajikistan,
Mr. Gerd Merrem and his staff in the Mission. They have
made tangible contributions to achieving qualitative
progress in the negotiations.

The March agreements in Moscow actually opened the
door to a new, final stage of inter-Tajik political dialogue.
A very important stage lies before us: their consistent and
steadfast implementation. We hope that the Secretary-
General will offer his good offices to achieve a full and
effective implementation of the agreements signed. In that
connection, we would welcome a decision by the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan.

My Government is steadfast in its resolve to
achieve - with the support of the world community, its
allies and good neighbours - comprehensive national
reconciliation and peace in our country. At the same time,
we recognize that national reconciliation is not a single act,
but rather a multifaceted and long-term process involving
all segments of society, all regions of the country and all
levels and dimensions of our society and our citizenry.

The moral and psychological climate in our society is
still poisoned by the toxins that were unleashed during the
civil war in our country. Unfortunately, this has been seen
in the actions of those forces that in principle oppose the
peace process, Wish to complicate the situation in the
country and want to reverse the process of political
settlement. Such criminal actions have included attacks on
United Nations personnel, taking peacekeepers and
journalists hostage and terrorist acts against peace-loving
citizens and personnel of a diplomatic mission in Dushanbe.

The February hostage crisis had great political
ramifications. It was overcome through the intensive
negotiations and the personal contribution of the President
of the Republic. This showed the complex obstacles to a
Tajik settlement. We are grateful to the Government of the
Russian Federation and to all those who, with their harsh
criticism of the situation and their active support, assisted
the President and the Government of Tajikistan in
achieving their release of the hostages. We would like to
express our delight and gratitude to the entire military and
civil staff of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan for the devotion and bravery they demonstrated
in complicated and often life-threatening situations as they
carried out the very difficult duties assigned them by the
Security Council.
Clearly, provocation, terrorism, violence and
hostage-taking are occurring in an effort to cast doubt on
the ability of the Government of Tajikistan to ensure
order and stability in the country. Let me assure the
Council that the President and the Government of
Tajikistan, using all means available to them and in
accordance with their responsibilities, will step up their
efforts to combat criminal groups and will do everything
necessary to ensure the security of international staff.

We express the hope that the additional measures
taken by the Government to ensure the security of
international personnel will create conditions conducive to
the full resumption of the United Nations activities and its
effective support for Tajikistan at a time when the country
is going through a very difficult transition from armed
conflict to peace.

The importance of increased activities of the United
Nations and other international organizations in Tajikistan
is predicated on the ongoing critical humanitarian
situation in that country. Sharp reductions in the level of
assistance for social welfare, health care and education;
insufficient energy supplies for hospitals, schools and
residences; and reduced real income for most families
have hindered the ability of Tajikistan's population to
meet its most basic human needs. The plight of many
refugees and displaced persons is a persistent problem.
Large-scale measures are required to eliminate the risks
posed by mines, which threaten the lives and health of
Tajiks.

We hope that the member States will respond to the
consolidated international appeal for special humanitarian
assistance called for by the Secretary-General and help
Tajikistan to overcome the consequences of war and to
restore its national economy. We are grateful to all those
who have pledged their generous contributions.

All peoples of the world View peace as an
opportunity not only for rebirth, but also for new hope.
With the imminence of spring and our national holiday
Navruz and their prospects for a speedy achievement of

 

peace and civil harmony in Tajikistan, my people are very
hopeful.

Throughout the recent tragic years, the international
community, and the United Nations above all, have made
the greatest mediatory and humanitarian efforts to resolve
the inter-Tajik conflict peacefully. Today more than ever
before, we are approaching the possibility of reaping the
tangible rewards of our joint efforts.
