Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Equatorial Guinean presidency for convening today's
open debate on such a relevant and urgent topic.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Head of Delegation of the European
Union. Additionally. I would like to make the following
few remarks.

Silencing the guns in Africa by the year 2020 is
without doubt an ambitious initiative, and only high
ambition can really bring us closer to achieving this
goal. Also, we clearly need to look beyond the year
2020 in terms of achieving a full and lasting peace in
all the corners of the African continent.

Much remains to be done, and all efforts need
to be made to that end. However, while looking at
the challenges at hand and ahead, we also need to
recognize the process already made. The partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union has
brought us closer to achieving lasting peace, with one
of the latest examples being the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic just a few weeks ago. In order to not
let this hard work and time go to waste, strong political
commitment is needed from all sides to implement this
and other important agreements.

While putting an end to ongoing active conflicts
and crises is the most urgent goal, we must not forget
that, if we want the guns to stay silent, we need to
address the root causes of conflicts. The African
Union's Agenda 2063 does that and highlights that
forging synergies between governance and peace and
security is crucial to addressing conflicts in a holistic
manner. Estonia welcomes the African efforts on
concrete structural conflict prevention initiatives, early
warning, mediation and preventive diplomacy, and we
very much encourage further efforts to that end.

Furthermore, better governance, creating strong and
reliable State institutions and ensuring accountability
and justice for the victims is the only way to move
towards truly achieve lasting peace. To that end, it
is critically important to include women and youth
in all aspects of conflict resolution and political
processes. Estonia stands ready to work with all our
partners to enhance capacities and work on solutions,
including digital ones, for conflict prevention and good
governance. That is also something we prioritize as we
strive to become an elected member of the Security
Council for 2020-2021.

