Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, to thank the Ambassadors of Spain, New
Zealand and Lithuania for their briefings and for the
leadership of the Committees they respectively chair.

Terrorism remains an extremely present threat, as
we are reminded by the all too frequent attacks that are
currently taking place. I am especially thinking about
the terrible attacks in N'Djamena yesterday, which we
condemn in no uncertain terms, and wish to assure
our colleagues in Chad of our complete support in this
challenge.

As emphasized by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, last year was characterized by
the proliferation of crises linked to Al-Qaida and its
affiliates, the emergence of Daesh, the ongoing actions
of Boko Haram, the spread of radicalization, which the

phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters illustrates, and
the situation in Libya. The Committee remains fully
mobilized on those topics through the consideration of
reports of the Monitoring Team requested by Security
Council resolutions.

While the threat remains at a very high level, it is
crucial that the sanctions list continues to best reflect
terrorist threats. We would therefore encourage all
United Nations States Members to continue to submit
listing requests to the Committee. Furthermore,
we encourage the members of the Committee to
take very seriously requests from Member States
noting allegations of violations. Violations of the
sanctions regime harm its effectiveness and clout.
The Committee has a responsibility to implement the
regime, and therefore cannot simply say it has received
the information. It must act. France is determined to
work for respect for the sanctions regime.
For the list to be credible and to be up to date with
regard to the threat, the delisting mechanism must be
effective and must respect the fundamental rights of
the persons listed. The establishment by resolution
1904 (2009) of the Office of the Ombudsperson in that
mechanism was, in that connection, an unprecedented
step by the Council to improve procedural guarantees.
I would like to commend the exceptional work of the
Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, who was able to give this function
the stature that it requires. We deeply regret her
departure and wish her much success in her future
career.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism has a
difficult task. Facing a multifaceted threat, it must be
able to adapt its work in order to continue to best inform
States of new threats. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that the Committee closely monitors new threats
linked to terrorism and regularly organizes public
meetings in order to draw the attention of all Member
States to those threats. With regard to combating
foreign terrorists fighters, it is particularly useful to
see the Committee working on the issue of travellers'
data, that is, the advance passenger information
system. Moreover, it is important that the Committee
continue its work in the fight against violent extremism
and its prevention. In addition, the Committee has
the responsibility to review the way in which States
implement not only resolution 1373 (2001), but also
many other resolutions- in particular resolutions 1624
(2005) and 2178 (2014).

It is crucial for States to accept visits by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in order to
audit their systems in the fight against terrorism. That
is in fact in their own interests. France recently received
a visit by the Executive Directorate. It enabled them not
only to take stock of our national system in this area, but
also to identify good practices. In the past few months,
France adopted new legislation aimed at curbing the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. Based on
those evaluations, technical assistance programmes
need to be implemented by the United Nations for
Member States. Therefore, we deem it crucial for the
Executive Directorate to continue to work closely with
other United Nations bodies responsible for combatting
terrorism in order to ensure the realization of this type
of project.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery vehicles, as well as the risk of these
falling into the hands of terrorist groups, continues to
present a real danger to international peace and security.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays a key role in combating that danger.
The 1540 Committee is at a pivotal point with the
commencement of the overall review of the Committee,
which will have to be completed by the end of 2016.
Next year will be doubly important for reinforcing the
international non-proliferation architecture, with the
holding of the Nuclear Security Summit, in anticipation
of which France has already made proposals.

Much progress has been made since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). An overwhelming majority of
Member States have already translated the provisions
of the resolution into their domestic legislation and have
taken measures to decrease the risks of proliferation. We
also commend the efforts made by the Committee and
the Group of Experts to put States requiring technical
assistance in contact with those able to provide that
assistance - a matter that France considers particularly
important.

Much remains to be done. After more than
10 years of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
there are many lessons still to be learned in order to
improve our collective work. We have confidence in
the comprehensive review process that began a short
while ago, and today we mark that with the issuance
of a press statement. The goal is to make the work of
the Committee more effective, and thus to intensify
the crucial fight against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

