Mr. Brahimi: I will try to be brief. But I think I
must say how very deeply grateful I am to all those
who have taken the floor for their kindness and their
generosity in supporting what we are trying to do in
Kabul. I will convey this extraordinary and very
welcome support to my colleagues, who have, indeed,
worked extremely hard and continue to do so in
implementing the mission that the Council and the
Secretary-General have entrusted to us.

There were a few direct questions, which I will
try to address, starting with the question of the
expansion of the International Security and Assistance
Force (ISAF) and security. This is one of the most
important issues. I heard you, Mr. President, and
Ambassador Levitte say that there are no countries
willing to respond to the request for an expansion. But
I think that the Council has taken it upon itself to
discuss the situation in Afghanistan and to help the
people of Afghanistan as they try to reinforce the very
fragile peace that the Council has helped them to
achieve. The people of Afghanistan, starting with their
President, Mr. Karzai, all consider ISAF to have been a
success in Kabul and think that ISAF can help them
elsewhere. One of the last people who had reservations
concerning the expansion of ISAF is Ismail Khan, and
even he said recently that he would welcome the
expansion of ISAF. So, as far as the people of
Afghanistan are concerned, I think that they want this
from the international community. Whether the
international community cannot or will not do it is
another thing, but I must say that the people there
continue to ask for that as a major, significant,
important, vital contribution to the maintenance of
security.

I think I told the Council five months ago that I
had the impression that expanding ISAF would not be
difficult, expensive or dangerous. Five months later, I
think I can say that I feel certain that it is important
and that it will be effective. It will not require tens of
thousands of soldiers; I think that an additional 5,000
soldiers will do the trick. Thus, it will not be very
expensive, and it will not be dangerous. Let me
illustrate one point - about the danger. We were
terribly concerned that throughout the Loya Jirga
process, we were exposing the Afghans and our own
people to danger. Public meetings were held in 400
different places all over Afghanistan - cities, villages,
remote places, all over the country. Thousands - and
on one occasion 15,000 - participated in those
meetings. These political processes are always
occasions for confrontation. Yet, all in all, those
meetings were more peaceful than meetings in many
other, peaceful countries. We had eight unfortunate
occasions on which people were killed. Only two of
them were clearly related to the Loya Jirga process.
The six others happened close to meetings that were
being held, and so it was assumed that there was a
connection with the Loya Jirga, but it is not so.

All in all, 10 people from the United Nations
participated in these meetings; each one of them was
present in one region. We also had 23 international
observers. That is all we had during this process. No
one was hurt during the process, and we had no
protection whatsoever from anyone.

That is why I say that people want it and that it is
not going to be dangerous. How much do people want
it? I think that this was made clear during the Loya
Jirga itself. At the end of the Loya Jirga, when medals
were given to a few of us, the person who received the
most applause was General John McColl. Compare this
with all that was said in the beginning - that the
British in particular would not be welcome because of
history and so on, and that foreigners are not welcome
in Afghanistan. I think that we have seen that this is
not true at all. The Afghan people can distinguish
between armies that come as friends to help and armies
that come as conquerors.

This is the only thing that I can say about the
expansion of ISAF. But once again, Mr. President, as I
told you earlier, we have heard you and we understand
that for the moment there is not much support for this
from national Governments.

Again, it has been said, quite rightly, around this
table that, ultimately, security is the responsibility of
the Afghans themselves. The Afghans are very grateful
to the Council for supporting them in forming a
national police and a national army. The Germans are
doing a very good job of being the leaders in that field
for the police, and the Americans are also doing a very
good job of being the leaders for the army.

But one cannot start with training. One must start
with patient discussions with the authorities in
Afghanistan, to make sure that the structures for this
national army and this national police are in place -
that when people are trained barracks will be ready for
them, that when policemen are trained they will be
going to units that are waiting for them, that they will
be paid, and so on.

Therefore I hope very much that next month we
will hold these discussions with the authorities and
make sure that the structures are there and that all the
elements that concern the security sector reform you
spoke about, Mr. President, are in place and working
together - a demobilization programme; the
reintegration of soldiers, whether in or out of the future
army and the future police; and the training of the new
army. All of these elements must be present, and I
think that they can be if we work together with
President Karzai, who is extremely supportive of this
process, and give him all the support that is needed.
President Karzai attaches extreme importance to
the question of corruption, and he speaks about it very
often. He has spoken about it very strongly in the Loya
Jirga, saying that corruption must be uprooted from
Afghanistan. In Geneva and in Paris, the new Minister
of Finance, Ashraf Ghani, relayed this message from
President Karzai, and he told us, for example, that they
will see to it that bidding for the mobile telephone
system is extremely transparent and ensure that there is
no foul play at any level, at any stage, in this field. I
think that the Government is aware of this. It is ready
to do its share, and I think that we must try and help it
to do so.

We must be very careful in one area: the struggle
against drug cultivation and trafficking. This is another
area that the hydra of corruption could infiltrate, and I
think that Britain, as the lead nation, the Government
in Afghanistan and the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) are aware of this.
They must remain vigilant and make absolutely certain
that they are not led unwittingly into situations where
corruption is rife.

To go back for one minute to the security sector, I
mentioned that one young man was killed last month
while being detained by the intelligence service. I said
that this was not acceptable, and Karzai also has said
several times that this was not acceptable. He said that
the intelligence service must not be an organ that
frightens the people of Afghanistan, and that a situation
must be created in which the people of Afghanistan can
become proud of their intelligence service rather than
frightened by it.

I think that the project of starting the reform of
this body is a very urgent one. It is terribly important to
do this, and the Government and President Karzai are
calling for support for this effort. I think that it can be
provided by the countries that are involved in the
security sector reform, under the leadership of the
United States, and certainly we as UNAMA will
contribute our share to that effort.

What structures are in place for women? There is
a ministry, and, as many representatives have
mentioned, 200 women took part in the Loya Jirga.
Those 200 women and many others met before the
Loya Jirga. My adviser for gender issues took the lead
in helping them take part in this Loya Jirga and, more
importantly, in creating a network that will assist these
women, who are going to return to their towns and
villages. They are counting very, very much on that
being an important element in trying to help women get
jobs and to exercise a few more rights than before.

But please - let us, again, work on agendas that
are Afghan agendas, for the people of Afghanistan. We
cannot put together programmes away from
Afghanistan and not keep in mind that we are dealing
with a country that is conservative, a country that has
traditions, a country that is proud of its traditions. Let
us follow up on and help the women of Afghanistan; let
us not impose on them agendas that will backfire on
them if we are not careful.

I will come back this afternoon and perhaps, if it
is necessary, I will say a little bit more.

