Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I would like to thank Mr.
Kalomoh for the update he has given on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau and we are also thankful for the briefing
provided by His Excellency Mr. Ramos Horta on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries.
We commend the work being done by you, sir.

We agree with Mr. Kalomoh that the situation has
been pulled back from the brink and we welcome that
the major stake-holders seem to have reached a
consensus on transitional arrangements. We must heed
his note of caution that serious political and social
problems persist that require careful management. The
need for continued international engagement and
generous assistance can not be overstated.

The United Nations has put a lot of time and
effort into trying to assist Guinea-Bissau in overcoming
the various challenges that it faces. Guinea-Bissau can
be termed a test case for the United Nations system, the
regional organizations, the donor countries and in fact
the entire international community. The success or
failure of this venture in Guinea-Bissau is going to be
crucial, not only for the people of that country, but for
the credibility of the United Nations and its
effectiveness to deliver, keeping in mind that Guinea-
Bissau is the focus of the attention of two principal
organs of the United Nations simultaneously, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
The coordinated efforts of the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council in the case of
Guinea-Bissau were being seen as a window to further
strengthening and institutionalizing of the United
Nations response, at the intergovernmental level, to the
complex crises and situations characterized by
interlinkages among security, political, cultural, social,
economic and developmental issues. It is important that
we should not fail in Guinea-Bissau. It is a small
country with a population of only about 1.3 million and
its economy, though debilitated, is also small in size.
This entails a correspondingly smaller international
assistance requirement to fix Guinea-Bissau's problems
and to make it self-sustainable.

Extreme poverty and under-development are the
main problems; 88 per cent of the population lives on
less than one dollar a day. The Security Council
mission to Guinea-Bissau reported that wider-spread
unemployment, especially among young people, posed
a potential long-term threat to peace and stability.
Fortunately, and rather surprisingly, the situation has
remained calm despite depressing socio-economic
conditions and political tensions.

The response of the international community to
the peace-building and developmental needs of Guinea-
Bissau, spearheaded by the United Nations, should
constitute a determined effort based on principles but
displaying operational flexibility, as our delegation has
said on earlier occasions. The democratic transition has
to be supported whole-heartedly with all available
resources.

It is surprising to know that a country such as
Guinea-Bissau, which is not even able to pay salaries
to its functionaries, has been making regular
repayments, along with interest, to the International
Monetary Fund. We agree with the observation of Mr.
Ramos Horta that there is a need to show special
consideration and pragmatism by the Bretton Woods
institutions to the ability of Guinea-Bissau to make
these repayments.

During the public briefing on Liberia on 27
August, the Foreign Minister of Ghana, while drawing
the attention of the Council to the situation in Guinea-
Bissau, had informed it that the commitments by the
international community to provide assistance to
Guinea-Bissau were too slow in materializing. And
earlier in June, in a preparatory meeting prior to the
Council's West African mission, the then-permanent
representative of Guinea-Bissau had pleaded her
country's case for international assistance in these
words: "Yesterday it was President Nino, today it is
Kumba Yala, tomorrow it will be someone else, but the
problems of Guinea-Bissau remain the same". I think
we need to reflect seriously on those words and devise
practical approaches that could bring real benefit to the
people of Guinea-Bissau.

