Mr. Sanz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
thankful for the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and for the work accomplished by the
Representative of the Secretary-General, Noel Sinclair.
Disarmament remains the key to progress in the peace
process in the context of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. We hope that after the recent adoption of
the Action Plan for the Completion of Weapons
Collection, stage II can be completed as soon as
possible.

We call on Francis Ona and his followers to
cooperate actively in the elimination of arms and to
participate in the process of transition towards
autonomy.

Spain welcomes the progress made by the
Constitutional Commission. We hope that the draft
constitution can be presented for approval by the
constituent assembly of Bougainville by the established
deadline and that elections will be held by the end of
2003.

We also welcome the recent signing by the
National Government and the parties to the
Bougainville Agreement of a memorandum of
understanding for the implementation of the autonomy
agreements, as well as the decision by the National
Government to withdraw its defence forces from the
island. We are grateful for the contribution of the Peace
Monitoring Group, which announced that it will cease
operations on 30 June. In this context, we support the
suggestion of UNPOB that the parties examine the
progress made on the elimination of weapons and, if
necessary, consider the possibility of replacing the
Peace Monitoring Group with another mechanism in
order to help UNPOB to complete its mandate and to
withdraw by the end of the year.

As the peace process moves forward, we must
stress the rehabilitation and reintegration of former
combatants and the reconstruction of infrastructure and
community services.

We trust that peace and stability will be
consolidated in Bougainville in such a manner that the
peace process will lead to the election of an
autonomous Government and the United Nations
Political Office will close upon the successful
completion of its mission.

