Ms. Palacio Vallelersundi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to join those who have spoken
before me in congratulating Germany on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, another
European presidency at a moment of whose importance
for the future of the Council and for the international
community as a whole we are all aware.

I would also like to associate myself with those
who have expressed their gratitude for the information
provided by Secretary of State Colin Powell. But I
would first of all like to say how important it is that he
has brought that information to the Security Council.
This once again represents recognition by the United
States of America of the importance of keeping the
question of Iraq within the framework of the United
Nations. Similarly, this reminds us that we are dealing
with a responsibility that belongs to the entire
international community.

The Secretary of State has put before us
compelling data that point to the existence of weapons
of mass destruction and to the consequences of their
possible use. Those data also confirm that Iraq is
deceiving the international community and that it is not
cooperating. Legally speaking, and in the context of the
United Nations and of resolution 1441 (2002) in
particular, that information leads to the legal
conclusion that there has been a flagrant violation of
the obligations established in resolution 1441 (2002).

The Secretary of State has also given us
information on the links between Saddam Hussain's
regime and terrorism. The international community
cannot allow a country to acquire components, develop
production lines, possess clandestine mobile
production units and laboratories or acquire stocks of
weapons of mass destruction. We cannot tolerate such a
violation of international law, as it endangers
international peace and security and undermines the
very foundations of non-proliferation regimes that it
has taken many decades to establish. Such a violation
also jeopardizes the very existence of an international
community that is able to organize peaceful
coexistence in our global society.

There is only one explanation for the lack of
cooperation by Saddam Hussain's regime with the
work of verifying his programmes of weapons of mass
destruction: that Saddam Hussain has not renounced
his plan to use such weapons as he has undoubtedly
used them in the past. As a Spaniard, I am particularly
concerned that biological and chemical weapons still
under Iraqi control, such as the ones shown to us today
by Secretary of State Colin Powell, could end up in the
hands of terrorists.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) have our full
confidence and support. But inspections are not an end
in themselves. Rather, they are the means of verifying
that Iraq is carrying out effective and complete
disarmament of its arsenal of weapons of mass
destruction. Inspections will only bear fruit if Iraq
cooperates actively. To date, it has not done so.

Time does not mean time for the inspectors. On
the contrary, it means an ultimatum to Saddam
Hussain's regime that it must disarm voluntarily. As
Secretary of State Colin Powell said, the inspectors are
not detectives. The inspectors should be the proxies for
the international community in witnessing voluntary
disarmament. We can consider all the mechanisms,
offices, additional inspections and minders we want.
But the issue will still be the same: the lack of will on
the part of Saddam Hussain's regime to fulfil its
disarmament obligations. We will only be deceiving
ourselves if we ignore that fact. Therefore, we can, and
must, demand a change of political will: full
cooperation with regard to disarmament, without delay
or subterfuge. What is at stake is the credibility of the
Security Council, which the Charter of the United
Nations established as the most valuable instrument for
the maintenance of peace. The Council is the key to our
collective security.

However, for 12 years we have witnessed
systematic non-compliance with Security Council
resolutions by Saddam Hussain's regime. Spain
therefore reiterates that it is imperative to send Saddam
Hussain's regime an unequivocal message that non-
compliance with the resolutions of the Council and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and long-
range missiles pose a threat to peace and that,
consequently, preserving international peace and
security means, as the Council has underscored, the
immediate and complete disarmament of Iraq.

A fundamental element of Spain's actions in the
current Iraqi crisis is respect for international law, of
which Security Council resolutions are an essential
part. My Government believes that in spite of Iraq's
continued non-compliance with its obligations -
which has been made patently clear from the disturbing
information just presented to us by Secretary of State
Powell - there is still is a chance for peace if Iraq
radically modifies its lack of compliance.
Saddam Hussain's regime must understand that if
it does not comply with its obligations, then it must
confront the grave consequences called for in
resolution 1441 (2002). But it should also understand
that the full responsibility falls solely upon Saddam
Hussain and his willingness to cooperate with the
obligations imposed by the international community.
That cooperation has heretofore been conspicuously
absent. The international community urges him to take
advantage of the last chance that has been given to him
under resolution 1441 (2002). For the sake of peace in
the world, I hope that Saddam Hussain's regime will
not miss that opportunity.

