Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, and like others who have spoken before me,
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing today.
We highly commend the pivotal and important role
played by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in fulfilling its mandate in the unstable
security situation prevailing in the country.

We also strongly condemn the repeated attacks
on the Mission, the latest of which took place in
December and was generally the worst of its kind
against peacekeeping operations over the past 25 years.
It resulted in the killing of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers,
concerning whom we express our condolences to the
Government and the people of Tanzania, the families
of the victims, and the United Nations. Because such
attacks have occurred in the past, we call on the
Government ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo to
pursue and prosecute their perpetrators. We commend
the Secretary-General's appointment of Mr. Titov to
lead the investigation into the attack.

We followed with concern the protests that took
place late last year and coincided with the date set
for elections in the 31 December agreement, which
stipulates the holding of presidential elections at the
end of 2017, which unfortunately did not take place.
Following the publication of the new electoral calendar
by the Independent National Electoral Commission,
in which the elections were formally delayed until
23 December 2018, opposition forces and their leaders,
along with many civil society organizations, renewed
their calls for demonstrations against the Government,
which unfortunately led to casualties and more than
140 arrests.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
also express our concern with regard to the facts and
statistics contained in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/ 16) and the Under-Secretary-General's
briefing in connection with displaced persons. The
Under-Secretary-General stated that those numbers
may increase, which would affect the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring States. In
that regard, we commend the work of MONUSCO in
protecting and faciliating support for civilians, as well
as the role of regional organizations working in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: the African Union,
the European Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. We pay tribute to their work to
ensuring stability and security in the country.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I sincerely thank Ambassador
Aboulatta, Permanent Representative of Egypt and
former Chair of the Committee, for developing its
working methods, following up diligently on the
political and security situation in the country, and
supporting the Group of Experts in fulfilling its
mandate, including following up on the investigation
into the attack against the two members of the group,
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, in March 2017. We
also commend the steps taken by the Secretary-General
in November to establish a United Nations panel of
inquiry to investigate the killing of the two experts,
and hope that the arrest of all perpetrators will be
effectuated as soon as possible.

Lastly, we congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, on her appointment as Head of MONUSCO,
and thank her predecessor, Mr. Maman Sidikou, for his
efforts.

