Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Last
week's debate on post-conflict stabilization (see S/PV.5895) was very productive, and we believe that
today's topic is inextricably linked to stabilization and
peacebuilding.

The protection of civilians is a very important
issue to Afghanistan as the Taliban and Al-Qaida
continue their heinous acts to disrupt the efforts of the
Government and international forces to establish a
stable, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan.

In our endeavour towards developing a
democratic State, it is essential that all citizens feel that
their human rights are secure and that everyone be
treated with dignity and respect. The most basic human
right is the right to live in security but, too often,
terrorists deprive people in Afghanistan of this
fundamental right.

Indiscriminate and brutal terrorist attacks are
carried out in Afghanistan, particularly in the southern
part of the country, as terrorists use fear tactics to
undermine people's trust in their Government and in
the international community. Whether in the form of
roadside bombings, suicide attacks or various other
heartless killings, the acts of Violence committed
against civilians by the Taliban and Al-Qaida are
premeditated and calculated. They are designed to
weaken the determination of the international
community to support Afghanistan and the trust that
the Government is trying to build with our citizens.

The enemies of Afghanistan intentionally seize
opportunities to use civilians in combat in order to
complicate the response of international and national
security forces. The insurgents attack remote Villages
populated by peaceful farmers and labourers. They take
shelter in or around homes and buildings, using them
to attack security forces, in an attempt to force combat
in civilian areas. Local residents are inevitably caught
in the middle.

The Afghan Government and international forces
spare no effort to avoid civilian casualties, while
terrorists use civilians as human shields. The suicide
attacks are the clear manifestation of deliberate killing
of innocent people. In fact, they thrive on a casual
disregard for the sanctity of human life and the enmity
that widespread violence breeds.

Although it is very difficult to avoid collateral
damage, an integral part of military planning is to
avoid harming civilians. The number of civilian
casualties is lower than often reported. Also, we are not
certain about the accuracy of casualty estimates
presented by international organizations, as they are
mainly based on reports that in many cases latter
proved to be exaggerated. In fact, we face an enemy
without a uniform or identity badge, indistinguishable
from local people. As a result, a dead Talib may be
perceived as a civilian casualty if he is an Afghan
Talib.

Despite the complexity of the issue, the
protection of civilians is of the highest priority for our
Government. Our forces act with the utmost
precautions during combat in civilian areas.
Furthermore, international and Afghan forces have
recently implemented new methods, including the use
of smaller bombs, and have revised the use of other
weaponries. A new mechanism of coordination
between the International Security Assistance Force
and our security forces has been established in the
eastern and southern zones, which allows us to
carefully plan operations and avoid collateral damage.

Thanks to these methods and mechanisms, my
delegation is happy to report that the number of
civilian casualties and air strikes during counter-
terrorist operations has decreased considerably since
2007. However, the Government of Afghanistan is
deeply concerned about any loss of civilian life and
urges the international community to exercise utmost
caution during combat operations.

Although we have come a long way, much more
needs to be done, both in Afghanistan and beyond.
Unfortunately, where there is armed conflict, there will
be casualties; that is a sad and painful truth. In order to
enjoy the popular support of the people, any use of
force by the Government requires an elaborate moral
justification. Terrorists and insurgents take advantage
of that necessity with acts of violence that erect a
barrier of fear and mistrust between the people and
their Government.

Nonetheless, the most important question before
us is how to minimize civilian casualties in armed
conflict. The international community and the
Government of Afghanistan have a common
understanding that it is imperative to enhance
coordination between national Governments and
international organizations with a view to protecting
civilians.

We are in a battle to win hearts and minds in
Afghanistan. Terrorists are ruthless and irresponsible
by nature: they intentionally exploit our sense of
fairness. However, our humanity is not a weakness. In
fact, it is the very foundation of our society. Hence it is
crucial that we act upon what we have learned here
today to secure the lives of civilians and engage local
communities - it is they who are at the front lines of
the struggle. After all, the diplomatic efforts here and
the counter-terrorist operations on the ground have a
common goal: to protect the peoples of our nations,
without whom there would be nothing to fight for.

