I thank the High Representative for his briefing and the members of the Security Council and others for their statements. Today's meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina takes place at a very challenging time as the international community is making enormous efforts to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This difficult time provides an opportunity for us to demonstrate that by acting together, in solidarity and with cooperation, we can overcome the difficulties the world is facing at present. Before I proceed with my statement, however, I would first like to express my condolences and deep regret to the families that have lost their loved ones to this dangerous virus. Our common fight against the pandemic has confirmed the importance of global and regional cooperation and of addressing the challenges that threaten development and stability, not only of our region, but also of the entire world. At these difficult times, we have witnessed remarkable friendship and solidarity between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and their citizens. In that context, let me mention the "green corridor" at the border crossing at Sremska Raea, opened in line with a decision of the Central European Free Trade Agreement Joint Committee to set up a faster system for the flow of goods among the countries of the region, including in particular humanitarian products. Serbia has made every effort to send necessary assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including medicine and protection equipment. Let me point out once again that my country intends to continue to provide necessary assistance and to express its solidarity with Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries in the region. Serbia continues to be firmly committed to promoting good-neighbourly relations, with the ultimate goal of overcoming the negative legacy of the past and of building a shared future based on the principles of mutual respect. By its constructive and active engagement within the regional framework and through regional initiatives and mechanisms, it is striving to make a positive contribution towards achieving common interests. In this way, my country has proven that sharing common values leads to the achievement of shared goals, particularly those that bring us closer to European Union membership. Serbia therefore strongly supports each and every step made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in that direction. Serbia has invested much effort in stabilizing the situation in the region and will continue to do so in future. In that regard, respect for the principles of territorial integrity and sovereignty, which form the basis of the international order, is of paramount importance. Serbia's position with regard to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is well known, often reiterated and absolutely indisputable. Serbia supports Bosnia and Herzegovina as one State with two entities - Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina - just as it supports all the decisions that the State makes in accordance with the competencies and agreements of its three constituent peoples: the Serbs, the Croats and the Bosniaks. Serbia will continue to develop good and active cooperation with both the central and entity authorities. We welcome the formation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's new institutions at the end of 2019 and the start of the work of the new Council of Ministers headed by Mr. Zoran Tegeltija. As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia wishes to point out that, 25 years after its signing, it is important to reaffirm the validity of the Agreement, which put an end to a civil war and provided the basis for stability in both Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a whole. Accordingly, I would like to recall that the mechanism for a possible amendment of the Dayton Agreement is well known and implies consent by the two entities and the three constituent peoples. Insistence on or imposition of a solution either from within or outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina is unacceptable. We are convinced that a functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina is just as viable without changing the fundamental principles of the Constitution of the country, if attention is focused on a package of reforms needed to proceed with European integration that is backed by the consensus that already exists in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia unequivocally supports active dialogue to solve all outstanding issues within Bosnia and Herzegovina. It believes that all key decisions relevant for the country's future are to be taken following such dialogue and pursuant to agreements reached between the entities and among the three constituent peoples. We call on all actors to demonstrate the required level of responsibility and to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric, mutual accusations and unilateral acts that are contrary to the letter and spirit of the Dayton Agreement. The Agreement came as a compromise and reflects a delicate balance, achieved the hard way, between opposing conceptions of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Subsequent attempts to favour any of the models proffered 25 years ago are not at all conducive to full and lasting stability in the country. We also call on all actors involved in political processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as on the representatives of the international community, to demonstrate greater responsibility and forgo the rhetoric aimed at disqualifying other political actors, especially those elected legitimately in democratic elections. We believe that dialogue within the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only way forward in order to raise the level of trust and confidence and achieve a compromise solution for the future development of the country. As in the past, Serbia will continue to strive to make a maximally constructive contribution in that regard. Strengthening regional cooperation by engaging in numerous activities and taking responsible positions in order to fulfil the justifiable expectations of all citizens continues to be the lasting commitment of my country. Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia's key regional partners. We welcome the economic progress being achieved in the region, which brings social development and well- being to all our citizens. As we did in the past, we shall continue to work with utmost dedication towards promoting regional cooperation. Let me point out once again that Serbia is firmly committed to peace, stability and reconciliation. As I said at the beginning of my statement, the solidarity that is our reality in this time of the COVID-19 crisis should extend beyond the crisis. We believe that the policy of dialogue, good-neighbourliness and cooperation is second to none. Sadly, 25 long years after the end of the conflict, the devastation of the war has not been entirely overcome, as those who perished in it cannot be brought back to life. What we can and should to do to restore confidence in our future, however, is to condemn all crimes and bring their perpetrators to justice, while paying our respects to and empathizing with all victims of the conflict, irrespective of their ethnicity or religion. Only in that way shall we make progress on the road towards economic and political stability, lasting reconciliation and shared prosperity.
