Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for providing my delegation with the
opportunity to participate in this open debate. The
recent developments regarding possible arms
shipments to Zimbabwe have shown once again how
topical this issue is, both in the context of the General
Assembly and for the Security Council.

Building on the statement made this morning by
the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to emphasize that we
agree with the Secretary-General's analysis of the
current state of affairs regarding the issue of small
arms. The Netherlands fully supports the
recommendations made in his report (8/2008/258), and
we are pleased and encouraged by his fresh approach
to this important topic. In particular, my delegation
welcomes the broad approach to the issue, the
connection to capacity-building and development, the
2

focus on improving cooperation between national law
enforcement authorities and the inclusion of issues
such as ammunition flows and poor end-use
verification.

The problems arising from small arms
proliferation are still plentiful. We need to continue
striving for full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We are confident that the
upcoming Biennial Meeting of States will propel and
steer action on international cooperation, marking and
tracing, stockpile management and surplus disposal,
and illicit brokering.

The recommendations made by last year's United
Nations expert group on illicit brokering, which was
chaired by my fellow countryman Mr. Prins ~ who is
sitting next to me - deserve follow-up, While our
ambitions for a legal instrument should not be
abandoned. And we need to weigh and reweigh our
methods of curbing the proliferation of small arms in
the light of the knowledge we have gained.

In recent years, the international community has
become more aware of the connection between armed
violence and development. It is increasingly
understood that the problems arising from small arms
need to be addressed not as a separate technical issue,
but as an issue that is embedded within a broader
development approach. The 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) is a
confirmation, at the highest level, of the new consensus
that security and development are intimately linked.

Armed violence has a major impact on the often
vulnerable countries that suffer from it, as it affects
economies, health sectors, budding democracies and, in
general, the fabric of society. To deal with small arms
and light weapons effectively is to recognize the
myriad ways in which armed violence affects society
and to act on it accordingly. If the international
community is serious about achieving the Millennium
Development Goals * which I believe it is - we need
to start looking beyond the efforts directly aimed at
achieving those goals and realize that armed violence
will thwart any substantial improvement in levels of
development.

The Secretary-General recommended that we
develop key indicators for the area of small arms and
use those to determine a set of measurable goals. In
that respect, the efforts in the framework of the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development are
08-32416
mentioned as being encouraging. The signatories to the
Declaration, which come from all regional groups,
have started to work on measurability in the field of
armed violence and are currently reflecting on the
possibility of developing so-called security for
development goals. Those goals could be
complementary to the Millennium Development Goals
and, as such, bridge the gap between security and
development.

It is our hope that the understanding of the
correlation between armed violence and development
will become firmly rooted both in United Nations
standards and in international action on small arms
proliferation.

