Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/795) on the discharge of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), pursuant to the relevant
recommendations set out resolution 2410 (2018). We
thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for her detailed briefing
on recent developments in Haiti and the activities of
MINUJUSTH during the period under review.
Cote d'Ivoire is very concerned about developments
in Haiti, characterized by the recent social protests that
led to the loss of human life and significant material
damage. My country condemns those unfortunate
events, which undermine the rebuilding process
and exacerbate the living conditions of the Haitian
population, which aspires to peace, stability and
development. In the light of the Secretary-General's
report, my delegation will focus on three issues - the
sociopolitical situation, the economic situation and the
exit strategy.

On the political front, the situation in Haiti remains
worrisome due to the persistence of socio-political
tensions. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on all stakeholders
to act with restraint and respect the rule of law. It also
urges them to engage in an inclusive political dialogue
to address the major challenges facing the country. In
that regard, it welcomes the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in providing
consensual responses to the social challenges raised by
the rising price of oil.

My delegation also welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Jean Henry Ce'ant as Prime Minister in early
August. It looks forward to the approval of his
appointment by Parliament, as well as the formation
of a Government whose mission will be to lead Haiti
towards the consolidation of peace and stability.

My delegation believes that the achievement of
these objectives should take into account the following
aspects: the strengthening of cooperation between the
executive branch and Parliament; the fight against
corruption; reform of the texts governing political
parties; the need for the Government, the various
political parties and members of civil society to
overcome their political differences; the adoption of
a governance or stability pact, which should result
from the national sector-based dialogue and encourage
all relevant actors and institutions to support the
implementation of agreed political, economic and
social objectives.

My country also calls on the international
community to support all efforts to promote dialogue
in Haiti in order to create conditions favourable to
the holding of peaceful, credible and transparent
parliamentary and local elections in October 2019.
Cote d'Ivoire urges the Haitian authorities to fulfil their
obligations with a view to guaranteeing the success of
the electoral process.

With regard to the difficult economic situation in
Haiti, my delegation urges the Haitian authorities to
take appropriate measures to create a climate of trust
between the population and national institutions and to
reassure investors in order to mobilize the financing
necessary to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. To that end, the Government of Haiti should
adopt legislative reforms and implement programmes
and projects that address the immediate and long-term
needs of the population.

Finally, under the post-crisis strategy, my
delegation welcomes the commitment of MINUJUSTH,
the United Nations country team and all other partners
working with the people and Government of Haiti to
build peace, stability and development of Haiti. My
delegation MINUJUSTH welcomes, in that regard, the
actions successfully carried out by the Government
of Haiti with the support of MINUJUSTH, including
the mitigation measures taken to accompany the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission, prevent a
security vacuum and ensure a smooth transition in the
departments concerned with the strengthening of the
capacities of the Haitian National Police, as well as the
intensification of the community Violence reduction
programme; the finalization of the security transition
plan in anticipation of the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH,
taking into account the risks and national capacities to
respond adequately to security needs; the development
of the joint resource mobilization strategy to support
the implementation of strategic priorities, taking into
account the requirements of transition planning.

My delegation also welcomes the results achieved
with respect to respect for the rule of law and the
promotion of gender and human rights, including
the improvement of the detention conditions of the
prison population.

The success of the MINUJUSTH exit strategy
will inevitably involve close cooperation and the
harmonization of priorities among the various
stakeholders to build and consolidate Haitian public
institutions. My delegation therefore calls on the
Government of Haiti to collaborate fully with the
United Nations so as to ensure the success of the
previously identified priority tasks in order to achieve
a smooth and efficient transition without a United
Nations peacekeeping presence.

In that regard, my country urges the Haitian
authorities to take all measures necessary to meet the
persistent challenges, including the capacity building
of the Haitian National Police and the pursuit of reform
in all rule-of-law sectors, including human rights and
criminal justice reforms. It also encourages the Haitian
authorities to take steps to implement the principle of
accountability for the perpetrators of proven violations
of human rights.

In conclusion, my delegation congratulates all
United Nations staff who work tirelessly to strengthen
peace and development of Haiti. We wish Ms. Helen
Meagher La Lime, the new Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of MINUJUSTH,
every success in her new duties.

