The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Croatia.

Today's meeting comes at the end of an eventful
year marked by a number of encouraging developments
in the Middle East. Croatia joined the Council at a time
that was marked by renewed hope for reaching
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Under strong
United States leadership, we have witnessed the
development of a comprehensive, direct and result-
oriented Israeli-Palestinian negotiation process within
the framework set out in Annapolis a year ago.
The parties have built a solid framework for
negotiations and have direct, serious and substantive
talks regularly and at all levels. We applaud their
unwavering commitment to peace.

On the regional front, important regional tracks
have opened between Israel and Syria and between
Syria and Lebanon. In Lebanon, the adoption of the
Doha Agreement led to developments that hold the
promise of a renewed era of democracy, genuine
national reconciliation and stabilization.

A series of high-level meetings this week
reaffirmed the international community's commitment
to the shared goal of a two-State solution and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Two days ago, the Council
adopted resolution 1850 (2008), an important
benchmark in the peace process that endorsed those
achievements and expressed support for the
irreversibility and continuation of the Annapolis
process and its guiding principles. To complement that
process, it also urges an intensification of efforts to
foster mutual recognition and peaceful coexistence in
the region.

The resolution came at a critical point when all
efforts should be channelled into preserving
momentum and establishing an environment that will
enable the parties to continue to build on the progress
achieved while being guided by the principles and the
mutual understanding reflected in resolution 1850
(2008) and in the Quartet's statement of 9 November
2008.

We recognize the challenges that the parties face
on their journey, even more so now as they embark
upon a sensitive period of political transition. We
understand that the political and diplomatic processes
remain inextricably linked with the situation on the
ground, and hope to see tangible changes in accordance
with the obligations to which both parties have
committed themselves under the Road Map and
reaffirmed in Annapolis.

The deterioration of the humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza and the renewed rocket
attacks on southern Israel, including dozens this week
alone, which have an impact of the activities of United
Nations agencies and humanitarian assistance
operations, remain a serious concern.

Furthermore, we understand that development
and peace are mutually reinforcing and that economic
development is an essential part of a lasting solution.
That is why the continuing international engagement
remains critical, to stimulate both Palestinian economic
renewal and the reform processes, notably in the sphere
of security and the rule of law. We hope to see the
success of Jenin, Nablus and Hebron replicated
elsewhere. The ability of the Palestinian Authority to
build credible institutions and a security infrastructure
that is willing and able to combat terrorism and other
threats is both an essential element of Palestinian State-
building and a legitimate expectation on the Israeli
side.

While respecting the integrity of the bilateral
negotiations, we should not forget the regional
dimension of the process. The efforts of responsible
regional partners to secure just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, are a valuable complement to the
ongoing peace process.

In many of its aspects, the Arab-Israeli conflict
remains a defining conflict of our time. Tensions in the
region reverberate globally. That makes the
irresponsible and threatening rhetoric coming from the
Iranian leadership all the more alarming.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our belief
in the ongoing peace process. To quote Prime Minister
Ivo Sanader of Croatia and others, this is the best
chance we have. The parties have set into motion a
momentum that we cannot afford to lose. They deserve
our full support on their journey. We have a clear
shared goal to turn into reality the vision of two States,
a democratic and peaceful Palestine living side by side
with a democratic and secure Israel, and to advance the
momentum towards just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

