Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to welcome
the presence here with us today of Prime Minister
Aristide Gomes of Guinea-Bissau. We would also
like to congratulate Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), on his appointment to
this important role. We wish him every success in his
work and thank him for his briefing.

We have listened carefully to the information shared
with us today by Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-
Bissau, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
and Ms. Tavares Pinto.

We note the significant progress that has been
made in helping Guinea-Bissau to emerge from its
political crisis following the decision by President
Jose Mario Vaz to appoint a new Prime Minister and
form a consensus Government. We encourage all the
political forces in the country, despite their ongoing
disagreements, to work with the Cabinet to achieve a
sustainable settlement.

We support the work of the country's leaders
to prepare for the elections planned for November.
We are pleased that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau is making a
significant contribution to supporting the electoral
processes, including by mobilizing means from
international partners. We support the mission's
intention to facilitate constitutional reform, as noted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/771), and
dialogue should begin on that as soon as possible. In
that regard, the time between the parliamentary and
presidential elections would be very suitable. We
continue to believe that this measure is critical from the
point of View of resolving the issues around the Guinea-
Bissau Constitution and ensuring the prevention of a
relapse into political turbulence there.

We are grateful to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for promoting a political
settlement in Guinea-Bissau. We note the decision
of ECOWAS to remove the sanctions it imposed on
Bissau-Guineans in February, which we think is a very
timely step. However, we believe that any arrangements
for the country's future should be based on the desires
of its own citizens, without pressure or the imposition
of ready-made solutions from outside. Only through
a response to its genuine national interests can they
play a positive role in the work of helping the country
emerge from its long-standing crisis.

