Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Madam President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for convening today's
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. The Maldives aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland, who
spoke on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, a cross-regional group of
23 States, of which Switzerland is Coordinator.

The Security Council represents and acts on behalf
of all States Members of the United Nations, pursuant
to article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. In
keeping with that mandate, there is an obligation
among every member of the Council to ensure that
every decision is transparent and in the best interests
of the global community. The Maldives welcomes these
inclusive annual debates on the working methods of
this august body as integral to productively engaging
with the entire membership of the United Nations.
We especially welcome the issuance of presidential
note (S/2014/268) ,on a Security Council member
or members acting as penholders for the drafting of
resolutions, presidential statements or press statements.
It is particularly pleasing to note that penholder
members are encouraged to exchange information
and consult with all members of the Council and
relevant stakeholder Member States from the general
membership of the United Nations.

In this modern day and age, the importance of
engaging with all States Members of the United
Nations cannot be overstated. The Maldives echoes the
call for the Council to take note of recommendations
made today by the wider membership and calls for
it to provide a summary of recommendations based
thereon, with the intention of guiding the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

The need for democratization and the maintenance
of the rule of law at the international level is widely
accepted and of paramount importance to the
functioning of the core organs of the United Nations. In
that spirit, the Maldives continues to advocate for the
willing waiver of the right to exercise the veto in cases
of mass atrocity crimes. The Maldives commends the
proposal made by France to that effect. We encourage
all permanent members of the Council to engage with
ACT on exploring this issue further. The time is now
for finalization of a code of conduct on refraining from
the use of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.

As we approach 2016 and the appointment of a new
secretary-General, the time has also come for greater
transparency and inclusion. The role of the Secretary-
General has evolved immensely since the foundation of
the Organization, and, as the premier representative of
the global community, his or her selection is rightfully
subject to the input of the global community. The
general membership of the United Nations deserves
to understand the vision and personality of the future
Secretary-General before he or she is selected. Similarly,
the selection process should reflect the concerns of the
wider membership in order to enhance the legitimacy
of the Secretary-General as a true representative of the
global community. The Maldives stands behind ACT's
initiative to create a constructive dialogue with both
the Security Council and the General Assembly and
encourages all Member States to support this initiative.

It is only together, with both permanent and
non-permanent members of the Council working
in tandem, that higher standards of accountability,
coherence and transparency can be reached in the
functioning of this core organ of the United Nations.
It is our enduring hope that we continue to strive for
better practices with outcomes that support global
peace and prosperity.

