Mr. Dondua (Georgia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Lithuanian presidency and, personally,
my good friend Minister Linkevieius, for bringing this
important issue back to the Council. Today's discussion
is timely, especially since there has been only one debate
on the matter (see S/PV.7003), two years ago, following
the landmark resolution 1738 (2006). We believe the
Council should address this important issue more
actively and frequently, as we face an ever-increasing
and worrying trend of violence against journalists in
both conflict and non-conflict situations, including by
non-State actors.

Timely and credible information is an essential
tool for the international community to adequately
assess a situation and, where possible, to prevent or
respond to an emerging crisis. It would therefore be no
overstatement to say that the information obtained by
journalists often contributes directly to international
peace and security. We note with deep concern that the
number ofjournalists killed while doing their job has
been consistently increasing in recent years. The most
brutal and appalling examples are the recent beheadings
ofjournalists by Daesh.

Areas controlled by non-State actors and terrorist
groups, as well as territories under foreign occupation,
are zones of high risk for journalists, with threats to
their lives from actors operating in total denial of
established legal norms. Regrettably, my country is one
of those that has witnessed the death ofjournalists on
its soil, during the 2008 war with Russia. Along with
other civilians, three journalists were killed and four
wounded while exercising their professional functions,
including a Dutch journalist who died in a Russian
missile strike on civilian targets on 12 August 2008.
Barbed-wire fences and other artificial obstacles along
the occupation line have been installed, not only to
disrupt people-to-people contacts and humanitarian
access, but also to prevent journalists from entering
the occupied territories and shedding light on the dire
human rights situation on the ground. In April 2014, the
occupation troops illegally detained three journalists
from a Georgian television channel who were working
on a report about the installation of barbed-wire fences
in the area. None of those cases was subjected to a
proper investigation, owing to a lack of political will on
the part of the authorities in effective control.

Unfortunately, such is the trend worldwide.
Appalling findings are set out in the Secretary-
General's latest report on the protection of civilians
(8/2013/689). The perpetrators were apprehended
and prosecuted in less than 5 per cent of the cases,
and accountability for perpetrators of attacks on
journalists is virtually non-existent. We believe that the
United Nations should start to counter this dangerous
tendency by declaring unequivocally that a regime of
military occupation cannot serve as an excuse from the
responsibility of all stakeholders to ensure a safe and
enabling environment for journalists to perform their
work independently, without undue interference or fear
of censorship, persecution or prosecution. We should
redouble our efforts to increase the effectiveness of the
existing legal and political means to that end.

In that context, we commend the work of the Human
Rights Council, which last September adopted by
consensus resolution 27/5, on the safety ofjournalists.
We welcome the fact that the resolution is focused on
ending impunity. It sends a critical and unambiguous
message that there is no excuse for allowing attacks
against and murders of journalists and media workers
to go unpunished. We call on Member States where
journalists are at risk to heed the specific legal and
policy measures set out in the resolution and implement
them without delay, in close cooperation with the
United Nations, other relevant international entities,
civil society organizations andjournalistic networks.

We share the View that identifying journalists as
a special category of persons that should be protected
in the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions is an important
first step in ensuring their protection.To that end, given
the critical role of the Secretary-General, and while
encouraging him to continue including the issue of the
protection ofjournalists in armed conflict in his reports
on the protection of civilians, we would also suggest
considering the possibility of specific reporting by the
Secretary-General on the subject.

Another worrying development is related to the
manipulation of information. Where State-run mass
media are engaged in fierce propaganda that encourages
extreme forms of nationalism and violent ideology
while attempting to justify the grabbing and annexing
of foreign lands, social radicalization and militarization
become normal phenomena.

In conclusion, may I once again express my
country's firm commitment and readiness to actively
contribute to and support the freedom of expression and
the safety of journalists worldwide, as they constitute
the cornerstone of free and pluralistic media.

