Mr. Jovanovic: The Peace Agreement initialled
yesterday finally puts an end to the tragic and bloody
four-year-old civil war and creates conditions for turning
the dangerous crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina into a
period of peace, stability and cooperation. This Peace
Agreement is not a perfect one, something that can, indeed,
be said of a great majority of the peace agreements
concluded throughout history. It is a result of necessary and
reasonable - although at times painful and difficult -
compromises. All parties to the civil war and the Bosnian
crisis have come to realize that an imperfect peace is better
than a protracted and uncertain war and that only in peace
can just goals be best achieved. Even though by this Peace
Agreement a victory over war has been achieved,
nevertheless a war for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement provisions must be won and mutual confidence
must be restored, as well as true stability and cooperation
in the region.

It would have been best had the bloody civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina not been waged at all. It could
have been avoided, had Ambassador Cutileiro's plan been
accepted in time and had not one of the sides, encouraged
from the outside, subsequently withdrawn its consent. The
Yugoslav side, as is well known, had strongly supported the
Cutileiro plan and solemnly expressed its readiness to
recognize Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent State
after its completion. This most effectively contradicts all
subsequent charges that Yugoslavia has had territorial
pretensions against this former Yugoslav republic.

I have no wish to respond to the attacks and threats
against my country put forward by the Minister of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. They are in sharp contrast to the letter
and spirit of the initialled Peace Agreement, and we hope
that they do not announce a departure from the commitment
to peace.

By putting an end to the war and crisis in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a major step has been taken towards
overcoming the crisis in the former Yugoslavia as a whole.
However, that step alone is not sufficient. It is necessary
immediately to end all other forms of war, which,
throughout the crisis in the previous Yugoslavia, have been
systematically waged against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Serb people as a whole. Media,
economic, psychological and propaganda warfare against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Serb people
represent an essential part of the war in Bosnia, and
therefore with its ending they should also be eliminated.
The cruel and comprehensive sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which have brought
enormous suffering to the civilian population and
economically crippled the entire region of south-eastern
Europe, should immediately cease. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia expects that its rights in the United Nations
and other international organizations will be quickly
restored.

By its active and consistent contribution to the
process of negotiation and conclusion of the Agreement,
as well as by the decisive acceptance of all previous
peace proposals in connection with the Bosnian crisis, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has unequivocally
demonstrated its commitment to peace and to overcoming
the consequences of the four-year-old civil war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As was the case throughout the peace
process, Yugoslavia will continue to be a reliable bulwark
in the process of implementation of the Peace Agreement
as well. We are confident that the Republic of Srpska will
closely follow the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in its
constructive approach to the Peace Agreement. We hope
that other sides to the Agreement will do the same.

In that regard, a huge responsibility rests with the
international community, particularly as embodied in the
Security Council and the Contact Group. The international
community should treat all sides to the conflict equally.
Equality is an essential element of the Peace Agreement
and a basic precondition if the Agreement is to be
sincerely and fully implemented by all the sides.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expresses its gratitude for the hospitality of
the Government of the United States as well as for the
huge efforts that it and other members of the Contact
Group have invested, efforts without which this Peace
Agreement could hardly have been reached. The Yugoslav
Government also wishes to express its gratitude to all
members of the Security Council for their efforts during
the peace process which culminated in today's crucial
decision.

From the outset of the crisis and the conflicts in the
previous Yugoslavia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has been consistently committed to the equality, freedom
and dignity of all the peoples of the previous Yugoslavia.
The fact that the secessionist Republic of Croatia decided
to deny these rights to the Serb people led to their
legitimate resistance against the new Croat regime. After
Croatia's genocidal attacks on the United Nations

 

Protected Areas (UNPAs), known as Sectors West, South
and North, and the enormous suffering that led to the
exodus of more than 200,000 Serbs from their ancestral
homes, a Peace Agreement on the region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem (Sirmium) finally
provides hope that the problems can be resolved without
military means and in a peaceful, negotiated manner.

The Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem (Sirmium) is of prime
importance for the peace, stability and normalization of the
situation and relations in the previous Yugoslavia and in
this part of Europe. The Agreement underlines the
predominant role of the forces of peace and reason in the
peace drive and is an effort to use political means and
compromise to solve the extremely complex problems
created after Croatia carried out a unilateral and forcible
secession from the former Yugoslavia in mid-1991.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia believes that the
Agreement represents a solid basis for the full honouring
and effective and lasting protection of the rights of the
region's Serb population by ensuring it peace, freedom and
equality.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is of the opinion that by placing the Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem region under a
Transitional Administration, the Security Council and its
members have taken on a lasting responsibility for the
security of the region and for respecting the human rights,
basic freedoms and welfare of all its inhabitants.
Conversely, the Transitional Administration and the
multinational forces should be responsible to the Security
Council. It is quite evident that all the residents of the
region should have equal rights, including all refugees and
displaced persons from Krajina. It is imperative that the
mandate, structure and organization of the Transitional
Administration be in full accordance with the essence of the
Basic Agreement and encompass the protection and full
equality of all residents.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expects the Transitional Administration to take
control of, and enhance, all existing public services and
administration, because they enjoy the trust of the
population. It is imperative that the proportionality of the
ethnic structure of the region be maintained, both in the
number of people employed in general and, especially, in
the number in top-level management jobs. The principle of
proportionality must be especially respected in the police
and judicial system.

It is clear from the Agreement that the control of
border crossings and the issuance of personal documents
is under the jurisdiction of the Transitional
Administration. The first regional elections must be free
and fair and carried out at the regional, county and
municipal levels, safeguarding the identity of the region.
A council of municipalities with sufficient regional
regulative power will have to be established, which would
represent and protect the interests of the people of the
region. It should be clear that the permanent presence in
the region of the international community, as a guarantor
of respect for the human rights of all residents, should be
maintained even after the end of the transitional period.

The restoration of the confidence of the population
of the region is a key element of the implementation of
the Basic Agreement. For that reason, it is important to
restrain any attempt or action that may interfere with the
provisions of the Basic Agreement and hinder the process
of its implementation.

