The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his remarks addressed to me.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I think that we have had a very interesting
discussion today which opens a new dimension to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
my delegation and I listened with great interest to our
guests from the region.
The United States believes that the Panel
provided a broadly accurate picture of the emerging
and troubling economic dimension of the crisis. We
may not agree with all of the elements of the report, but
we cannot ignore this dimension of the conflict if we
want peace to come to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. I am pleased that it seems that
we all agree that the Panel should complete its work
and should work to further refine its report over the
next several months.

The report of the Panel reminds us that the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
not being used for the benefit of the Congolese people.
While we do not believe that the pursuit of wealth was
a cause of the conflict, we do believe that the
unregulated pursuit of the wealth of the Congo is a
consequence of the conflict. The longer the conflict
drags on, the more blurred the lines between cause and
consequence become.

We must also, in looking at the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, give serious
consideration to the imminent report of the
International Rescue Committee, which maintains that
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has caused mortality to increase by 1 million deaths per
year since the outbreak. We should also bear in mind
the humanitarian and human rights reporting of our
Secretary-General and his colleagues in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Finally, we again recall with
sorrow and outrage the murder of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) workers on
26 April.

There are two areas in the report of the Panel of
Experts that I would like to call to the attention of the
Chairperson and her colleagues in connection with
their further work. The first is the inclusion of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe in a category labelled as "so-called
negative forces". While we are certain that the Panel in
no way meant to diminish the opprobrium with which
the Council regards the perpetrators of the Rwanda
genocide, this is an unfortunate linguistic construction
that we hope can be avoided in future.

The second issue has to do with the Kiswahili
language, which is misidentified as a foreign tongue
spoken by those who invaded the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Kiswahili is widely spoken in the Congo
and is a lingua franca of commerce and intellectual life
throughout East and Central Africa. It is an African
language that binds Africans together within their
countries and within their region, and labelling it as a
foreign language in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is inaccurate.

The report tells us that the actions of those who
are in violation of the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo stand out as most objectionable.
However, the report also states that the activities of the
Congolese rebel groups, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and some of its
allies are contributing to these troubling events. In
addition to the message that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's occupiers are financing their activities
through illegal or illicit activities, we also take from
this report the fact that the country remains subject to
foreign and indigenous corrupt practices. While this is
a colonial legacy, it is also a post-independence
phenomenon. While foreigners must accept their
responsibility for the plundering of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's resources, so, too, must
Congolese, past and present, take such responsibility.

Another cause for concern has been the failure of
the Government of Zimbabwe to cooperate with the
Panel. We are not here to pass judgement on that
Government's activities, but we must remind each
other of our obligation to cooperate with this type of
investigation. The Governments that have extended the
fullest cooperation are those that came under the
greatest criticism. This cannot be allowed to create a
future dynamic whereby Governments choose non-
cooperation as their best policy option.

I want to repeat something that other speakers
have noted, because it is essential to our discussion
here today and to the follow-up. Our goal is not to
punish or apportion blame; our goal is, and must
remain, the successful implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. I note that Minister Mbabazi and others
this morning noted that the Lusaka Agreement offers a
unique opportunity to find peace in the region. We
agree, and we want to continue working with all of the
partners in the area within the Lusaka process to realize
its potential.

Peace based on the Lusaka Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions is the only
answer in the region. That is why the Security Council
is sending a mission to the region later this month, and
that is why we are here today. We believe that peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must rest on
three pillars: the full withdrawal of all foreign forces;
the disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration of armed groups, particularly the former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and the
Interahamwe; and the implementation of a new
political dispensation arrived at via the inter-Congolese
dialogue. Ending the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
protecting its people cannot be accomplished in a
vacuum, but they are both near-term and long-term
requirements. The foreign and domestic parties must
end such activities so as to help create a climate in
which peace can take root. However, the Congolese
parties themselves must also build the institutions that
alone can provide for the human rights and welfare of
their people.

With new momentum in the peace process, we
hope that the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is coming to an end. As we look to the
future, I recall the words of Abraham Lincoln, who,
speaking in the waning days of our own national
nightmare, said:

"With malice toward none, with charity for
all let us strive on to finish the work we are in,
to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him
who shall have borne the battle and for his widow
and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and
cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves
and with all nations."

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

