Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank the Brazilian presidency of
the Council for convening the debate on this very
pertinent subject regarding the interdependence
between security and development.

My delegation believes that the foundation of
peace and security is the establishment of a deliberate
and sustained socio-economic development framework
for post-conflict zones. It is equally important to
engender policy dialogue and to implement
development projects and programmes in areas
susceptible to conflict and instability. We also believe
that security should be anchored in a firm foundation
of political, social and economic infrastructure, both in
areas that are both emerging from conflict and those
that offer refuge.

It is pleasing to note that an increasing number of
Member States are purposefully reorienting their
foreign policy objectives and principles with a view to
strengthening the contribution of development
assistance in building relations.

The gradual demilitarization of foreign policy
doctrines by a good number of Member States is also a
welcome development that has a positive bearing on
security and development. We continue to witness
more and more resources being allocated to advancing
the development agenda, establishing strong
institutions of governance and the rule of law and
promoting and protecting human rights. The elevation
of development priorities to achieve parity with
military spending is a commendable shift in policy and
strategy that demonstrates the willingness of Member
States to offer individual and collective responses to
the global challenge of addressing the development
deficit and threats of insecurity in many parts of the
world.

The international community collectively
possesses abundant resources and capability to lift
humanity up from conditions of deprivation and
underdevelopment. In that way, we would have
avoided a more expensive route in favour of a more
sustainable and effective approach to maintaining
peace and security. Our bold initiatives in the area of
conflict management will be in vain if the same level
of commitment and resource mobilization is not
replicated to meet one of the main goals enshrined in
the Millennium Declaration, namely; the quest to lift
over a billion people from poverty and hunger.

We should not allow the quest for technology and
innovation to impede international cooperation and to
further widen the gap between excesses on one hand
and extreme poverty on the other. The opportunities
presented by liberalized markets should result in their
being accessible, as well as in increased trade and
investment, which has so far only succeeded in giving
some economies the security of development and
growth more than others. That is the challenge of
security we need to overcome.

The benefits accruing from globalization should
account for our strongest partnership and
interdependence in securing the future of all mankind.
Investing in one another's sustainable development has
the shared value of increasingly driving nations closer
to each other, as opposed to alienating them from one
another. We have to build a stronger and
interdependent development community. That is the
most sustainable way of eliminating conflict and
insecurity.

At this juncture, let me commend the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations for their hard work in the
area of conflict prevention, monitoring and
management, as well restoration of security and of law
and order and the rebuilding and strengthening of
institutions of governance.

My delegation believes that only the United
Nations has the moral authority and the universal
legitimacy to intervene in situations of instability that
threaten to paralyze States. However, in order to bring
a lasting solution to peace and security challenges,
more emphasis should be given to the economic
strategy that will be followed in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. The art of mediation and conflict
management should therefore always be accompanied
by clear policy guidelines on resource mobilization and
the establishment of long-term development priorities.

We are fully persuaded that development
assistance is by far a much more meaningful and
lasting response to the challenge of insecurity, simply
because it brings results. It sustains countries and helps
prevent their eventual collapse. It is also much more
appreciated than fragmented aid because of its
participatory nature. It generates security and goodwill
even far beyond the domestic spheres of the State
engulfed in conflict, and it is the ultimate in ensuring
that the contagion effect of conflict is limited. The
gains of development will undoubtedly set us on a
good pedestal of achieving a secure and stable political
environment.
