Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
Ms. Ursula Mueller's comprehensive briefing. We
also welcome the presence here this morning of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Khaled
Sulaiman Aljarallah.

Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
conflict and the seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. While there have
clearly been significant developments on the political
and military fronts in recent months, it is also clear that
millions of people are still facing incredibly precarious
conditions, further exacerbated by the harsh winter
weather. It is because of the daily risks and suffering
facing Syrians that it is essential to provide immediate,
unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance through
the efficient use of all available means, including cross-
border access. Peru is of the view that it is essential to
extend that assistance for another 12 months owing to
the high degree of sophistication and security it offers
and the lack of any real alternative to it for those who
are most vulnerable. We hope that this crucial issue will
be addressed this afternoon from the sole perspective
of alleviating human suffering and that the Security
Council will remain united in its responsibility to
protect the people of Syria.

The north-western part of the country remains the
focus of attention because of its population density,
high volatility and latent risks owing to terrorist groups'
extensive control of the area. We are alarmed that the
levels of violence in that area have been increasing
since October and that, as a result, another 136 people
have been killed amid arbitrary arrests, kidnappings
and the destruction of infrastructure.

Peru reiterates its condemnation of terrorism
in the strongest terms and believes that the terrorist
groups remaining in Idlib and other areas of the Syrian
territory must be held accountable and brought to
justice. We nevertheless stress that we must not use the
fight against this scourge as a means to justify putting
the lives of millions of people at risk.

On the other hand, Peru commends the remarkable
efforts being made by the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors, under extremely complex logistical
circumstances, to provide sustained assistance to the
more than 67,000 internally displaced persons in Al-Hol
camp. We note that almost half of these displaced
persons are from Iraq, which is why we encourage the
authorities of that country to continue their efforts to
facilitate the return of their nationals, a process that we
stress must take place within internationally accepted
parameters and with the support of the United Nations.

Also with regard to displaced persons, we stress
that any initiative that would lead to the return to Syria
of its millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons must be carried out within internationally
accepted parameters that guarantee their dignified,
safe and voluntary return. To that end, we consider it
essential for the parties to continue to develop measures
that might promote a better climate of understanding,
including the release of detainees, the identification of
missing persons and the return of mortal remains. We
welcome the work being done in this regard through
the Astana framework, but we note the urgency of
achieving more substantial progress in this area. We
also stress the importance of mobilizing international
community support for humanitarian mine clearance
and the removal of improvised explosive devices in
Syria. These devices continue to wreak havoc on the
population and hinder the delivery of assistance.

I conclude by reaffirming that only by achieving a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) will
it be possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster in

Syria while fully respecting the country's sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity.

