Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening today's meeting, at
which the Council has adopted resolution 1974 (2011),
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for an additional 12
months. Afghanistan welcomes the adoption of today's
resolution as an important step towards strengthening
our partnership with the United Nations and the
international community. The United Nations offers a
vital contribution in the effort to achieve peace,
security and stability in Afghanistan. For this, the
people and Government of Afghanistan are grateful.

The resolution adopted today is important for
several reasons. It signifies the United Nations
continuing commitment to supporting the people and
Government of Afghanistan. The resolution
underscores Afghan ownership and leadership, and
calls for a more focused United Nations approach that
is in line with the transition to Afghan ownership and
leadership and seeks to streamline the activities of the
United Nations and the United Nations family towards
a One United Nations, in conformity with
Afghanistan's national priority programmes. We also
welcome the review of the United Nations mandate and
support before the end of the year. We look forward to
the review as an important measure for furthering the
effectiveness of the United Nations role in
Afghanistan.

As Afghanistan embarks on the process of
transition, the role of the United Nations will remain
crucial in the years to come. We attach great
importance to our partnership with the United Nations
and other international partners, whose steadfast
commitment and contributions have helped us come
this far. We look forward to strengthening this
partnership to realize our shared goal of peace in
Afghanistan through the transition and beyond.

I thank Council members for their contribution to
the resolution just adopted. I also wish to extend our
appreciation to the delegation of Germany and
Ambassador Peter Wittig and his colleagues for
facilitating the negotiations on the resolution.

