Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): At the outset, I would like to thank the Belgian presidency for the initiative to include in its programme of work an open debate on the theme of transitional justice. We thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and the other briefers for highlighting different aspects of the concept of transitional justice, also from the perspective of its practical implementation. Transitional justice processes and mechanisms are traditionally seen as a critical component of the United Nations framework for strengthening the rule of law. Today's debate is a good opportunity to highlight the role of transitional justice also in the context of the prevention agenda. An important point of reference in this context is the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on their joint study on the contribution of transitionaljustice to the prevention of gross violations and abuses of human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law, including genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and their recurrence (A/HRC/37/65). Building comprehensive and legitimate transitional justice processes is essential in terms of acknowledging past grievances and ensuring accountability for past atrocities, as well as realizing the rights to truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence. The effective implementation of transitional justice policies requires a victim-centred approach, with a special focus on women and children as the group who are most vulnerable to atrocity crimes. The meaningful participation of women who have been affected by conflicts should be at the centre of efforts to seek truth and ensure justice. Regrettably, we continue to witness hate crimes and atrocities against ethnic and religious groups, State-led policies of hatred, racial and ethnic profiling, the glorification and justification of past crimes and the dehumanization of victims. The genocidal acts perpetrated against Christians, Yazidis and other communities by terrorist organizations in Syria and Iraq are stark reminders that the denial of crime and the dehumanization of victims do not belong only to history. The Armenian nation went through the horrors of genocide at the beginning of the twentieth century and continues to face the challenges of denial and justification of past crimes. Therefore, Armenia has been taking consistent measures to consolidate international efforts to prevent the crime of genocide. The justification of the Armenian genocide at the highest level by denigrating and insulting the dignity of the victims, qualifying it as "the most reasonable act" and manufacturing alternative historical narratives profoundly hamper efforts to ensure the realization of the right to truth and non-recurrence. In recognizing the crucial role of civil society organizations and institutions, I would like to commend in particular the important work carried out by the International Centre for Transitional Justice, including its analysis of the Armenian genocide. Armenia is committed to supporting United Nations efforts to promote transitional justice as an important element of the United Nations prevention agenda. Over the years, we have initiated a number of Human Rights Council resolutions related to the prevention of genocide. It was at Armenia's initiative that, in 2015, the General Assembly designated 9 December as the International Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime. Recognition and condemnation of past atrocities is vital for preventing identity-based crimes, protecting the universality of human rights and achieving genuine reconciliation and sustainable peace.
