Mr. Fall: It is my honour to present the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2OI7/995) on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). The report covers the latest peace and
security developments in the subregion, as well as the
activities of UNOCA that have been undertaken since
my last briefing to the Council in June (see S/PV.7967).

I am pleased to report on some positive
developments in the subregion, particularly regarding
the regional integration and capacity-building of the
General Secretariat of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). However, the overall
situation in Central Africa remains marked by tense
sociopolitical situations, economic difficulties, and
continued attacks and horrific abuses carried out
by armed groups against civilian populations, all of
which necessitate concerted national, regional and
international action to prevent further degradation.
In this context, I have maintained continuous contact
with stakeholders and leaders across the subregion to
facilitate the search for a peaceful resolution of the
conflicts through inclusive dialogue.

In Chad, the Republic of the Congo and Gabon,
continuing, serious economic difficulties, combined
with political and social tensions between the
respective Governments and opposition movements,
remain a cause for concern. In Chad, I have encouraged
the Government and opposition leaders to discuss the
modalities and time frame for an inclusive dialogue in
order to reach consensus on proposed solutions to the
governance and economic issues facing the country and
agree on meaningful governance reforms that will create
an environment conducive to the holding of legislative
elections. In the Republic of the Congo, though several
political leaders who were arrested following the 2016
presidential election were released on humanitarian
grounds to seek medical treatment abroad, prominent
opposition figures - such as Jean-Marie Michel
Mokoko and Andre Okombi Salissa - remain detained
without trial. The security situation in the Pool region
also remains unresolved, although it has relatively
improved and internal political consultations have
begun regarding the region's stabilization. During my
visits to the country, I have stressed the importance
of stabilizing the Pool region and operationalizing
the platforms for political and social dialogue. I have
also highlighted the need for a timely and fair trial for
the detained opposition leaders, who deserve humane
detention conditions.

Meanwhile, in Cameroon, half of the country's
regions are affected by either Boko Haram in the far
north; the crisis in the Central African Republic in
the eastern part of the country; or the Anglophone
separatist movement in the north-western and south-
western regions. We must remain alert and redouble our
prevention efforts to ensure that prevailing tensions do
not deteriorate in the context of the 2018 elections.

The situation connected to the grievances of the
population in the English-speaking regions of the
country is of particular concern. I have maintained
close contact with the Cameroonian authorities and
continued to underline the need for genuine and
inclusive dialogue. While the Government has taken
a number of measures to address those grievances,
including reforms in the judicial and education sectors
and the release ofa number of English-speaking leaders
detained in connection with the crisis, there have been
calls for a more fundamental dialogue to overcome the
marginalization that is felt by much of the population
there. At the same time, clashes have continued
between radicals and Government forces, resulting in
the deaths of security officers in the north-western and
south-western regions that are likely to further inflame
tensions.

(spoke in French)

In Gabon, the national context is characterized
by the persistence of an economic slowdown, strikes
and the debate on a controversial constitutional reform
project. The opposition and a part of civil society
criticize the method used, which they consider as
non-inclusive and illegitimate, and the substance of
the constitutional reform, which, according to them,
represents a democratic retreat. It is expected that the
reform will be passed by Parliament, where the ruling
party holds a two-thirds majority. The referendum
option, although possible under the Constitution,
has seemingly not been envisaged. The unsuccesful
candidate in the last presidential election, Mr. Jean
Ping, and his allies continue to challenge the re-election
in 2016 of President Ali Bongo Ondimba. In particular,
Mr. Ping continues to encourage his supporters to
hold public demonstrations in favour of his takeover
and persists in his refusal to engage in a dialogue with
President Bongo Ondimba.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains a source of concern, with ongoing attacks and
serious abuses by armed groups, including the killing of
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and aid workers deployed
to the country to provide assistance to the civilian
population. It is urgent that the peace process progress,
within the framework of the African Initiative, with
the implementation of the concrete actions defined
by the road map adopted at the meeting organized by
the African Union (AU) in Libreville on 17 July. That
should lead to an immediate cessation of hostilities and
the eventual disarmament and demobilization of all
armed groups in the country. I welcome the launch of
the activities of the African Union panel of facilitators
in Central African Republic in late November, followed
by its first contacts with the armed groups in December.
It is now important not to lose momentum during the
crucial period ahead.

The high-level meeting on the Central African
Republic, held on the sidelines of this year's General
Assembly, and the Secretary-General's visit to the
country in October played a critical role in attracting
new attention from the international community on the
Central African Republic. In that context, the region's
full engagement in the peace process remains vital,
not only to provide political support to the African
Initiative, but also to provide a collective response to
the cross-border dynamics affecting the conflict in
the Central African Republic, including transhumance
and trafficking. UNOCA, in close cooperation with
MINUSCA, will continue to work with ECCAS and the
countries of the subregion and play an active role in
resolving the crisis in the Central African Republic.

Despite considerable efforts at the national, regional
and international levels to combat Boko Haram, the
latter remains capable of perpetuating horrific attacks
and abuses that exacerbate the humanitarian, economic,
social and security situation in the affected areas. It
is therefore crucial that all stakeholders and partners
redouble their efforts to address the crisis caused by
Boko Haram in a comprehensive manner. To that end,
the conclusions of the recent regional conference for the
stabilization of the Lake Chad basin, organized by the
African Union Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, are welcome initiatives that deserve the
full support of the international community for their
implementation.

(Spoke in English)

Concerning the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
in addition to its abuses committed against local
populations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic and its poaching
activities, along with the increased security vacuum
following the withdrawal of Ugandan and United
States forces from the zone, it is important to recall
that the areas in which the LRA operates face a
myriad of security challenges, including issues related
to transhumance, the lack of State authority and
cross-border movements of poachers and a variety
of armed groups. Furthermore, it is important for the
African Union and countries that contribute troops to
the AU Regional Task Force to quickly agree on the
reconfiguration of the Task Force and to an increase in
support for the training of the Central African Armed
Forces. We also encourage the international community
to support the African Union Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA.

The United Nations welcomes the advances in
regional integration, particularly regarding the free
movement of persons throughout the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC)
zone, which is now a reality. UNOCA has continued
to place emphasis on support for the overall process
of regional integration, including through advocacy
for institutional reform of the ECCAS secretariat and
the rationalization of ECCAS and CEMAC. In that
connection, UNOCA has organized multiple activities
designed to strengthen the capacity of the ECCAS
secretariat in mediation, early warning, collaboration
with civil society and gender mainstreaming. UNOCA
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel have strengthened their cooperation in
facilitating and enhancing interregional partnership
between ECCAS and the Economic Community of
West African States, which has culminated in plans
to sign a memorandum of understanding between the
two regional economic communities. Overall, UNOCA
and ECCAS continue to enhance their collaboration
through the establishment and execution of a joint work
plan and the holding of regular meetings at the senior
and working levels.

With regard to women and peace and security, on
16 November the Government of Cameroon launched
its national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). That will contribute to
solidifying the regional action plan for resolution 1325
(2000) in Central Africa, which is in the process of
being developed, with the support of UNOCA. It will
also encourage other countries to follow suit.

UNOCA, in cooperation with UNESCO and
ECCAS, presented theirjoint three-year programme on
youth at the Pan-African Youth Forum, held in Libreville
on 30 November and 1 December. The Forum aimed at
engaging young people in promoting a culture of peace
and non-violence and involving them in the prevention
of radicalization and the management of conflicts by
creating an early warning system.

Before travelling to New York, I participated in the
forty-fifth ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), held in Kigali from 4 to
8 December. For the first time, UNSAC held a closed-
door ministerial session, which focused on the situation
in the Central African Republic, including the report
from the October visit of the UNSAC Bureau to
Bangui, organized by UNOCA, as well as the reform of
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa.
A side event for youth and civil society was also
organized to ensure greater visibility by leaders of the
region on the issues youth face, as well as their interest
and capacity for involvement in conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding.

UNOCA continues to place emphasis on efforts
to enhance the coherence and coordination of overall
United Nations activities in the subregion. This
includes collaborating with United Nations resident
coordinators and country teams to engage national
authorities on sensitive political issues as well as on
longer-term efforts to formulate national and cross-
border peacebuilding plans, with the support of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

