Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
progress made over the recent months in Kosovo. I also
wish to thank both His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofthe Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku
for their statements.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/407) and in Mr. Tanin's briefing, the situation
in the Kosovo region continues to be complex and
fragile. In that regard, resolution 1244 (1999) remains
relevant and provides the main legal basis for resolving
the issue of Kosovo. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
respects the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia and appreciates that
country's continued efforts to facilitate an inclusive,
peaceful and political solution to the situation.

We would particularly like to highlight the
resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, which
we hope will assist in the implementation of the such
key provisions of the Brussels Agreement as the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo. We would also
like to commend the various initiatives undertaken
with the assistance of UNMIK and the United Nations
team on the ground, which have been carried out to
foster dialogue, trust and partnerships between the
parties, with a view to building peace and security
and sustainable development. Ensuring security and
stability in Kosovo requires efforts of both parties to
continue the dialogue, which is why we encourage them
to continue their endeavours aimed at achieving stability
on the ground, while respecting the implementation of
the agreements reached.

Against that backdrop, we also share the concerns
identified in the report with respect to the recent
escalation of tensions between Pristina and Belgrade,
which could affect peace and stability in the Balkans.
Equatorial Guinea finds it unacceptable that Mr. Marko
Duric', Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija
of the Government of Serbia, was arrested and detained
during his visit to Kosovo on 26 March. Similarly, we are
concerned about the slow progress of the investigation
into the 16 January murder of Kosovo Serb politician
Oliver Ivanovic'. We call for prompt investigations
into those two events. Those challenges only damage
the trust generated among the various communities
and increase the risk of violent extremism and social
instability, which make societies more vulnerable
to conflict.

For those reasons, we call on the parties to intensify
their efforts to improve the rule of law, promote
development, peace and security in Kosovo and
safeguard good relations of trust among communities
living in Kosovo.

The issue of Kosovo is complex because of
the existence of such sensitive issues as national
reconciliation, which involve the well-being of
individuals and the protection of the rights of all
populations and communities in Kosovo. The parties
in conflict must therefore refrain from any action that
could increase tension, and instead give priority to
those that will strengthen peace and confidence, which
will undoubtedly influence the quest for a final solution
that is satisfactory to all.

We believe that all parties must continue to act
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and existing
agreements, so that through dialogue they can find a
peaceful and lasting solution for the benefit of all. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea supports and commends
the mandate of UNMIK and the support it provides to
all communities in Kosovo. Similarly, we appreciate the
efforts undertaken by the European Union in pursuit of
ajust solution to the situation in Kosovo.

