Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I am sure that, given the efficient manner in
which you are discharging your responsibilities, the
work of the Council will be carried out successfully.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
talented predecessor, Ambassador Jorge Urbina,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, for the
exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council during the month of November.

I convey my warmest greetings to Mr. Robert
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, and I congratulate him on his outstanding
briefing to the Council this morning.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
the other members of the Council, for having given me
the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

The Committee remains resolutely in favour of
political negotiations towards establishing a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. It commends the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008) on 16 December, in which this Council declared
its support for the negotiations launched at Annapolis,
called on both parties to fulfil their obligations under
the Road Map and to refrain from all actions that
would prejudice the outcome of negotiations, and
invited the international community to contribute to the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to
negotiations. The irreversibility of the process must
absolutely be preserved.

While our Committee strongly supports the
continuation of negotiations, we cannot, however,
ignore the significant gap between the political process
and the deplorable situation on the ground. The
Committee is extremely concerned by renewed
violence in the Gaza Strip and the dire humanitarian
situation in the area. The civilian population is

paralysed by a blockade imposed by the occupying
Power. Our Committee unequivocally condemns the
violence being perpetrated by both parties and claiming
victims among the innocent civilian population, be it
on the part of Israeli military operations or the result of
rocket fire from Gaza. At the same time, the
Committee considers it totally unacceptable and unjust
that the entire civilian population of the Gaza Strip be
subjected to collective punishment and a paralysing
blockade as a result of the actions of small militant
groups.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip has
severely deteriorated in the past months. The residents
of Gaza urgently need access to basic commodities
such as fuel and food supplies. Medical facilities have
stopped functioning due to a lack of electricity and
basic materials. Building materials are urgently needed
to repair homes and schools that have been bombed.
Some humanitarian aid has been allowed into the Gaza
Strip in recent days, but not enough to meet the needs
of the population. Today, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
announced that it had suspended its food distribution to
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip after it ran out of
supplies.

We call on Israel, the occupying Power, to
immediately lift the siege on the Gaza Strip and to
allow humanitarian agencies to enter to help alleviate
the appalling living conditions of its residents. Israel
should immediately halt military operations and the
excessive use of force in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, and act within the ambit of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We call on both sides to urgently cease all
acts of violence, exercise utmost restraint and allow
calm to prevail.

The Committee is also deeply concerned over
recent settler violence, particularly in the West Bank
city of Hebron. We condemn attacks by Israeli settlers
on Palestinian civilians and the destruction of property.
We remind Israel of its responsibility, as an occupying
Power, to protect Palestinian civilians, property and
holy sites. Israel also needs to urgently halt settlement
activity, fulfilling its obligations under the Road Map.

The international community, including my
Committee, is doing its utmost to create a climate
conducive to the conduct of permanent settlement
negotiations. The Committee stresses the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations towards the

08-6603]
question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its
aspects in accordance with international law. We urge
all parties concerned to move the peace process
forward towards a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the establishment of a sovereign and
viable Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders. A settlement should be based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), and on the Arab
Peace Initiative, including the acceptance of Israel as a
neighbour living in peace and security in the context of
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement.

