I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her briefing on the latest developments in Libya. I would like to express Estonia's sincere appreciation of, and support for, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and Acting Special Representative Williams in having worked to facilitate the contacts and mediate between the Libyan parties. That has been especially apparent in the past few weeks, following the signing of the ceasefire agreement. The political process under the umbrella of the United Nations and the Berlin process remains the only acceptable international framework to support Libyans in achieving a lasting peace. We commend the Libyan parties for coming together and welcome the signing of the permanent ceasefire agreement on 23 October by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. The process that has ensued - the meetings on all three dialogue tracks: the military, political and economic tracks - is indeed encouraging. We call on all parties to continue on that path in order to fully implement the ceasefire agreement and abide by all the political and economic commitments. Equally important to the Libyan parties' commitment is the support of the international community. That means putting an end to all foreign interference and the violations of the Libyan sanctions regime. In that connection, the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI will continue to make an important contribution to those efforts. Support from the international community must also include ensuring the departure of all foreign fighters and mercenaries who are present in Libya, as set out in the ceasefire agreement. The only way forward is to allow for a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process to be implemented. Estonia remains concerned about the humanitarian situation in Libya. Migrants and asylum seekers are frequently subjected to violence, including sexual and gender-based violence, and access to health-care facilities remains very limited, especially in the light of the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on the authorities to take concrete steps to allow aid to reach those most in need. Moreover, I would like to stress that all violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law must be thoroughly investigated, and those responsible must be held accountable.
