Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First, Mr. President, I
wish to thank you for organizing this briefing. It is
very timely and pertinent for the Security Council to
deliberate on the transnational threats to international
peace and security posed by drug trafficking, organized
crime and terrorism. We also thank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings. We very much appreciate the
Secretary-General's leadership in raising awareness on
this issue, as well as the valuable work done by
UNODC in building the capacity of Member States to
combat drug trafficking, organized crime and
terrorism.
In this era of globalization, organized crime
groups and networks have unfortunately become more
diversified and connected. As a result, they have
successfully exploited the opportunities presented by
globalization and created parallel economies of their
own, living off illicit drug and arms trafficking and
money laundering. Today, therefore, we are faced with
a unique and growing phenomenon that poses
considerable risks and threats to the entire international
community. These transnational threats, inter alia,
undermine state authority, fuel corruption, hamper
economic development and weaken the rule of law. As
such, they not only adversely affect the economic and
social fabric of the countries concerned and erode the
fundamental values of societies; given their
transnational and global character, they also create
tension and breed conflict among countries.

In the Security Council, for instance, we have
observed this grim reality on many occasions. I will
not give examples, but it is evident that such
transnational threats pose a significant and particular
challenge for countries emerging from conflict. They
are thus among the reasons exacerbating many crises
where the United Nations operates and, as such, they
also undermine the peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding efforts of the international community.

Furthermore, the interconnected nature of
terrorism and transnational organized crime has
become more evident and troubling in recent years.
Indeed, today it is a well-documented fact that the
revenue generated by drug trafficking has become a
primary source of terrorist financing, followed by arms
smuggling, human trafficking, money laundering and
extortion. We could point to other examples and
linkages where various transnational threats work in
tandem with one another to the detriment of
international peace and security.

Of course, the magnitude of the problems they
create may differ from region to region. But it is
obvious that geography can no longer be a shield
against these threats, which recognize no frontiers; and
thus the fight against this challenge must be based on a
comprehensive, effective and global strategy. We need
strong international cooperation on the basis of
common and shared responsibility.
In this regard, there are already well-established
institutions and programmes within and outside the
United Nations system for combating these threats. Our

efforts must first and foremost be aimed at
strengthening cooperation between these framework
and improving their efficiency. However, as evidenced
by today's debate, there is also a role and responsibility
for the Security Council to fulfil in monitoring the
impact that these transnational threats have on
international peace and security, particularly in areas
and issues that the Council is seized of, and taking
necessary action as appropriate to help in the fight
against these scourges.

Turkey is certainly committed to play its role on
both accounts. In fact, mindful of the Vital importance
of effective international cooperation, Turkey has
already signed and ratified all the relevant United
Nations conventions, in particular the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols. Turkey has also concluded bilateral
agreements with more than 70 countries on cooperation
against drug trafficking, terrorism and organized crime.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
that transnational organized crime cannot be prevented
by Governments acting individually or through
traditional forms of international cooperation.
Organized crime and its tremendous financial gains
necessitate well-designed, coordinated and
comprehensive responses on the part of the
international community. As Mr. Costa emphasized,
our response must be based on the parallel pillars of
development and security, backed by justice. We hope
that the Security Council's renewed commitment to
addressing transnational threats will re-energize
international cooperation. The draft presidential
statement, which we fully support, certainly sends the
right messages in that direction.

