Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in
convening this special meeting of the Security Council.
I say "special" because this is not just another annual
debate on the important issue of small arms, to be
followed by a presidential statement. Today, I think
Argentina has raised the issue to a higher political level
in the Council, and we thank you for that. We
understand that, instead of a presidential statement,
there will be a draft resolution. If adopted, it will be
the first resolution concerning small arms in the global
context.

Actually, despite the devastating consequences of
the illicit circulation and use of small arms and light
weapons, the Security Council has adopted only two
resolutions on the issue. In the first, resolution 1209
(1998), the Council recognized the close relationship
between the problem of illicit arms flows to and in
Africa and international peace and security. It
expresses, in paragraph 1,

"grave concern at the destabilizing effect of illicit
arms flows, in particular of small arms, to and in
Africa and at their excessive accumulation and
circulation, which threaten national, regional and
international security and have serious
consequences for development and for the
humanitarian situation in the continent".

That was eight years ago. We know that, since
then, millions of innocent people have become victims
of the direct and indirect use of those weapons, not
only in Africa but also in other parts of the world. We
heard the Foreign Minister of Peru this morning cite
figures to the effect that half a million deaths each year
are attributable to small arms and light weapons.
United Nations peacekeepers in Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, have
also been deliberately killed in the course of conflicts
in which those weapons are used. The Organization
continues to spend billions of dollars in peacekeeping
operations that are directly or indirectly related to the
excessive accumulation and circulation of illicit small
arms and light weapons.
In those circumstances, we do not believe that the
Security Council should, year in, year out, continue to
issue presidential statements expressing, for instance,
its grave concern that the destabilizing accumulation of
small arms has contributed to the intensity and duration
of armed conflicts. We share Argentina's view -
expressed by you, Sir, a few minutes ago - that the
time has arrived for the Security Council decisively
and promptly to send a strong political message
through a resolution on small arms and light weapons.

Two years ago, in resolution 1540 (2004), did this
Council not express its grave concern at the threat of
terrorism and the risk that non-State actors might
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery? Did

the Council not, accordingly, reaffirm that the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes
a threat to international peace and security? In that
context, we share the View expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report entitled "In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all", that States must strive just as hard to eliminate the
threat of illicit small arms and light weapons as they do
to eliminate weapons of mass destruction.

We believe that the Council should now, today, in
the draft resolution under consideration, go beyond the
1998 expression of grave concern and state
categorically and unequivocally that the excessive
accumulation and circulation of small arms,
particularly illicit small arms, constitute a threat to
international peace and security. Such an explicit
affirmation would underscore the seriousness of the
issue and the determination of the Council to deal with
it more effectively.

Last year, in a presidential statement, this Council
encouraged the arms-exporting countries to exercise
the highest degree of responsibility in small arms and
light weapons transactions according to their existing
responsibilities under relevant international law. We
suggest that the Council go one step further by
explicitly encouraging the conclusion of an
international arms trade treaty in the same way that it
has affirmed its support for multilateral treaties aimed
at eliminating or preventing the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.

We welcome with appreciation the Secretary-
General's latest follow-up report on his recommendations
on ways and means in which this Council could
contribute to dealing with the question of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons. We commend the
Security Council for establishing and mandating expert
monitoring mechanisms for the effective implementation
of sanctions, including arms embargoes. In particular, and
of interest to Sierra Leone as a State that has emerged
from conflict in the troubled West African subregion, we
commend the United Nations Operations in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) for the action it has taken to enforce the arms
embargo by carrying out inspections, including without
notice, of cargo aircraft at ports, airports, airfields and
military bases, as well as at border crossings in that
country. The identification of an embargo expert to advise
UNOCI on ways to improve the effectiveness of the arms
embargo inspection teams is also commendable.
Perhaps the most interesting development in the
enforcement of the arms embargo in the West African
subregion is the conclusion reached by the Group of
Experts on C6te d'Ivoire that countries have suspended
or blocked the export of military goods and services to
Cote d'Ivoire, as well as the conclusion that, currently,
neither the Government nor the Forces nouvelles have
a strategic need or the financial capability to procure
heavy and light weapons. That should contribute to the
control and circulation of illicit arms in the subregion.

We note with interest the proposal mentioned
earlier this morning by the Ambassador of France, in
particular with regard to the problems of transporting
those illicit weapons, as well as of their financing. We
hope that the Security Council will soon address those
problems directly.

We share the conclusion of the Secretary-General
that the enforcement of Security Council resolutions on
sanctions would depend on the political will and
relevant technical capacity of Member States.
However, since, as is often recalled, the Security
Council has primary responsibility under the Charter
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
we expect the Council to take the lead and to assume a
more proactive role in our collective effort to rid the
world of the scourge of the illicit trade in and excessive
accumulation of small arms.

We would also like the Council to endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendation that it explicitly
articulate, in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
the role of peacekeeping missions on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
