Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate to discuss the
critically important issue of peacekeeping. I thank the
Secretary-General for his opening statement.

As we meet, nearly 100,000 peacekeepers and
17,000 civilian personnel are deployed in peacekeeping
missions around the world. Day after day, they put their
lives on the line to protect people from communities
and nations different from their own and to uphold
the fundamental principles set out in the Charter of
the United Nations. The United States thanks those
individuals for their service, as well as the 122 countries
from which they come.

Let me begin by saying that, on many of the issues
involved in peacekeeping, we all agree on the key
points. We agree that peacekeeping is an absolutely
essential part of the Council's work and driven by our
shared moral commitment to protecting the defenceless
from the scourges of war and conflict. This sense of
shared purpose is also driven by our having witnessed
the horrific human consequences of the times when
the United Nations has failed to stop the slaughter of
unarmed civilians.

This year, we are marking the twentieth anniversary
of the Rwandan genocide; next year we will do the
same for Srebrenica. Rwanda and Srebrenica taught
the world and the United Nations an extremely costly
but important lesson. In order to fulfil their basic duty
to protect civilians, peacekeepers need clear, robust
mandates. This is another of the points on which we all
can agree, and on which we have agreed repeatedly in the
mandates for peacekeeping missions authorized since
that time. Indeed, many of the current peacekeeping
missions have robust mandates empowering them to
use force to protect human lives.

However, that does not mean that peacekeeping
missions should rely predominantly on the use of
force to protect civilians. As is affirmed by resolution
2086 (2013), which the Council unanimously
supported, effective peacekeeping is multidimensional
peacekeeping. That means that we must use all of the
tools in our tool box to prevent situations in which
the use of force is necessary to save lives, and work
methodically to lay the foundations for greater peace
and stability.

All of that said, in circumstances in which force is
necessary to protect innocent lives missions must fulfil
the responsibilities set out by these robust mandates. In
fact, the credibility of all of our commitments around
the world to protecting civilians - which can be a
deciding factor in determining the behaviour of those
who would otherwise attack civilians - is inextricably
tied to our living up to our word in each and every
mission. As such, the failure to hold to this commitment
in one mission can undermine the legitimacy of all of
the others.

We have seen that these more robust approaches
can be highly effective. The accomplishments of the
Force Intervention Brigade in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo demonstrate that clearly. The
success of that initiative truly has many fathers and
mothers, from the region that put forward the idea of
a neutral force focused primarily on combatting armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the
mandate that represents our collective commitments,
to the contributing countries Malawi, South Africa and
Tanzania, and to the troops who have performed so
bravely and professionally on the ground in extremely
challenging conditions. This effort has not only made
the individual peacekeeping mission more effective
and more credible, but also supported broader efforts to
promote peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.

If we agree that we have a moral imperative
to protect people at risk; if we have learned that
peacekeeping missions need robust mandates to
fulfil that commitment; and if we have unanimously
authorized missions with such mandates, the question
then is how we can give those robust missions the tools
they need to be as effective as possible.

First, we in the Security Council need to set forth
clear priorities in mandates, particularly through
the sequencing of tasks - not because we think that
some goals are less important than others, but rather
because our experience has demonstrated that certain
objectives cannot be pursued until others have been
met. For example, it is difficult to rebuild a broken
judiciary when it is not safe enough for people to leave
their homes. Such prioritization will make missions
more effective and more efficient. The Council's
newest peacekeeping mission, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, offers a solid example of
the Council's efforts to set such priorities, as well as
proof of its benefits.

In addition, now that we have clearer, more robust
mandates, we must do a better job of ensuring that
missions have the capabilities needed to fulfil them.
Among those necessary capabilities we count access
to new technology, from wireless radios and satellite
phones to unmanned, unarmed aerial vehicles. We
believe that those best suited to determine what
capabilities are required are the missions themselves,
and specialists from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. To move such decision-making to the
Council would not only take it away from the experts
who know best, but also would dramatically hinder and
politicize the process of obtaining crucial capabilities
required to implement Council mandates and save lives.

Another way we can make missions more effective
is to allow for greater inter-mission cooperation. We
have seen how that can be a smart way to temporarily
move resources rapidly to respond to emergencies
and scale up missions on short notice, as Council
members unanimously authorized in South Sudan,
through resolution 2132 (2013). The more flexible such
arrangements are, the more swiftly we will be able to
respond to the next unexpected crisis.

Lastly, I would like to highlight an additional issue
related to peacekeeping that deserves our attention.
In March, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
released a report on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping missions, focusing specifically on the
use of force to protect civilians. Its key finding is that
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, "force is
almost never used to protect civilians under attack"
(A/68/787, para. 79). The report highlights a number of
apparent reasons for the failure to use force to protect
civilians, as well as recommendations for how to
address that.

While recognizing that the use of force is only one
tool for protecting civilians, my Government believes
that the Council would benefit from a thorough briefing
of the report's serious and concerning conclusions.
The Council would also benefit from a discussion of
the report's implications for our work going forward.
At its essence, the report reveals a significant gap
that has emerged between the commitments we set
down on paper - which constitute a responsibility to
act - and the way that missions perform in practice.
The larger that gap grows, the more vulnerable civilians
become and the less credible the Organization and the
peacekeepers that represent it become.

I hope that this is another point on which we can all
agree and that today's discussion will contribute to the
Council's work to make peacekeeping more efficient
and effective.

