Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to express our respect
for, and gratitude to, Mrs. Ogata for her enormous
contribution to the cause of the protection of refugees,
for her many years of cooperation with our country,
and for the assistance which the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
under her leadership, has been rendering Russia in the
area of migration.

I wish to convey to her our sincere gratitude for
those efforts and for the zeal which she has been
demonstrating in resolving the most complex of issues.
In her, the United Nations system and the international
community have an example of an outstanding woman
leader - a wise, staunch and humane individual. I
hope that, even after she leaves the post of High
Commissioner, she will continue, through her authority
and influence, to exert a positive impact on that cause
to which she has given 10 years of her life.

It has fallen to the lot of the UNHCR within this
period to deal with such humanitarian crises,
unprecedented in terms of scale and accompanied by a
mass exodus of people, as those in the former
Yugoslavia, in particular in Kosovo; western Africa;
Afghanistan; East Timor; and many other places.
Almost always, within the framework of what was
possible, the UNHCR found adequate solutions.
Moreover, in addition to doing the enormous amount of
work necessary to eliminate the consequences of
emergency humanitarian situations and to strengthen
the regime of international protection of refugees, the
UNHCR was able to take on the comprehensive and
far-reaching questions of peace-building, post-conflict
reconstruction, the stabilization of States and assistance
to their long-term development, within the framework
of the "Brookings Process".

A recent source of special satisfaction for us is
the level of cooperation achieved between Russia and
the UNHCR. The mutual understanding, trust and
openness which have characterized relations between
our country and the UNHCR have facilitated the
implementation of even the most complex programmes.
We should like to note the particular contribution of the
UNHCR to the preparation and implementation of the
decisions of the 1996 Geneva Regional Conference on
problems of migration in the Commonwealth of
Independent States. We hope that under a new
leadership the problem of forced migration in the
region of the Commonwealth of Independent States
will remain one of the high-priority areas on the
agenda of the UNHCR.

We agree with the assessment of the High
Commissioner that the UNHCR, on the threshold of its
fiftieth anniversary, is at a turning point. There are new
challenges before us, and there is a need to find
adequate answers to them. Here we welcome the
initiative of the High Commissioner to organize global
consultations in order to strengthen the regime of
international protection and unswerving compliance
with the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees.

Persons who genuinely need international support
must be the focus of the joint efforts of States,
international organizations and civil society. Naturally,
each category of migrants, depending on their legal
status, requires a specific approach.

At this turning point, the international community
must focus on making maximum use of the existing
potential, above all through an improved coordination
of action between humanitarian agencies and by
strengthening their interaction with the affected States.
Moreover, here a prerequisite for international
humanitarian activity must be strict compliance by all
organizations with the fundamental principles of non-
interference in internal affairs, neutrality, impartiality
and humane action.

Our practice of cooperation with the UNHCR is a
superb example of precisely such interaction. Attempts
to cast doubt on these principles, to erode them through
the use of new elements, no matter what supposedly
humane considerations may motivate them, can lead
only to the growth of mistrust and the emergence of
additional problems.

We are doubly concerned by the alarming trend of
increased deliberate attacks with the use of violence,
including murder, on United Nations staff and
associated personnel during the performance of their
duties. Our delegation has expressed its sincere
condolences on the deaths of UNHCR staff members
during field operations during recent times. The
question of security, of both the refugees themselves
and of United Nations humanitarian personnel, must
remain a focus of our attention.

In conclusion, we would like once again to
emphasize our support for UNHCR and to express the
hope that its new leadership will maintain continuity
and will just as successfully continue to achieve the
complex objectives facing that organization.

