Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
African Union, and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their detailed briefings on the situation
in Darfur.
To be honest, after hearing a number of our
colleagues' statements, we have the distinct impression
that they mistook today's meeting as an opportunity
mainly to discuss the internal situation in the Sudan
rather than the situation in Darfur. In our view, that
is not right. The Security Council has no mandate to
discuss the evolving political processes in that country.
It is important to avoid any statements or actions that
could be interpreted as interfering in its internal affairs,
and we urge all our colleagues in the Council to keep
that in mind.

As far as the state of affairs in Darfur itself is
concerned, we note that on the whole the situation in
the region has remained stable. There have been no
reports of major armed clashes for some time, and
intercommunal violence is now virtually non-existent.
The Sudanese Government has done a great deal to
normalize life in Darfur, and we hope that those efforts
will continue. It is important that, given the positive
momentum in the region, the process of further
drawing down the military component of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) continues in accordance with resolution
2429 (2018). We share the view that in order to prevent
any relapses into conflict we must avoid the possibility
of creating a power vacuum in the region and focus on
building the capacity of State institutions in Darfur. We
consider this the main task ofthe transition concept for
UNAMID endorsed in the resolution and designed to
support the Sudanese people in the context of the start
of the peacebuilding phase of the Darfur settlement.

We emphasize the importance of ensuring that
donors deliver on the pledges they have made at previous
donor conferences. Together with a relaxation of the
unilateral sanctions on the Sudan, we believe that should
help to normalize the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in the Sudan as a whole and resolve issues
related to peacebuilding and strengthening security
in Darfur.

We are pleased that almost all the provisions of the
2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have been
implemented. It is regrettable that the unreconciled
armed opposition, while it has lost its presence on the
ground, has not given up its attempts to destabilize
the situation and incite a new wave of violence in the
region. It has been clear for a long time that the reason
the Darfur peace process is stalled is because of the
unconstructive negotiating position of the unreconciled
parties, including the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid. That is clearly the story behind the refusal of
the movements that did not sign the Doha Document to
implement the 6 December pre-negotiation agreement
concluded in Berlin and mediated by the African
Union. Here we should also point to the Sudan Call
alliance's decision of 20 March to withdraw from
Thabo Mbeki's amended Roadmap Agreement. It is
regrettable that in reporting such facts the Secretariat
is making the same appeals to everyone concerned. We
are convinced that courting the unreconciled parties in
this way only harms the peace process. We also believe
that rather than encouraging radicals to hold meetings
in their capitals, the external sponsors of the Sudanese
opposition should urge them to come up with more
realistic demands that respond to the goal of advancing
the peace process.

Considering all of this, we see no basis for linking
the events in Khartoum of 11 April with the processes of
the UNAMID withdrawal and the review of the Darfur
sanctions regime, which should progress in accordance
with the existing plans.

