Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): At the outset, I thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan and his very able team for
the 90-day report, as well as for his chairmanship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the last two years. My delegation truly
appreciates his efforts in promoting a consultative
approach in the work of the Committee, as well as
the active encouragement of the outreach activities
by the Panel of Experts at a time when it is crucial to
remind Member States that during the E3+3 and Iran
negotiations, Security Council measures remain in full
force.

Lithuania welcomes the decision by the E3+3 and
Iran to continue their diplomatic efforts with a view to
completing negotiations by March 2015 and finalizing
possible remaining technical and drafting work by the
end of June 2015. We also note the commitment by
Iran and the E3+3 to extend the implementation of all
measures foreseen in the Joint Plan of Action, and in
particular the European Union's decision to extend the
sanctions relief. Finally, we welcome the appointment
of Catherine Ashton as Special Adviser ofthe European
Union High Representative for facilitating the nuclear
talks with Iran.

Lithuania fully supports efforts by the E3+3 and
underlines that Iran's willingness to show flexibility
in bridging remaining gaps will determine the
eventual success of the process. Iran must engage
constructively with the E3+3 on all outstanding issues
to achieve verifiable confidence by the international
community in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. The momentum in the negotiations
should not be lost and parties should complete them in
the shortest possible time. We welcome yesterday's
meeting in Geneva at the level of political directors in
this regard.

Lithuania also closely follows the dialogue and
cooperation of Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) under the Framework for Cooperation.
While we welcome the implementation of practical
measures, we are concerned by the conclusion by the
IAEA that Iran has not provided any explanations that
could enable the Agency to clarify the two outstanding
practical measures related to the initiation of high
explosives and to neutron transport calculations. It is
also unfortunate that Iran has not yet proposed further
practical measures, despite repeated calls by the
Agency. We reiterate that the provision of all pertinent
information as well as unimpeded access to various
facilities are key to enabling the Agency to have a clear
understanding of Iran's nuclear programme.

Turning to the work of the Committee, it is
important to reiterate that the Joint Plan of Action does
not have any effect on sanctions measures imposed
by the relevant the Security Council resolutions. All
Council sanctions imposed on Iran therefore remain in
full effect as negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran
continue, and States have an obligation to implement
them. The work of both of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts in verifying compliance should also remain
unaffected.

In that regard, we encourage Iran to engage with
the Committee in facilitating its investigations. Four
letters by the Committee are now awaiting a response
by Iran. In particular, Iran is yet to provide information
on the attempted transfer of concealed rockets, mortars
and related material on the Klos C vessel, which was
recognized by the Panel of Experts as another violation
of Iran's obligations pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We thank the Panel of Experts for the midterm
report, which offeres useful insights into Iran's ongoing
procurement practices and possible violations of the
travel ban. We look forward to the Panel's further
investigations in that regard.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
hope that Iran's engagement in the E3+3 talks will lead
to a comprehensive, negotiated and long-term solution
that will strengthen international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

