Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov for his
briefing today and his able leadership of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

Organized crime represents a threat to democracy,
the rule of law, human rights, stability and social and
economic development. The correlation between
organized crime, human trafficking, drug trafficking
and corruption is a global challenge that requires a
joint, efficient response, as criminal networks continue
to grow rapidly, transcending national and regional
borders.

The tentacles of organized crime reach deep into
society and spread out across borders. Obviously, no
country can stand alone in carrying out this fight. It
must be fought on the domestic and international front.
No country is immune to crime or corruption, but
societies in transition are more vulnerable to these
threats.

It is a fact that criminal networks prosper in an
unstable and underdeveloped environment that is
vulnerable to corruption and money laundering through
violence, arms and drug or human trafficking. In such
contexts, countries must first adopt a proactive
approach aimed at developing an institutional
framework, implementing responsive measures to halt
criminal activities. Nor should measures to deter
criminality be neglected.

On a broader scale, countries must share
responsibility for fighting crime at the regional and
international levels, especially drug trafficking, as it
has the greatest impact on peace and security. In this
regard, we welcome the cooperation of Member States
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the International Narcotics Control Board.

We would like to underscore the devastating
linkage between drug trafficking and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and explosive and
related materials. It is clear that the resulting
widespread effects cause violence, destabilization and
conflict. There is a need to increase global efforts to
create effective instruments and mechanisms to deal
with crimes related to those issues, whose destructive
effects persist in all countries.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is determined to develop
and strengthen our legislative, judicial and executive
State capacities and coordinate those related activities
with our neighbouring countries and with international
organizations that are fighting crime. We have adopted
and are currently implementing a strategy to fight
organized crime for the 2009-2012 period. That
document outlines objectives and measures to fight all
forms of crime, with a specific focus on the aspect of
corruption.

In conclusion, I wish to point out that the fight
against organized crime is a perpetual one. Therefore,
we must strengthen our efforts to implement preventive
action and strengthen institutional frameworks and the
rule of law through cooperation among Member States,
the United Nations and other international
organizations.

