Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, I also would
like to pay homage to the memory of the victims of
9/11. Our thoughts and prayers are with their families.
We should never forget that tragic day or lower our
guard, and should always remain united in the fight
against terrorism.

The Permanent Representatives of the Russian
Federation and Iran briefed the Security Council
about the Tehran summit held on 7 September. Upon
instructions from my Government, I also would like to
share my country's views on the outcome of the summit
and our position on the developments in Idlib.

The Astana format was created in order to help
reduce violence across Syria and give impetus to the
political process. The importance of maintaining
our joint efforts to end the conflict in Syria through
a political solution were reconfirmed in the Astana
meetings. The most concrete outcome of the format
has been the establishment of the de-escalation zones.
The Idlib de-escalation zone, as a case in point, has
dramatically reduced violence in the province.

Idlib was the main agenda item at the Tehran
summit. The leaders agreed that the situation in Idlib
should be addressed in line with the principles and
the spirit of cooperation that characterized the Astana
format. Those shared principles, such as the preservation
of the territorial integrity of Syria and the need to find
a political solution to the conflict, are crucial for our
efforts to succeed in Idlib and elsewhere in Syria.

At the summit, President Erdogan underlined the
need to preserve the de-escalation zone and called for
an immediate and complete ceasefire in Idlib. The
ceasefire, as highlighted by our Minister of Defence
yesterday, should include all air and ground attacks.
There can be no arbitrary hierarchy of death. While
condemning and warning against chemical attacks,
we cannot overlook the use of conventional weapons,
which continue to cause massive casualties. Our
calls for an immediate ceasefire include all military
operations, and Turkey will continue to work on that
basis. We invite the international community to vocally
and actively support our efforts to that end.

As pointed out by the members of the Security
Council, there is no doubt that an all-out military
operation would result in a major humanitarian
catastrophe. Such an operation would trigger a massive
wave of refugees and tremendous security risks for
Turkey, the rest of Europe and beyond. With all our
generosity, we have gone to extraordinary lengths to
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, including
hosting approximately 3.5 million refugees, more than
any other country in the world. But let us face it: we
long ago exceeded the limits of our capacity.

We simply cannot allow a fait accompli in Idlib
that would endanger the lives of millions of innocent
civilians. That is our collective duty as the international
community. Today the people who are watching us with
worry in Idlib are not terrorists, but rather 3.5 million
civilians, 1 million of whom are children. We must not
fail them.

The Syrian regime seeks to legitimize its operation
on counter-terrorism grounds. Let us make no mistake:
such an operation would not achieve the stated goal.
In a complex place like Idlib, traditional counter-
terrorism methods would not yield the desired results.
On the contrary, they would create further suffering
and alienate and radicalize more Syrians. In that sense,
a military operation in Idlib would only play into the
hands of terrorists.

Only a viable ceasefire would allow the creation
of an environment to effectively fight terrorism. That
entails employing approaches that require time and
patience. That is what Turkey has been working towards
achieving through its separation efforts in Idlib. In order
for our efforts to succeed, guarantees must be given to
civilians and moderate opposition groups that they will
not be targeted once they separate from terrorists. That
is the underlying objective of the call for a ceasefire by
President Erdogan.

In line with the Astana memorandum, Turkey
established 12 observation posts in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. Our observation posts have
prevented violations. Our presence has also contributed
to creating conditions for separating terrorists from
moderate opposition groups.

Furthermore, Turkey has been at the forefront
in the fight against terrorism, and we are resolved to
combat that scourge without discriminating among
terrorist groups. We have reinstated stability and calm
in the areas we cleared from terrorists in Syria. We
are pleased to observe that hundreds of thousands of
Syrians have voluntarily returned to their homeland
and that a responsible approach to counter-terrorism
can indeed win hearts and minds.

There should be no illusion: there can be no military
victory in Syria. A military solution cannot bring
about any legitimacy, or create a lasting settlement.
Legitimacy can be achieved only through a negotiated
political solution. The United Nations-led Geneva
process remains the main venue to that end, in line with
the resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). And the situation in Idlib will be
decisive for the fate of the political process.

At the Tehran summit, the three guarantors
reaffirmed their resolve to continue joint efforts to
advance the political process. They reiterated their
commitment to help establish and launch a constitutional
committee. In that framework, senior officials of the
three guarantors are currently meeting Special Envoy
de Mistura in Geneva to continue their discussions
to start the committee's work. We attach the utmost
importance to the establishment of a constitutional
committee and creating the conditions for holding free
and fair elections under United Nations supervision
without further delay.
As President Erdogan stated in his article in The
Wall Street Journal yesterday,

"Idlib is the last exit before the toll. If the
international community, including Europe and
the United States, fails to take action now, not
only innocent Syrians but the entire world stands
to pay the price. Turkey has done everything in its
power to stop the bloodshed next door. To ensure
that we succeed, the rest of the world must set aside
narrow self-interest and throw its weight behind a
political solution."

Today - with our partners in Astana, with
the Council under this roof and with the overall
international community - we face the moment of of
truth in defence of the values we stand for.

