Mr. Haavisto (Finland): The observer of the
European Union has already spoken, and I associate
myself fully with his statement.

Finland is an active member of the international
contact group for Somalia, and we participated at last
week's London conference at a high level. Finland has
been actively supporting the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), for example by supporting
the training of TFG security forces. In addition,
Finland has been participating with a military vessel in
anti-piracy activities on the Somalian coast. In Finland
we have a large Somali diaspora, which is also seeking
a peaceful solution to the crisis in Somalia in a
constructive manner. We have also been supporting the

process of including elders and traditional leaders in
the peace dialogue.

Finland wishes to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing the recently held Somalia conference in
London. It was a very timely meeting that produced
very good outcomes. We can see at least four results
achieved at the conference.

First, the conference highlighted that Somalia
must be put back on the agenda of the international
community, and it was successful in doing so.

Secondly, due to the improved security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia, the overall message
of London was that it is possible to work towards
completing the transition period by the end of August
and to support reconciliation and development in
relatively safe areas. An additional funding mechanism,
the so-called local stability fund was created to
facilitate actions in those areas.

Thirdly, the London conference also boosted the
Security Council's decision, in resolution 2036 (2012),
to strengthen AMISOM. from 12,000 troops to nearly
18,000. That made it possible to include the Kenyan
forces in AMISOM. However, additional funds will be
needed. The EU has already announced a new
contribution of €100 million.

Fourthly, focus on the root causes of the conflict in
Somalia was underlined, and complementary proposals
were presented to intensify work on tackling piracy
and terrorism.

Finland welcomes all those achievements. It is
possible to assist Somalia in a constructive and
concrete way despite the challenges in security in
many parts of the country. For Finland, it is clear that
the future of Somalia is in the hands of Somalis.

We welcome the Garowe process in advancing a
new constitution and parliamentary reforms. Those are
key building blocks for Somalia in and after the
completion of the transition period. It is crucial that the
Garowe Principles are agreed among the Somalis. It is
positive that they are supported by the United Nations
and other partners.

The Garowe Principles emphasize the role of
recognized traditional elders in the process towards a
post-transition parliamentary structure. Finland's
support for UNPOS has focused on utilizing Somali
elders and religious leaders as constructive contributors
in furthering peace. Finland is willing to consider
further support for that work.

It is positive that 30 per cent of the Somalis
provisionally adopting the constitution should be
women. Gender issues and underlining equal
opportunities for all have been an essential part of
Finland's development policy for a long time.

It is obvious that both the new constitution as
well as the process leading to parliamentary reforms
need to be made explained to ordinary Somalis in clear
terms that make them feel familiar. Therefore, public
awareness campaigns, education and information are
called for. We wonder whether Somalis living in the
diaspora might also be involved in that work. We
believe that in addition to its important remittances to
Somalia, the diaspora has an important role to play.
The Somali diaspora in Finland supports various
development activities in Somalia with complementary
funding from the Finnish Government.

Gradually strengthening Somalia's own security
forces is essential when rebuilding Somalia as a nation
after two decades of non-functioning State structures.
Finland has been participating from the beginning in
the European Union training mission that trains
security personnel for the TFG.

After the end of the transition, there will still be a
great need to continue the reconciliation and peace
work. The peace process has to be inclusive, and all
who want to build Somalia and distance themselves
from terrorism should be welcome to contribute to
rebuilding the nation. That opportunity should
specifically be open to women and youth, who often
are excluded from these processes.

Finland values the United Nations and various
countries that have established their presence and
operations in Mogadishu, despite the obvious security
challenges. Only by operating from inside Somalia can
the international community fully earn the trust of the
Somali people.

