Mr. Simonovie: Let me mention that the High
Commissioner is sorry that he could not address the
Council today, himself.

Earlier this year, the representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea spoke very
vividly in the Council about the "savageness and
brutality" of crimes against humanity committed
against the Korean people during the Second World
War (S/PV7105, p. 57). Ambassador Ri Tong II listed
massacres, abductions, forcible recruitment, forced
labour and sexual slavery, which, he said "trampled on
the dignity of Korean women and of the Korean nation
as a whole" (ibid).

That is the kind of compassion that we are seeking
for the victims in the Korean peninsula today - victims
of extermination, of murder, of enslavement and
torture; victims of rape, forced abortion and other
sexual violence; victims of persecution on the basis of
political, religious, racial and gender grounds; people
who have been forcibly transferred; those whose loved
ones have been abducted or disappeared without a
trace; people who have been deliberately starved for
long periods of time.

According to the Human Rights Council commission
of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, those crimes have been perpetrated
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in a
widespread, systematic manner, as deliberate policy
directed by the highest levels of Government. In many
instances, they constitute crimes against humanity. The
report of the Commission (S/2014/276, annex) is before
Council members today. Rarely has such an extensive
charge-sheet of international crimes been brought to the
Council's attention. It documents a totalitarian system
characterized by the brutally enforced denial of the
rights to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
as well as the rights to freedom of opinion, expression,
information and association.

Songbun classification, which calibrates perceived
loyalty to the State, generates extensive and damaging
discrimination throughout the country. Where it
intersects with gender-based discrimination, it
increases the vulnerability of women and sharply
limits their opportunities. The Government of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has also used
denial of the right to food to control and coerce its
people. The actions of officials have caused the deaths
of hundreds of thousands of people, according to the
commission - particularly during the famine of the
1990s - and have inflicted permanent physical and
psychological injuries on survivors.

In November 2013, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme found that 84 per cent of households - 8
to 9 families out of 10 - were not consuming enough
food. According to the latest national nutrition survey,
in 2012 28 per cent of children under-five suffered
stunting from malnutrition and almost 1 woman in
4 had been so starved that she risked giving birth to
premature or underweight children.

Nationals of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea who manage to flee the country may fall victim
to trafficking networks, and women often face forced
marriage or forced prostitution. If forcibly returned, they
face persecution, torture, forced abortion, prolonged
arbitrary detention and even summary execution.

The commission expressed its deepest horror at
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's political
prison-camp system - kwanliso - whose inmates
suffer deliberate starvation, forced labour, execution,
torture, rape, forced abortion and infanticide. The
commission estimated that hundreds of thousands of
prisoners have perished in those camps over the past
50 years and that they currently hold 80,000 to 120,000
people.

Representatives of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea have acknowledged the existence
of what they term "reformatories". I firmly believe
that with honesty, transparency and international
assistance, we can find a way to dismantle the camp
system and release and rehabilitate prisoners. Other
countries of the region have shown that it is possible to
release thousands of political prisoners and to roll back
systems of administrative detention.

The commission of inquiry has highlighted the
connections between the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and security
in the region overall. The sustained military focus
and nuclear priority of the Government have been
pursued at the expense of the economic and social
rights, as well as the lives and well-being, of its people.
Comprehensive human rights violations on the part of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea have had a
significant impact on regional peace and security, from
international abductions and enforced disappearances
to trafficking and the outflow of desperate refugees.
If we are to reduce tension in the region, there must
be movement towards real respect for human rights in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That issue
deserves the Security Council's fullest attention and
action.

Since the publication of commission of inquiry's
report in March, with the prospect of action by
the Council, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea authorities have shown promising new signs
of engagement with international human-rights
mechanisms. They engaged productively in their
second universal periodic review in the Human
Rights Council and, for the first time, accepted
numerous recommendations dealing with humanitarian
assistance, women's and children's rights, health and
education. Representatives of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea also held an unprecedented meeting
with the Special Rapporteur. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea also indicated, for the first time,
its willingness to accept technical assistance from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Moreover, bilateral negotiations
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and Japan have reopened the investigations into the
alleged abductions of Japanese nationals. I hope that
this process will be conducted in transparency and
good faith, leading to truth and redress for the families.
It will also be important to bring clarity to reported
abductions from the Republic of Korea and elsewhere.

All of those developments may present an
opportunity for real change. Other countries in the
region have shown in the recent past that it is possible
to dismantle deep-seated structures of repression and
receive assistance in reform, leading to new recognition
and standing in the international community. My
Office will naturally give all possible support to
such progress, together with the international human
rights mechanisms; and here I note that the Special
Rapporteur should be invited to visit the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea without preconditions. In
March 2015, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will establish a field-
based structure in Seoul, as mandated by Human Rights
Council resolution 25/25. That will follow up on the
commission of inquiry, boost support for the Special
Rapporteur and serve as a hub for documentation,
technical assistance and advocacy in order to promote
accountability and improve human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Real change in the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will not only
require reform; it also demands justice. For the first
time, a United Nations-mandated body has described
human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in terms of international criminal
law. That is significant in establishing individual and
institutional accountability, but it also invokes the
international community's responsibility to take action
to prevent and punish such crimes. An overwhelming
majority ofMember States - those in the Human Rights
Council and those in General Assembly - as well
as victims, survivors and civil-society organizations
around the world, have called on the Security Council
to take action on this report, including by referral to the
International Criminal Court and by adopting targeted
sanctions.

As we have seen this year, concerted actions by
the international community can have a powerful
deterrent effect and may begin to change the policy of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I believe
that the Security Council can advance two crucial
goals: accountability and engagement for reform.
Today's discussion has placed the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea on notice. The Council should
carefully monitor developments in the coming months
to see whether engagement with that country leads to
real change, or whether it should take further action.

The people of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea have endured decades of suffering and cruelty.
They need the Council's protection, and the cause of
justice, peace and security in the region requires its
leadership.

