Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive and objective briefing, as always, and
his unfailing commitment to the region.

First of all, we welcome the decision taken by Israel
and Hamas in Gaza to observe a ceasefire based on the
terms of the agreement the two sides reached in 2014.
We appreciate the political will ofboth sides, which has
resulted in the finalization of the truce. We hope that it
will lead to a full-fledged peace treaty between the two
sides and thereby prevent a relapse, which should be
averted at all costs.

We sincerely welcome the efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations since the beginning of the crisis to pull
Israel and Gaza back from the brink of war and bring
about some calm. Astana also appreciates the measures
of the international community and different entities
to secure a ceasefire. Confidence-building measures
and political-diplomatic measures are at the core of
our foreign policy and we always urge our partners to
utilize them.

Astana encourages both sides and Member States
with influence to help work towards a solution by
encouraging Israel and Palestine to return to the
negotiating table. Such efforts should seek to reach
mutually acceptable principles for the coexistence of
two States based on international law and Security
Council resolutions, as well as address the blockade of
the Gaza Strip, where an acute food shortage persists.

However, we are glad to learn that the fuel shipments,
under the Organization's supervision, continued to flow
into the Strip unhindered. It is equally essential that
both parties uphold the ceasefire, exercise maximum
restraint and not indulge in any hostile or provocative
actions, and do so by liaising with the United Nations,
Egypt and other countries of influence.

In order to do so, it is important to consolidate
the Palestinian ranks together on a common Palestine
Liberation Organizationpoliticalplatform as anecessary
condition to realizing the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for their own independent State. That
means paying attention to reaching intra-Palestinian
consolidation to create constructive mechanisms to
resolve other problematic issues, such as unemployment
and the difficult humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip.

Kazakhstan would like to underscore the
responsibility of both sides to prevent an escalation
of the conflict and to resume negotiations without
any preconditions. My country's position remains
unchanged and is very clear. It is based on the
principle of two States for two peoples, with the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the creation of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the international borders of
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. At the same
time, we fully understand the aspirations of Israel to
live in security. The fundamental concept, as we have
always said in the Council, is rooted in the inalienable
rights of Palestinians to statehood and the right ofIsrael
to security and recognition.

