Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Kobler, Special Envoy
Robinson and Angolan Minister of Defence Goncalves
Lourenco for their briefings. We welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Minister of Defence and
Military Veterans of South Africa and the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda at today's meeting.

Since the beginning of the year, the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has seen continuous improvement. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region has gradually
been implemented. The international community,
including the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, has made great efforts to that end, which China
greatly appreciates.

The Great Lakes region is at the centre of the
African continent. For historical and ethnic reasons,
countries in the region have frequent interactions.
Their destinies are inextricably interwoven. Right
now, the region has a good opportunity to put an end
to its long-term turmoil. The international community
should coordinate its efforts on three fronts so as to
push for the realization of lasting peace, stability and
development in the region.

First, with respect to common security, the
international community should advocate in favour of
the concept of common security, comprehensiveness,
cooperation and sustainable development, and
respect and guarantee every country's security. In
the Great Lakes region, the international community
should encourage countries concerned to resolve
their differences and disputes through discussion
and consultations and increase mutual trust, resolve
divergences and promote security through dialogue.

Secondly, in the area of common development, the
Great Lakes region is endowed with rich resources and an
enormous potential for development. The international
community should concretely help countries in the
region realize development and address the root causes
of conflict, such as poverty. While pursuing their
own development, countries in the region should also
actively strive to achieve development for all so that
the fruits of development can bring more and greater
benefits to the people of every country.

Thirdly, with respect to win-win cooperation,
working together will make countries stronger, while
isolation will make them weak. Countries should abide
by the basic policy of win-win cooperation in handling
their international affairs. We hope that members from
the region will establish a new concept of win-win in
bilateral, multilateral and common endeavours and
through regional cooperation platforms, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
and jointly promote regional peace, security and
development.

China attaches great importance to its ties with
Africa. I firmly support Africa in resolving African
issues in an African way, while we implement the
China-Africa Cooperative Partnership for Peace and
Security initiative in an in-depth manner and further
increase our support for the creation of a collective
security mechanism in Africa. In the meantime, we
will continue our cooperation with the rest of the
international community so as to jointly promote peace,
stability, prosperity and development in Africa.

