The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Al
Hussein for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Patriarch Sako.

Patriarch Sako (spoke in French): On behalf
of Christians of different ethnic and cultural
denominations who are enduring severe trial in
the Middle East, I extend my thanks to the French
Government 4 and especially to French Minister for
Foreign Affairs Mr. Laurent Fabius - for leading this
groundbreaking humanitarian initiative.

As Council members may know, this year is the
centenary ofthe massacres ofChristians in 1915. Today,
100 years later, we are experiencing a similarly tragic
situation, which has pushed thousands of Christians to
emigrate. This is a great loss for all. To speak frankly,
the so-called Arab Spring had a negative impact on
us. If we had had the opportunity to work in harmony
with the mosaic of religions and ethnic groups in our
region, there would have been a driving force in the
region towards peace, stability, progress and openness
throughout the region.

In this Chamber, I would like to convey a message
inspired by the spiritual and humanitarian values that
animate me. Positive coexistence, on the basis of peace
and justice and in the spirit of love and citizenship,
should remain utmost priority for the Security Council
and the United Nations.

With regard to my country, I call for support for
the central Government and the regional government
of Kurdistan so as to liberate all Iraqi cities, especially
that of Mosul and the towns and Villages in the planes of
Nineveh, for us Christians, Yezidis and Shabaks alike.
I call for international protection of these towns and
cities, who were forcibly displaced from their homes.
A secure zone should be created and a real estate and
property law adopted so as to ensure their rights to
their lands, and enable them to return home and resume
their normal lives. The central Government should also
be responsible to compensate them for the damages
incurred.

The major problem lies in an understanding the
various components of a State - the way in which
religion, citizenship, individuals, the role of woman and
national education are seen - in order to live together
in peace and respect. The Islamic extremist groups
refuse to live with non-Muslims. They are persecuting
and uprooting them from their homes and destroying
all traces of their history. We are facing a cultural and
ideological crisis - a way of monopolizing power,
disabling institutions and restricting freedom. It is
therefore urgent to establish consistent criteria based
on international law.

In addressing the Council, I should stress that
terrorists who commit crimes against humanity should
not be categorized together with the innocent faithful
ofIslam. Indeed, the majority of Muslims are silent and
peaceful. They reject such politicization of the religion.
They are accepting and coexist with others within a
secular State and according to the law with respect for
all institutions.

It is increasingly clear that peace and stability
cannot be achieved solely through military action.
Military action, in fact, cannot dismantle this clustered
way of thinking that destroys human beings and cultural
heritage. What this calls for is that the international
community, including the League of Arab States and the
Organization ofthe Islamic Cooperation, take definitive
legal measures. For example, they could adopt political,
cultural and educational solutions. These solutions
should be appropriate to protect the national mosaic
comprising individuals, persons and groups regardless
of their diverse religions and ethnic backgrounds. The
rights of the all citizens must be safeguarded and the
relations among citizens strengthened.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to a
more significant emerging threat. When millions of
children and young people are deprived of schooling
and education, and millions of refugees are gathered
in camps without special care and attention, there
is growing frustration, unemployment and poverty,
which could very easily develop into an atmosphere of
revenge and openness to extremism. There is therefore
a need to provide care for these refugees by responding
to their needs and alleviating their suffering. We must
undertake a practical process to emerge from this
Vicious cycle.

First of all, through the United Nations, executive
policy should be adopted, based on the updating
of the constitutions and laws. This would promote
justice, equality and dignity for all citizens without
discriminating against one group in a favour of
another. It is imperative that our countries acquire
secular Governments guaranteeing equality to all
citizens. These Governments should be responsible
for the protection of all individuals. They must
comprehensively protect the rights of all their citizens.

Secondly, religious leaders should be encouraged
adopt moderate discourse that deepens the sense of
citizenship. No matter what they religious beliefs or
ethnic origin may be, they should nurture a feeling of
belonging to their national territory, not exclusively to
their religious denominations or tribes. A necessary
factor is the reform of educational programmes so as
to enhance the principles of respect between citizens
and to promote tolerance and communication. This
would also condemn division, hatred and the desire for
revenge. All of this would protect future generations
from the consequences of extremism, violence and
terrorism. These things cannot be achieved unless the
religious hierarchy presents an appropriate exegesis
of religious texts, with zero tolerance to extracting
religious texts regarding violence from their contexts.

Thirdly, a law should be adopted criminalizing all
States and individuals who support terrorist groups,
either financially or intellectually, or by providing
them with weapons. Their acts are a crime against
social peace. They must be held accountable.

Fourthly, we must promote the development of
organizations for human rights and promoting civil
society. Such organizations should be supported to play
a role that is more simply consultative, but rather an
executive one, at the regional and international levels
alike.

May the Council rest assured of my best wishes for
success in its humanitarian mission.

The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Mrs. Vian Dakhil, Member of the Iraqi
Parliament.


