Ms. Decerega Smith (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): I am grateful to you, Sir, for your initiative in
convening this meeting of the Security Council.

The delegation of Panama sees today's debate as a
good opportunity to express its support for including the
question of anti-personnel land-mines in the consideration
of peace-keeping, in both conceptual and operational
terms. It is an urgent duty for us to consider and act upon
the problem of land-mines. The ongoing threat on lands
that are no longer a battlefield is that at any time land-
mines can explode and claim men, women, children and
the elderly as their victims: civilians one and all, who are
defenceless and unaware of the threat to their lives. This
threat poses a challenge to the human intellect: that of
dealing with this senseless situation and eliminating the
land-mines, whose existence in more than 65 countries is
cause for shock - and the cause of pain and death. This
situation, which is repugnant to human logic, must be
eliminated.
Many in the United Nations, on many occasions,
have denounced anti-personnel land-mines and have
called for international cooperation for rapid, urgent,
effective and complete demining. During today's debate
in this Chamber, speakers have also stressed the
relationship between the issue of anti-personnel land-
mines, political disarmament issues, humanitarian issues,
and development issues. That relationship has also been
sharply underscored by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in "An Agenda for Peace"
and in the Agenda for Development.

One historian of the Spanish colonization of the
Americas relates that at one point the political and
military authorities of the people indigenous to an area
colonized by the Spaniards took the decision to make no
more poisoned arrows. It was the view of that historian
that the fields of battle against the colonizers and against
enemy tribes were littered with poisoned arrow-heads,
which posed a particular threat to the indigenes, who went
barefoot. Whether or not one agrees with that
interpretation, my delegation considers that the story
illustrates many dimensions of the problem of the
existence of so many millions of anti-personnel land-

 

mines at the end of the twentieth century, despite the firm
hope that we all share that the will for peace and
cooperation for development can prevail in international
relations.

Last May the revised Protocol II on land-mines was
adopted as part of the 1981 Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects. The provisions of that Protocol
and the restrictions it sets out are insufficient. My
delegation wishes to put on record that the Government of
Panama agrees with those who favour the total prohibition
of the production, export and use of anti-personnel land-
mines. The General Assembly of the Organization of
American States, which met in Panama some three months
ago, adopted a resolution supporting mine clearance in
Central America; we hope that the General Assembly of the
United Nations will echo that position at its forthcoming
fifty-first session.

In May 1996, the European Union, through its then
Chairman-in-Office, the delegation of Italy, expressed the
conviction that

"it is constant, broad and persistent efforts that are
needed to achieve all the fundamental humanitarian
goals".
My delegation sees in that statement a firm promise to
carry out efforts of all kinds, including legal and financial
efforts, and we hope that will be the case.

A few days ago we learned of the seven-point action
programme on anti-personnel land-mines presented by Mr.
Klaus Kinkel, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, on 18 June 1996. The seventh point of the
German programme was by way of a supplementary
invitation to today's Security Council meeting, to which
Panama is happy to respond by means of the present
statement.

We note important efforts on the part of a number of
countries to engage in a task that should involve us all. At
the risk of omissions, I want to thank the European Union,
Canada, the United States of America, Japan, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Australia, Uruguay, Colombia and Argentina. On
behalf of the Government of Panama, I reaffirm our
readiness to contribute our determination and resources to
bring about the elimination of anti-personnel land-mines
and to ensure that the complete eradication of these horrible
tools of suffering is a goal we reach as soon as possible.

My delegation endorses the statement made by the
representative of Nicaragua, who spoke on behalf of the
countries of Central America.

