Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
I commend his personal commitment, especially his
recent mission to the region and, in particular, to Gaza,
which enabled him to assess the situation on the ground
and the extent of the human and material damage
suffered by the Palestinian population during Israel's
most recent military operations.

My statement will focus on the question ofPalestine.
My country appreciates the convening in Cairo on
12 October of the Gaza reconstruction Conference
and welcomes the commitments made by donors to
contribute to Gaza's rebuilding and development
efforts.

Nevertheless, my country believes that the time
has come for the international community to take
responsibility and establish safeguards to ensure that
the aggression against the Gaza Strip does not become
a recurrent phenomenon every two or three years,
jeopardizing all peace efforts and wasting the enormous
financial resources allocated to Gaza's reconstruction.
From that perspective, it seems crucial to us that we
emerge from that vicious cycle and end the continuing
spiral of violence, thereby leaving behind the cycle of
continuing construction and reconstruction.

Furthermore, we must not lose sight of the fact that
the Palestinian problem is not confined to aggression
against Gaza. Clearly, it is important to end the blockade
and to protect Gazans from all forms of aggression.
Above all, however, there must be an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory, which has
persisted for far too long and for which no durable or
permanent solution seems to be visible on the horizon.

Despite the well-known parameters for a solution,
Israel continues to hamper the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and prevent the two-State solution
by flouting the relevant United Nations resolutions and
its other international commitments.

Concerning the upheaval in the Middle East,
especially the hotspots and impasses in armed
conflict that encourage radicalization and terrorism,
such situations are both unacceptable and extremely
dangerous. We deplore the fact that many years of
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians have not
yielded any concrete results.

In that context, there must be a change in strategy
and to explore other options. It is the responsibility of
the international community to bring Israel to reason
in order to renounce its intransigence by accepting a
negotiated political solution leading to the realization of
the vision of two independent States living side by side
in peace and security based on the pre-l967 borders.
In the absence of that, the international community
will have to finally recognize the State of Palestine and
thereby ensure protection of the Palestinian people even
under occupation, based on respect for international
law.

In that respect, the new initiative of Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, supported
by the League of Arab States, sets a date to end the
Israeli occupation and form a Palestinian State based
on the pre-1967 borders. It deserves the full attention of
the international community.

In that regard, we salute the adoption by the United
Kingdom Parliament of a resolution calling on the
Government to recognize the State ofPalestine. We also
commend Sweden's courageous decision to recognize
the State of Palestine. Those positions, beyond the
profound symbolic character, represent a step in the
right direction to put an end to the historic injustice
that the Palestinian people have bitterly experienced on
a daily basis for six decades.

We are profoundly concerned by the recent actions
of the Israeli occupation forces and groups of extremist
settlers on the esplanade of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
carrying out profane attacks against the holy sites and
brutally attacking pilgrims who have made the journey
in fulfillment of their religious duty. Such actions are
provocations - even attacks - against the feelings
of the Muslim world that risk undermining the peace
efforts.

We also condemn the settlement policy and the
destruction of Palestinian homes and all arbitrary acts
committed against the Palestinian population.

In that vein, it is Chad's belief that aggressive acts
committed by Israel against the civilian Palestinian
population in the Gaza Strip, the displacement and
transfer of civilians by the Israeli authorities, the
destruction of civilian property and all acts of collective
punishment represent grave violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights.

To conclude, I wish to again stress that the
international community must emerge from its inertia
and assume its historic and moral responsibility by
considering all possible options and exerting the
necessary pressure upon the parties to ensure the
relaunching of the peace process in order to end the
suffering of the Palestinian people and enable them
to exercise their right to a sovereign, independent
and viable State. That also constitues the road map to
settling other conflicts in the Middle East.

