Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the respresentative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Singapore has for many years called for
improvements to the working methods of the Security
Council. Our latest proposals are included in the
document on Security Council reform circulated by
the President of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly on 31 July.

As a small city-State, we will not have many
opportunities to be a member of the Security Council,
but we attach much importance to the issue of the
Council's working methods and would like to see quick
progress. We therefore thank Spain for convening
today's meeting and for its concept note ((S/2015/793, annex) on the theme of this open debate. We would like
to focus on three aspects of the working methods of the
Security Council.

First, to improve its own effectiveness and
accountability, the Council must address the elephant
in the room. Too often in the past, the veto has been
used to prevent action to address genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes that had led to the
loss of many innocent lives. Singapore reiterates
its call to the permanent members of the Council to
refrain from using their right of veto to block Council
action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. If they must, they
should at least explain to the wider United Nations
membership why they cannot support initiatives
aimed at preventing or ending mass atrocities. In
that regard, Singapore supports the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct
on Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. We also support the
joint proposal of France and Mexico for the permanent
members of the Security Council to refrain from using
the veto in cases ofmass atrocities. We call on all States
Members of the United Nations to do likewise.
Secondly, with respect to transparency and
accountability, the Council has been operating on
provisional rules of procedure for decades. Many of
the current working methods are also captured outside
the provisional rules of procedure in successive notes
by the President of the Council. Given the importance
of the Security Council, that is not ideal. It is time for
the Council to adopt its rules of procedure to improve
the transparency and accountability of its work. That in
turn would enhance the Council's credibility with the
wider membership of the United Nations.

Thirdly, with respect to inclusiveness, in order
to ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations, the Security Council has been conferred
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, the Council
should not allow that to prevent it from working with
the wider United Nations membership on key issues that
affect all Member States. Ifthe Security Council is to act
for the benefit of the wider United Nations membership,
it should engage the Member States in a Virtuous cycle
of dialogue and effective decision-making.

Next year, the United Nations membership will need
to decide on the next candidate to lead the Organization.
We call on the Council to work more closely with the
General Assembly, in accordance with their respective
mandates as laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to make the process for selecting the
Secretary-General more open and transparent. Some of
the measures adopted in General Assembly resolution
69/321, such as the joint letter by the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Council
inviting candidates to be presented in a timely manner
with a description ofthe entire process, are a good start.
We need to take further steps in that direction.

Singapore welcomes opportunities like today's open
debate to discuss the important issue of the working
methods of the Security Council. We look forward to
a meaningful outcome on this issue that will help to
further strengthen the effectiveness and credibility of
the Council.

