Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to say at the outset that the Syrian
people continue to be the victims of developments in the
Security Council and the hypocrisy of certain countries
that do not want to end the crisis in Syria but prefer to
manipulate terrorism, invest in armed terrorist groups
and impose an economic embargo on the Syrian people.
Needless to say, countries that attempt to exploit the
suffering of the Syrian people in order to achieve their
own goals are far from engaged in ending the suffering
of the Syrian people.

The Syrian Government asks the Governments
of those countries that support terrorism in Syria to
stop exploiting the Syrian crisis to achieve their own
political goals and not those of the Syrians. They must
also lift the economic embargo imposed on the Syrian
people and stop bombing their cities, killing civilians
and destroying the infrastructure. All of this is real
evidence of the direct responsibility of those regimes
for the suffering and forced displacement of Syrians.
They impede the safe and dignified return of the
refugees to their own country.

The Government of my country, the Syrian Arabic
Republic, has spared no effort in recent years to provide
every form of humanitarian assistance and support to
all Syrians affected by the crisis, regardless of their
locations throughout Syria. The Syrian Government
has therefore collaborated and cooperated with the
United Nations and other international organizations
working in Syria to that end, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182. Far from the propaganda
and the allegations that some are trying to promote,
I would like to stress that the path to improving the
humanitarian situation is known by all and requires
the following.

First, we must not ignore the main causes of the
suffering of the Syrian people, namely, the practices of
armed terrorist groups and well-known Governments
that support them; the ongoing crimes committed by
the so-called international coalition, which have caused
the deaths of thousands of civilians and serious damage
to the infrastructure, including schools and hospitals;
the coercive unilateral illegal measures imposed on
the Syrian people, which must cease immediately and
unconditionally, especially in light of the fact that
their catastrophic, criminal effects on civilians and
humanitarian action are known to all.

Secondly, it is necessary to put an end to the deliberate
and methodical politicization of the humanitarian issue
and to stop attempts to exploit it by certain States in
order to look good. That was demonstrated recently at
the Brussels Conference, where the objective was to
pressure Syria and complicate and prolong the crisis
while associating humanitarian and development action
once again with political conditions that do not jibe
with humanitarian principles.

Thirdly, the efforts of the Syrian State and its
allies to facilitate the return of Syrian refugees to their
country in safety and dignity must be supported. The
pledges of donors must be in line with this goal rather
than using billions of dollars to keep the refugees in
host countries.

Fourthly, there is a need to join Syrian efforts in
order to save our people in Idlib, who are living under
the threat of the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups and entities affiliated with it, which are using
the people as a human shield. There should be an end
to the recurrent aggressions of those terrorist groups
against innocent civilians in the neighbouring towns
and cities.

Fifthly, there must be an end to the suffering of tens
of thousands of civilians who live in areas controlled
by illegitimate foreign forces and militias affiliated
with them. In this regard, we note that it has been
1,820 days since the civilians in Rukban camp, which
is located in Al-Tanf area, have been living in forced
captivity by the United States and terrorist militias
associated with it. The continued suffering of those
Syrian civilians demonstrates the indifference of the
United States Administration to their suffering and
disastrous situation. We stress once again that there is
a need to put an end to the suffering of these civilians
and to close this issue definitively. The detained people
in the camp must be allowed to leave it and return to
their home regions, which have been liberated by the
Syrian Arab Army from terrorism. We note that the
Syrian Government has taken all necessary measures
to evacuate the detainees from the Rukban camp and
end their suffering. What is needed today is for the
American occupation forces to allow the camp to be
dismantled and to ensure safe transportation in the
occupied Al-Tanf area.

In conclusion, the only way to alleviate the
suffering and help the humanitarian situation is for the
known Governments to stop sponsoring terrorism and
immediately end the illegal coercive measures used to
implement nefarious agendas.

Lastly, the suffering of each and every Syrian
person, including those with disabilities, causes pain
to us. The Syrian State institutions are making every
effort to assist and support those people and others
who are vulnerable. The number of such people has
significantly increased due to the activities of terrorist
groups and crimes committed by the international
coalition. Those difficulties have been exacerbated by
unilateral coercive measures that impede our efforts
to safely provide our people with all services and
health care. Every city in Syria has many specialized
educational institutions for persons with disabilities
and provide their services free of charge. The Syrian
Government has paid great attention to assisting
persons with disabilities.

