Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

The Nordic countries are heartened that, during
the past few years, the number of conflicts in which
child soldiers have been used has decreased.
International attention and efforts to eliminate the use
of child soldiers and alleviate the suffering of children
in situations of armed conflict have intensified. This is
largely due to the excellent work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We
would like to reiterate our deep appreciation for her
tireless efforts to call perpetrators to account and to
further develop the international mechanisms to bring
an end to this scourge. We would also like to take this
opportunity to commend UNICEF for its worldwide
efforts to ensure the protection of all children,
including through its leadership of the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms.

At the same time, we have to note that the
positive developments have less to do with the efforts
of the international community than with the fact that
certain armed conflicts in which the use of child
soldiers had persisted have come to an end. It is
particularly disheartening that human rights violations
against children are repeated when new crises and
armed conflicts flare up. We need to address the root
causes of such violations and put an end to human
rights abuses.

I wish to focus my remarks today on three issues
that the Secretary-General has emphasized in his
recommendations to the Council. The first is
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to gather information to ensure that the Council
gets timely, accurate and verified information from

complex situations on the ground. The second is
allowing the United Nations to work with non-State
actors in addressing grave violations against children
to ensure that action is taken when violations have
been reported. The third is how to take decisive action
in cases where violations persist despite repeated
condemnations.

The Nordic countries appreciate the fact that, for
the first time, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/ 181) lists parties that have committed either
sexual violence or killed or maimed children. The
capacity needed for gathering, verifying and analysing
the information on these crimes is recognized in the
report. The Nordic countries support what the
Secretary-General in his report calls a conservative
approach taken this year in determining the parties to
be listed for these violations and the self-critical
approach in acknowledging the difficulties in
information collection. For us, this demonstrates that
the Office of the Special Representative, the country
task forces and all relevant United Nations and
non-United Nations partners are guided by very high
standards of accuracy and verification, despite the
often complex situations on the ground.

Nordic countries - both Governments and civil
society - have been committed supporters of UNICEF
since its establishment. UNICEF leads the work of the
existing 14 monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
the ground. We are encouraged by the good
cooperation between UNICEF and the Office of the
Special Representative. We would like to see a similar
close relationship develop with actors working on
women and peace and security, in particular the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also support the
involvement of child protection specialists in the
preparation and planning of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping missions, as well as systematic inclusion
of Child Protection Advisers in all peacekeeping
operations and political and peacebuilding missions.

Information on grave violations is not collected
and verified for the sake of having the information but
for action to be taken in response, in order to make a
difference to children's lives. We welcome the fact that
in the course of last year the development of and
agreement to action plans by three non-State armed
groups has led to the demobilization of several
thousand child soldiers. These action plans are a strong
example of why allowing contacts between the United
Nations and non-State actors for the purposes of
addressing grave violations of children's rights is so
crucial. We join the call of the Secretary-General on all
Governments concerned to allow the United Nations to
work with non-State actors for effective protection of
children.

The presence of the Afghan National Police on
the list in annex I of the report of the Secretary-
General represents a special case for the Nordic
countries. Several Nordic countries actively support the
Afghan National Police as part of the effort to enhance
the human rights and security situation in the country.
We are encouraged by the steps taken so far by the
Afghan Government to address the issue of recruitment
of children, and we stand ready to support the Afghan
National Police to that end.

Unfortunately, there are also cases where the
Security Council does not lack information but where
the violations continue nonetheless. The Nordic
countries express great concern that parties continue to
commit grave violations, and we appreciate that for the
first time the Secretary-General's report has a separate
list of persistent violators: those parties to a conflict
who have been listed for grave violations against
children for five or more consecutive years. The
Nordic countries believe it is time for the Security
Council to step up its response against these persistent
violators. It should also consider more effective
measures in response to grave violations in general. We
support the proposals of the Secretary-General to
include child recruitment and its use in the mandate of
all sanctions committees, to improve the flow of
information between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the sanctions committees and
to invite the Special Representative on Children and
Armed Conflict to regularly brief the sanctions
committees.

In this regard we have been encouraged to hear
that the Special Representative was recently invited to
brief the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we hope that
the Security Council will decide to make this a regular
practice.

Lastly, the fight against impunity, including
through our continuing support for the International
Criminal Court, is of course both a preventive and a
responsive measure to combat grave violations against
children.

