Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening today's open debate. We
convey our delegation's deepest condolences following
the sad demise of the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire.

We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his informative briefing.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and by the representative of Iraq on behalf
of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

In our national capacity, our delegation would like
to make five key points.

First, we reaffirm our support for the peace plan
presented by the President of the State of Palestine to
the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183). The plan
is yet another constructive proposal on behalf of the
Palestinian people in their just struggle over seven
decades for their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence. We urge all concerned to give due
consideration to the peace plan, as the status quo on the
Palestinian question is neither acceptable nor tenable in
the framework of the two-State solution.

Secondly, the Government and people of Bangladesh
share grave concerns about the prevailing situation and
tension in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. We condemn the killing of at least 41
Palestinians during peaceful demonstrations since the
commencement of the Great March of Return nearly
four weeks ago. We urge the Council to send a firm
and unequivocal message against the unlawful killing
and injury of innocent Palestinian civilians. We join
the Secretary-General in calling for an independent
and transparent investigation into those incidents, and
for Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with its
obligations under international humanitarian law and
relevant United Nations resolutions.

Thirdly, we continue to insist on lifting the illegal
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has created
a dire humanitarian situation. Provocative policies and
legal measures concerning the occupied East Jerusalem
and the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque must be reversed in
deference to relevant United Nations resolutions and
international public opinion. We reaffirm the overriding
importance ofpreserving the question ofEast Jerusalem
as a final-status issue in the peace process.

Fourthly, Bangladesh urges the Council to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We remain
concerned about the total disregard to comply with the
provisions ofresolution 2234 (2016). Immediate priority
must be given to ensuring international protection for
the Palestinian people suffering for decades from the
occupying Power's policy of collective punishment.

Fifthly, we reiterate our concern about the
prolonged uncertain situation endured by millions of
Palestinian refugees in a number of host countries. We
reaffirm the need to ensure enhanced, predictable and
sustainable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNWRA).
We call upon Member States in a position to do so
to enable UNRWA to discharge its mandate in a
meaningful manner.

Bangladesh emphasizes that provocations,
unilateral actions and the escalation of tension are
totally incompatible with our shared pursuit of peace
and security in the Middle East. We expect the Council
to demonstrate unity of purpose in order to find
peaceful, just and lasting solutions to all protracted
conflicts and humanitarian situations in the region,
including the Palestinian question.
