Mr. Choi Su-young (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin, Mr. President, by joining previous speakers in
thanking you for organizing today's open debate on
protection of civilians in armed conflict and giving us
this opportunity to address the Security Council. My
delegation also welcomes and supports Security
Council resolution 1894 (2009), on protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which was adopted this
morning.

During the open debate on this subject in June
(see S/PV.6151), my delegation emphasized two
factors in enhancing and promoting civilian protection:
first, the demonstration of strong political will by the
Security Council and the parties concerned; and
secondly, the translation of the results of 10 years of
discussion on civilian protection into concrete
implementation and operationalization in the field. We
believe that today's resolution clearly expresses the
strong political will of the Security Council on this
issue, and we hope that the resolution will serve as a
solid foundation to further our efforts to convert our
discussions into real action on the ground.

While the primary responsibility for civilian
protection rests on the nations and parties involved in
conflicts, peacekeepers also have the responsibility to
support and provide security to people at risk. Failure
to address large-scale violence against civilians will
seriously hurt the legitimacy and credibility of
peacekeeping missions. Civilian protection should be a
vital priority and an integral part of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. My delegation is pleased to
recognize that today's resolution adequately addresses
this priority. Echoing the voices of those in the field, I
would also like to emphasize, inter alia, the importance
of clear, credible and achievable mandates with
operational definition as a condition for ensuring the
successful execution of civilian protection mandates.

My delegation stands firmly with the Security
Council in affirming its strong opposition to impunity
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. When it is clearly established
that there is no escape for a violator, compliance with
international humanitarian law will be enhanced. In
addition to what the resolution stipulates, my
delegation would like to underline that the role of the
International Criminal Court should also be respected
in upholding the principle of no impunity when there is
a clear and evident failure of States to prosecute
criminals.

Women and girls deserve special attention, since
they are the most vulnerable group in conflict
situations, and since sexual violence has a devastating
and corrosive effect on society as a whole. My
delegation has been strongly articulating our
determination to put a stop to this most cowardly form
of violence, and we welcomed the landmark Security
Council resolution 1888 (2009) in this regard. Today's
resolution adequately reflects the spirit of resolution
1888 (2009) and will add important political
momentum to our efforts to eradicate sexual violence
and exploitation.

Preventing humanitarian access to civilians
affected by armed conflict constitutes a crime against
humanity. Unfortunately, however, there are still cases
where humanitarian personnel and relief supplies,
although a few miles away, ready to be delivered,
cannot reach those who desperately need them because
of the deliberate interference of certain parties
involved in armed conflict. My delegation values
today's resolution as an important step towards
addressing this issue, and we look forward to further
developments on the issue in the Security Council.

The protection of civilians is an ongoing task that
needs to be continued not only in the peacekeeping
process but also in the peacebuilding process. My
delegation believes that providing basic safety and
security for civilians is crucial to stabilize countries
emerging from conflicts. Assisting those countries to
set up transitional justice mechanisms and the rule of
law is fundamental in securing safety and security for
civilians. Successful peacebuilding is also an integral
element of protecting civilians in armed conflict, and,
in that regard, we hope that the Security Council will
incorporate this element in future discussion on the
1ssue.

