Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his analysis of the processes taking
place in Afghanistan. We listened closely to the
statements delivered by the Ambassador of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, and by
Mr. Bakhtiar. We concur with many of the assessments
contained in the relevant quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/824). For our part, we wish
to note the following.

We are profoundly alarmed at the security situation
in Afghanistan. The Taliban movement controls nearly
half of the country, periodically seizing new districts,
including in the north. We note that its fighters have
a capacity to stage large-scale, coordinated and well-
prepared operations. A stark example of this fact are the
days-long attacks against the strategically important
Ghazni province, the large-scale attacks against Ghor,
Farah and Sari Pu], and the difficult situations that have
unfolded in Paktia, Helmand, Faryab, Samangan, Herat
and Kunduz. Against that backdrop, we are especially
troubled by the state of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, which incur unprecedented losses
on a daily basis.

Our attention remains closely focused on the surge
of terrorist activity by the Afghan wing of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), whose ranks are
growing largely due to foreign fighters with battlefield
experience from Syria and Iraq. According to our
sources, the number of ISIL adherents may be as high
as 10,000. The danger is further compounded by their
growing ideological, propagandistic and recruitment
activity, which makes skillful use of information and
communication technology. Despite reports about
fighters being routed and their partial surrender to
Government forces in Jawzjan in August, they still
retain footholds in provinces of the north and north-
east, from where they seek to gain traction in the
country. We see a threat both to our borders and to
those of our Central Asian neighbhours. The Taliban
also sporadically joins the fight against ISIL, largely
in the north and east of Afghanistan, which points to
the fact that the ISIL threat is recognized both by the
authorities in Kabul and by the Taliban. We must stress
that the fight against the terrorists in Afghanistan
would be far more effective if regional and international
efforts were combined.

With respect to Afghanistan and other conflicts,
what remains relevant is our initiative to establish
a wide-ranging counter-terrorist coalition. It is
necessary to shed light on the situation regarding the
unmarked helicopter flights in northern Afghanistan,
which provide both weaponry and munitions to ISIL
adherents. We are surprised by the fact that there has
been no response to those events, including from the
command of the NATO contingent stationed there. We
believe that attempts to sweep this issue under the rug
are not acceptable. We are troubled by reports about
attempts by the Afghan wing ofISIL to reach agreement
with the Taliban movement and other organizations to
coordinate operations. Moreover, contacts are being
strengthened between ISIL and representatives of the
Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement. In the light of
the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan, we
deem it necessary to proactively leverage the Security
Council's counter-terrorism sanctions mechanisms.
We advocate the placement of additional barriers to
pre-empt terrorist activity in that country. It is important
to specifically emphasize the sanctioning of individuals
and entities who are complicit in ISIL operations.

We are troubled at the unbridled growth in
narcotics production. Narcotics provide significant
financial support for terrorists in Afghanistan. In that
connection, we are confounded at the fact that the issue
of Afghan narcotics is completely disregarded in the
final observations of the report. We believe that it is
important for this to be prioritized. It is the thrust of
our practical measures, including through the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). The Russian
Federation spares no effort in supporting the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in that regard, including providing regular assistance
to the UNODC-led Paris Pact Initiative, which seeks
to comprehensively prevent Afghan opium production,
the regional UNODC programme for Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries and the alternative development
programme in Badakhshan province. We are pleased at
the implementation of our initiative to train narcotics
police officers from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Central
Asian countries, as well as thejoint Domodedovo project
with Japan to form a canine unit for Afghanistan, which
we trust will serve as a key tool in the fight against
narcotics in the country.
We note with regret that the 17-year, large-scale
military presence of NATO and United States troops
has not served to stabilize the military and political
situation in the country. What is clear is that the approach
of using force to exert pressure has not brought about
the desired results; it only escalates the conflict. We
believe that there is no military solution to the crisis
in Afghanistan. The only way to resolve the crisis is
through pan-Afghan consensus achieved through
political and diplomatic means. That is especially
urgent at the current juncture on the eve of elections,
which should serve as a step towards the unification
of the country. We support the policy of Kabul and the
country's social and political forces to achieve that
end. We believe that negotiations need to be conducted
under the leadership of the Afghan people themselves.
We reaffirm our willingness to lend our fullest support.

We welcome international and regional efforts to
assist Afghanistan in establishing a peace process.
However, it is paramount that there be no competition
in that regard: it is not about building fiefdoms. We
must instead build an optimal platform for international
support for establishing a peace process in Afghanistan
by engaging the stakeholders. Such a vision is
advanced by the Moscow format of consultations with
Afghanistan, a meeting of which we plan to hold with
the participation of representatives of the Taliban,
following the formulation of a consolidated position on
the matter in Kabul. We trust that the United States will
be involved. The invitation still stands.

We note the growing understanding worldwide of
the importance of the regional context to any Afghan
settlement. We note in particular the renewed SCO-
Afghanistan Contact Group. We see sound potential
for scaling up counter-narcotics engagement between
Afghanistan and the CSTO.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play an important
role in coordinating international assistance to
Afghanistan. We commend the selfless and courageous
efforts UNAMA personnel.

Russia and Afghanistan are linked together by
historical, friendly, open relations based on trust. We
genuinely hope to see swift stabilization in the country,
for it to get back on track to sustainable development. On
that basis, we stand ready to engage with Afghanistan
and with regional and international partners.

