Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
4 October to 11 December.

In my capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, I visited Khartoum and
Darfur from 11 to 14 November, in accordance with
the Committee's agreed terms of reference. Several
Committee members accompanied me during this Visit.
It was the fourth visit of a Chair of the Committee to
the Sudan, the first having taken place in January 2014,
the second in May 2017 and the third in April last year.

The purpose of the visit was to obtain updated
first-hand accounts of the state of the implementation
of the measures imposed in resolutions 1591 (2005)
and 1945 (2010), as updated in resolution 2035 (2012).
The delegation met with Sudanese officials, both
in Khartoum and Darfur, United Nations entities,
internally displaced persons (IDPs), civil society and
youth groups.

Let me emphasize that the United Nations
sanctions regime continues to be largely confused with
other bilateral measures, both past and current, and
often cited as a main impediment to the development
of Darfur and the delivery of basic services to the
population. Such misperception appears repeatedly, in
particular in my conversations with civil society, but
also with representatives of some Sudanese institutions.
During my visit, I made every effort to explain the
scope and purpose of the targeted measures imposed in
the context of the Sudan by the United Nations, as well
as the difference between United Nations sanctions and
bilateral measures.

Without a doubt, the situation in Darfur has
improved since my visit last year and, in the larger
context, since the imposition of the sanctions regime.
The security situation has largely normalized, with the
exception of the presence of rebel groups in limited
areas of Jebel Marra. At the same time, the perhaps
self-evident linkages among development, livelihood,
security, justice and return are exemplified in the
current situation in Darfur. Many challenges remain in
the area of the humanitarian and human rights situation,
and the root causes of the conflict have yet to be
addressed, including through the creation of conditions
for Darfuri IDPs to return to their homes. In terms of
the peace process, some very positive steps have been
taken. There is also a clear expectation on the part of
Darfuri civil society and IDP representatives that they
will be included in the ongoing peace talks. While hope
is there, we, as the Committee and the Council, need to
do our utmost to help foster such hope and build on it.

I therefore encourage the Committee and the
Council to explore different options as to how the
tool of sanctions might support and acknowledge the
achievements made so far by the Sudanese authorities
and the people. I also recommended that the Committee
continue to cooperate with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan. Lastly, I recommended
that the Committee and the Secretariat engage in
outreach activities to explain the sanctions regime.

