Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
second comprehensive report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2001/33l). I hope that the
Council's debate today will help create better
awareness amongst Member States of the gravity and
complexity of the problem, which needs to be
addressed as a matter of priority.

It is a matter of grave concern for us that violence
against civilians in situations of armed conflict has
reached alarming proportions and is directed in most
cases against women, children and other vulnerable
groups, resulting in the displacement of large masses of
population. The excessively high proportion of civilian
casualties in conflicts, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, and the distressing reality of tens of
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons,
indeed make for alarming statistics. I am sure that my
good friend Under-Secretary-General Oshima is
conscious of this bleak reality. Pakistan, which has
carried the burden of Afghan refugees on its soil for
more than two decades, is all too keenly aware of the
plight of people forced to leave their homes. We
therefore unequivocally condemn the targeting of
civilians in armed conflicts.

Unfortunately, the targeting of civilians takes
place in spite of the existence of internationally
recognized legal principles which have evolved over
the years to protect civilians, refugees and
humanitarian personnel. It is our collective
responsibility to ensure effective adherence to these
principles of international law.

At the same time, it is also the obligation of the
Security Council to take necessary measures to ensure
the protection of civilians. But we have seen the
Council fail so many times in meeting this obligation.
Rwanda and Srebrenica are painful reminders of what
the Council could have done but was unable to do.
Again, its recent failure to protect Palestinian civilians
reflects the paralysis that afflicts the Council. The
deaths of valiant Pakistani and Belgian peacekeepers in
Mogadishu and Kigali, respectively, testify to the
unrealistic mandates which United Nations troops are
often called upon to uphold, even at the cost of their
own lives.

While the Council can be faulted for not doing
enough, it can also be criticized for not doing anything
at all. The glaring example is that of Kashmir, where
70,000 innocent civilians have lost their lives during
the last 10 years alone at the hands of a repressive
occupying force. At times, the Council's decisions have
even had an adverse impact on civilian populations
rather than protecting them. For example, Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000) on Afghanistan has
actually endangered the lives of civilians by exempting
one party from the arms embargo and emboldening it to
continue the conflict. While people die and flee their
homes, the Security Council has put its search for
peace in both these conflicts on the back burner. How
can we talk of learning lessons from past tragedies
when we have not even begun to consider the
resolution of the "forgotten conflicts" in Kashmir and
Afghanistan? All efforts aimed at protecting civilians
will remain futile as long as the Council fails to
address the root causes of conflicts.

The Council's attitude towards the tragedies in
Kashmir and Afghanistan reflects an arbitrary
approach, far removed from the principles and values
for which this body stands. No amount of lofty rhetoric
can hide the humanitarian agony in both cases.
Ironically, in the case of Kashmir, this Council has
closed its eyes to its own resolutions pledging the right
of self-determination to the people of Kashmir. In the
case of Afghanistan, the Council has shown indecent
haste in adopting resolutions to enact sanctions against
26 million innocent people.

And the conflict continues - in Kashmir because
of deliberate inaction by this body, and in Afghanistan
because of its precipitous actions. Both present tragic
humanitarian scenarios - in Kashmir as a result of
brutal oppression by the occupying force, and in
Afghanistan as a result of the cruelty of sanctions and a
one-sided arms embargo, which have scuttled the
Secretary-General's peace initiative through his
Personal Representative, Mr. Francesc Vendrell, and
displaced nearly a million Afghans. Hundreds of
thousands of these displaced Afghans have crossed into
Pakistan during the past four months, joining the 2.5
million of their compatriots already living there as
refugees. In this humanitarian crisis, we are blamed if
we help them, and we are blamed if we do not.

As we keep staging debates in this Chamber, the
world outside stands sadly disillusioned. People are
groping for the idealism and moralism that inspired the
vision of the United Nations Charter. Unfortunately,
armed conflicts continue to rage in all parts of the
world, causing human misery and hardship, affecting
millions of people, civilian people. Why can we not
prevent armed conflicts in time? Why can we not help
resolve disputes? Why can we not heal the wounds
caused by these disputes? And why can the Security
Council not fulfil its Charter obligations of maintaining
international peace and security?

While the Secretary-General's report will be
closely studied by my Government, I would like to give
our preliminary comments on its recommendations, as
well as some of our suggestions. First, we support the
Secretary-General's recommendations for the Security
Council to engage with parties and carry out fact-
finding missions for providing humanitarian assistance
and protection to vulnerable populations. In this
connection, we are appreciative of the contribution that
Under-Secretary-General Oshima has been making in
evaluating and highlighting the seriousness and
magnitude of humanitarian tragedies, whether caused
by natural disasters or man-made. In this regard, we
would encourage the Council to go a step further and
actively engage the armed factions to seek a peaceful
solution to a conflict. Peace is the ultimate and only
guarantee of security to civilians in any armed conflict.

Secondly, the focus of the international
community should be devoted to conflict prevention
and dispute resolution, as stipulated in Chapter VI of
the United Nations Charter, so that conflicts which
result in the targeting of civilians are not allowed to
take place in the first instance. Root causes of conflicts
must therefore be addressed.

Thirdly, the United Nations capacity to respond
effectively to conflict situations should be
strengthened, irrespective of geographic location, in
order to provide protection to civilians.

Fourthly, we would like to see the Council
actively, but objectively, involve itself in reviewing the
humanitarian impact of its decisions, especially with
regard to sanctions. I must say that there are no smart
sanctions, nor targeted sanctions, only unjust sanctions.
The Council must eschew adopting resolutions that
only suit the self-serving interests of a few Powers.

Fifthly, when mandating the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations, the Security
Council should also provide peacekeepers with
adequate resources and means to perform the task.

Pakistan is prepared, as always, to play its part in
promoting international peace and security, whether in
United Nations peacekeeping operations or in conflict
prevention and dispute resolution in our region.

We reiterate here our commitment to the
restoration of durable peace in Afghanistan through
dialogue and conciliation, and to a final settlement of
the Kashmir dispute in accordance with Security
Council resolutions and the aspirations of the people of
Kashmir.

In conclusion, I wish to refer to the Secretary-
General's desire to work towards a culture of
protection, and to his earlier call for the creation of a
climate of compliance with the existing rules and
principles. While, admittedly, the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict rests with Governments, it is also incumbent
on the Security Council to fulfil its own obligations, as
guarantor of international peace and security, to
provide protection to all civilians in armed conflict.
Only this will prevent the recurrence of human
tragedies that we continue to witness to this day.

