Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Today's meeting
provides an excellent opportunity for the United Nations
membership to pronounce itself on the recently released
Quartet report. While Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union,
let me provide my delegation's views on the report and
on other Middle East-related issues.

Despite the fact that the report obviously did not
meet the expectations of all sides, we consider it as
an important step that serves the overall purpose of
reconfirming that the international community has not
abandoned this long-lasting conflict and has not given
up hope of achieving a final solution. Yet what we see
now affords no room for optimism. The lack of direct
dialogue and a snail-paced political process create an
extremely unpredictable and explosive situation. The
negative trend on the ground puts at risk the prospects
for peace and a two-State solution. In that regard the
scores are even, as both sides have contributed to the
current state of affairs and the diminishing prospects
for peace.

While the international community is trying to
find a way out of the current deadlock, the parties
to the conflict should show their strong will to
find common ground about the prospects for their
future coexistence. The two sides, together with the
international community, must to make genuine efforts
to reach a lasting peace. Ukraine calls on political
leaders on all sides to work together and to take visible
actions to de-escalate the situation and to restart
direct dialogue. Ukraine reiterates its position that any
workable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement should
be guided by, and based on, the relevant provisions of
respective Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. There is no
doubt in our mind that a compromise resolution to the
conflict is possible only on the basis of the peaceful
coexistence of two States, ending the violence and
halting settlement activity.

The recently published Quartet report sounds
an alarm bell that we are on a very dangerous track
towards a one-State reality. This long-lasting conflict
is a complex issue, which makes any expectation of a
quick fix unrealistic. Nevertheless, we should continue
to make every possible effort towards a peaceful
settlement through a negotiated two-State solution
that brings about reconciliation in the region. Ukraine
welcomes any international effort aimed at bringing
new dynamics to the Middle East settlement and
seeking opportunities for the resumption of negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.

We should not lose track of other conflicts that
continue to inflame the region. The Syrian crisis is
probably the gravest regional and one of the biggest
global challenges the world is facing right now.
Ukraine stands for an immediate end to the bloodshed
and resumption of the negotiations to resolve the
conflict. We believe that sustainable peace in Syria will
be possible only after an internationally recognized
political transition based on the principles of Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex).

We are convinced that the only way out of the
current impasse is a result-oriented discussion on the
establishment of a credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governing transitional body, followed by a new
constitution and elections. However, it appears that
the willingness of the Syrian Government to engage in
such genuine discussions is lacking now, which makes
prospects for the start of the transitional period in Syria
on 1 August as remote as they were in December 2015,
when the resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted.

We are particularly concerned that with the direct
assistance of its regional and international allies, the
regime seems to believe more and more in the prospect
of military victory over its opponents. Unless there are
major changes in the behaviour of the Syrian authorities
and their allies, there is a solid risk of the Syrian conflict
further deepening and bringing even more havoc to the
entire region.

We remain convinced of the urgent need to put an
end to violence in Yemen. Therefore, we express our
consistent and unwavering support for the intra-Yemeni
peace talks hosted by Kuwait. While recognizing
the progress made by the parties towards a common
understanding of the road map to a peaceful solution,
we are rather dismayed by the fact that the parties
have not yet reached an agreement. Nevertheless,
the absence of a final agreement so far should not be
interpreted by the parties as a pretext for attempts to
change the front line. The ceasefire must be upheld
and strengthened. We therefore call on the parties to
resume direct talks without preconditions on 15 July,
as specified in the statement of commitment, and to
conduct these negotiations in the most flexible and
constructive manner that would enable them to swiftly
reach a final and comprehensive agreement.

Present-day terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaeda
have outgrown their regional dimension and now pose
a global threat that challenges international peace and
security. Ukraine stands united with the international
community in its determination to eradicate such
terrorist organizations and remove any fertile ground
for terrorism in the region. We are encouraged by the
substantial progress achieved by the Coalition against
ISIL in Iraq and Syria in the past couple of months.

At the same time, we are concerned that despite
some serious military setbacks, ISIL remains a serious
threat to regional and global security. We are convinced
that pending the conventional military defeat of ISIL,
there is an urgent need to elaborate a day-after strategy,
with regional actors playing a leading role to prevent
a resurgence of ISIL clones. As we embark on this
endeavour, we have to take into account the fact that a
rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism surpasses
the boundaries of any region. While we counter this
threat by military means, the underlying root causes of
the terrorism phenomenon cannot be ignored.

Without a clear way out of the multiple crises that
are tearing the Middle East apart, and without closing
the Pandora's box of deepening, region-wide sectarian
confrontation, it would be impossible to contain the
growing threat of Violent extremism and international
terror groups. We are convinced that it is in everybody's
interest that these conflicts do not re-enact the fate of
the whole Middle East peace process, which has been
ongoing for decades. We simply cannot afford the
terrible prospect of continuous fires all over the region
setting the wider Middle East ablaze.

