Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my thanks and appreciation to
you, Sir, and to the delegation of the Netherlands for
convening this meeting. This meeting undoubtedly will be
an effective contribution to making the work of the Security
Council more transparent. My delegation highly appreciates
the Secretary-General's statement, in addition to his
valuable report on the subject under discussion, namely, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

It is indeed regrettable to see that civilians in cases of
armed conflict face acts of terrorization and brutal
treatment, torture, killing and maiming, as well as genocide
or ethnic cleansing, in addition to acts of disappearance
because of the rebels or the combatants, whether from
opposition or Government forces in the areas of armed
conflict. All of these acts take place in total disregard of all
the conventions of international humanitarian law and the
law of human rights, notably the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.

The cause of our major concern is that loss of life
among civilians, or losses resulting from the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, are no longer simply the legacy of
war. Indeed, they are a deliberate targeting of non-
combatants in order to expel or ethnically cleanse groups of
the population or to accelerate total military surrender. By
way of example, we can refer to the events that took place
recently in Angola, where, in order to achieve military
gains, UNITA attempted to expel the civilian population
from the towns under its control to the towns under the
control of the Angolan Government.
This problem assumes increasing importance in view
of the growing number of civilians involved. The number
of internally displaced persons has reached 30 million.
Women and children have become the primary targeted
victims of armed conflict because of their inability to
defend themselves.

Another negative aspect which must be taken into
account is that combatants try to restrict the acquisition by
civilians of food and other forms of assistance for
survival and attempt to starve them to death deliberately.
In addition, they target humanitarian workers and those
who work in peacekeeping operations. The suffering
meted out to civilians in armed conflict in our time makes
it incumbent upon us to look seriously into the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities vis-a-vis these civilians, through taking
actions that would increase the Organization's ability to
deploy rapidly forces and to establish a permanent
mechanism to monitor the sanctions regimes, whether
imposed by the United Nations or by regional
organizations, and to ascertain the possible effects of
sanctions on civilians.

Of special importance is the recommendation that
the Council, should it receive information on an imminent
conflict targeting civilians and protected persons, should
then impose an embargo on arms supplies. In certain
cases the Council should consider the deployment of a
preventive peacekeeping operation or provide for another
form of presence for preventive monitoring.

The Council should adopt further targeted sanctions
to put an end to the violations of international
humanitarian law. It should also deploy international
monitors to follow closely the situations in refugee camps
and camps of internally displaced persons, especially
when there is a suspicion that there are armed combatants
or armed elements inside those camps.

We would like to reaffirm anew the importance of
taking into account the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on the alleviation of the plight of civilians at the
time when armed conflicts break out and target them
specifically. The Council, in its resolutions on the
outbreak of any armed conflict, must reaffirm that there
is a need for unimpeded access to extend humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population.

Finally, I would like to express our support for the
draft resolution before us at this meeting. It is our hope
that the draft resolution will contribute in a genuine
manner to the protection of civilians during armed
conflict. I mention in particular the establishment of a
working group to consider and study the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report.

 

