Ms. Pearl: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to share my thoughts on the safety of civilians, and
particularly journalists.

I believe the future depends on the depth and
intensity of the vow embraced by people today. I think
that this is very good news, as it is very difficult to stop
someone with the strong sense of justice. The will to
ensure that no one else, including future generations,
must endure the suffering that afflicts us depends upon
individuals. Journalists everywhere are those single
determined individuals who increasingly are bearing
the weight of our democracies on their own.

I am speaking at a troubled time for our profession,
a time that requires all of us to take a step back and
display more than one form of courage. To me,
courage - intellectual and moral - is the active
ingredient that will allow us to use our destinies to
inspire others and to defeat oppression. It was Mark
Twain who said, "It is curious that physical courage
should be so common in the world and moral courage
so rare". I believe there is no greater courage than the
strength to live up to one's values, no matter what the
circumstances. To stand up and speak takes courage; to
sit down and listen also takes courage. I therefore thank
the Council for doing this.

Somewhere during the wars, we journalists have
lost the old, unspoken agreement that we were a neutral
and fair profession. As a result, we are in danger. All
of us are forced to wonder what kind of journalism
exactly is worth dying for. Often, true acts of courage
are invisible to others. It is not recklessness; it is not a
search for fame or adrenaline. Rather, it is an intimate
process, the profound will to enlighten humankind, to
go beyond the obvious, to fight preconceived ideas, to
battle the corruption and the greed that are crippling
our societies.

Today, the confusion within our profession is
great. We are searching for economic models, and
we are trying to counter the competition of the
Internet. Some run after breaking news for the sake
of breaking the news. Others are walking on shaky
ground, blurring further the frontier between proper
journalism and entertainment news. The media itself
needs introspection, so I will not talk on behalf of the
media as a whole. Instead, I would like to concentrate
on those journalists who have the courage to embrace
the complexity of our world. The courage to honour
the truth, no matter what the circumstances are, no
matter how unpleasant, no matter how contrary it is to
what the majority thinks. Those individuals who truly
have the strength to empathize with others and the
determination to honour the core values of journalism,
such as giving a voice to the voiceless, resisting power,
and letting those values that define our profession
become who we are.

That search for integrity is our lifeline; but it is not
only ours, it is also that ofthose here. For we are the ones
who ensure that the public and politicians alike have the
information they need to make informed choices: that
the world is aware of the atrocities carried out by Daesh
in Iraq and Syria, by Boko Haram in Nigeria and by
the drug cartels in Mexico and Central America. Let
us not forget that beyond the news are individual lives;
beyond the politics is a human society; and beyond
our differences is our common ground. That common
ground is what terrorists are seeking to destroy. They
want and they need to end dialogue, understanding and
bonding among people.

How do they operate? They create a narrative,
they use labels, and mostly they thrive on our
weaknesses. Wars and conflict cannot live without a
narrative, a justification that breeds on ignorance,
fear and frustration. They kill journalists, workers of
non-governmental organizations, Americans, Jews,
those whom they call infidels and so on, in the hope
of dispiriting all those who identify with their victims.
Labels do not matter to them. But we are dealing with a
group of militants who dehumanize themselves enough
to kill a journalist whom they knew to be innocent and
whom they held for an entire year.

How do we deal with this? How do we create a
counter narrative? I believe that in Islam the most
elaborate form of jihad is the battle an individual
fights with him or herself to become enlightened. I
and many journalists members may never hear about
do what we can with the tools journalism gives us to
destroy the base on which terrorists operate, that is,
hatred. Accordingly, we report on what hatred feeds
on - ignorance, prejudice, greed, corruption, human
rights abuse, brain washing and the act of simplifying
what cannot be simplified.

In my case, that translates into 13 years of a daily
struggle - with a little help from my friend here, who
is my son - to oppose hatred with empathy, violence
with compassion and ignorance with education. I
am not alone, but we have become targets. Insurgent
groups no longer use reporters to transmit news, but
instead kidnap them to make news. They treat us as
enemy combatants and spies. This is our everyday
reality. In many cases, the journalists taking this on
are freelancers. That means young journalists doing
the job that the mass media is increasingly reluctant
to do. Often, they have no insurance, little training or
equipment and no support. But they do have as much to
lose as anybody else in this Chamber.

Women are bringing the world more than half of
the news. A great majority of them are freelancers,
which means they also face the added threats of sexual
violence, cyberattacks on their integrity and harm to
their families and children.

But let us not fool ourselves. Daesh and the likes
are only the visible part of the iceberg. The worrying
truth is that the response from Governments around the
world is equally damaging and dangerous tojournalists.
Nearly 60 per cent of journalists jailed around the
world are imprisoned on anti-State charges. Murder is
the ultimate source of censorship, and not only in the
case of Daesh. In 2014, impunity injournalism murder
cases reached a staggering 96 per cent - a figure
that Christophe Deloire just mentioned - and the
remaining 4 per cent obtained only partialjustice. Mass
surveillance by some Security Council member States
puts journalists and their sources at risk, undermining
the trust and confidentiality vital to qualityjournalism.
Additionally, an increasing number of countries are
now using anti-terrorism laws to muzzle the press even
further.

Why do we journalists continue working in such
circumstances? Over the years, I have talked extensively
to my colleagues on this subject. Those are people
whom I am going to quote, and I am not quoting them
because oftheir nationalities or because they happen to
be women, but for rather for their bravery.

I remember meeting the excellent Russianjournalist
Anna Politkovskaya when she was receiving an award
in New York. She said,

"I am exhausted. I have seen too much. I don't want
to go back to Chechnya, but ifI don't who will?"

Her articles had freed the wrongfully imprisoned and
helped recover the abducted. She was murdered in front
of her home in 2006.

War correspondent Marie Colvin, killed in Syria in
2012, wrote,

"We go to remote war zones to report what is
happening. The public has a right to know what our
Governments and our armed forces are doing in our
name. Our mission is to speak truth to power. We
send home that first rough draft of history. We can
and do make a difference in exposing the horrors
of war, and especially the atrocities that befall
civilians."

My dear friend Lydia Cacho, who revealed a
pedophile network in Mexico, wrote:

"I will never forget the face of General Montafio,
who, with his colleague Agent Pe'rez, spent 20 hours
torturing me psychologically, physically and
sexually. It happened in a car that drove the 1,500
kilometres from Cancun to Puebla. They threatened
to kill me, throw me out to sea and more. But I
arrived at the prison alive because the media had
managed to reveal the identity of my persecutors.
Both of them were policemen."

Freelance photojournalist Nicole Tung, talked
about Syria:

"Covering Syria means facing a multifaceted
set of problems, from bombardments to snipers to
kidnappings by the Government, Islamic extremists
and criminals. It is a place where journalists and
Syrian activists must operate in a conflict of
staggering destruction and desperation, and where
no side"- and this is what is worrisome - "believes
in the benefit of truth-telling any longer."
The neutral space in which journalists can operate
as independent witnesses is shrinking. Governments
and terrorist groups alike can bypass these objective
witnesses and take their messages directly online and to
social media. The lack of objective reporting means that
extremists and Government propagandists are free to
control the dissemination of information - information
that is not based on facts and not investigated and
confirmed by professional reporters. This has enormous
implications when one needs to make informed
decisions.

Furthermore, Governments are using terrorism
charges as an excuse to clamp down on dissent and
criticism. Journalists are routinely targeted and killed
for their reporting on terrorist groups, while others are
censored or imprisoned by Governments seeking to
respond to the very same threat.

Already this year more than 25 journalists have been
killed, the majority of them murdered. Member States
have agreed to reduce impunity through resolutions on
the safety of journalists and the United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. These rhetorical commitments are welcome,
but we need to see more concerted efforts on the ground
to actually implement them.

Jailing and attacking journalists will not help
defeat terrorists; it will only make them stronger. The
Security Council must warn States that they should
not use national security as an excuse to jail, harass or
censor journalists. A statement or resolution outlining
the threats journalists face, not only by terrorists but by
the anti-terror movement as well, would be an important
indication of this commitment.

All that said, I am intensely conscious that in the
end it is the solidarity of ordinary people that will drive
humankind forward - ordinary people such as the
journalists I have just quoted, who have exemplified a
moral courage that I truly hope will inspire the ordinary
person in each of us.

