Mr. Stehelein (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for presenting the report
(S/2015/579). I also thank the Foreign Ministers
of Serbia and Kosovo, Mr. Dacic' and Mr. Thaci,
respectively, for their statements. I would also like to
express our deepest gratitude to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whom we
heard today for the last time in his current functions,
for the work he accomplished during his term. Finally,
on behalf of France, I would like to express our best
wishes to his successor, Ambassador Tanin.

This year got off to a rocky start for Kosovo, but the
new Government rose to the challenge. We welcome the
adoption by the Parliament of Kosovo of constitutional
amendments allowing for the establishment of a
specialist court that will shed light on the allegations
of war crimes set out in the Marty report that was
presented to the Council of Europe in 2011 and that
have been pursued by the Special Investigation Task
Force. It is essential for that courageous decision by the
Kosovo Parliament be followed up in all its dimensions.
The resolution of this matter is crucial in order to
demonstrate Kosovo's commitment to the fight against
impunity and constitutes an essential milestone in the
process of normalizing its relations with Serbia, which
is particularly vital in the context of its rapprochement
with Europe.

Another symbolic matter on which significant
progress is awaited concerns the establish of an
association of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, which
is essential for the future of the Serb population of
Kosovo. The statutory unity of Kosovo will in no way
be called into question by the setting up of such a
structure. Such a measure must not be subject to further
delay, given that two years have already elapsed since
the agreement was signed on 19 April 2013. We expect
the authorities in Pristina to redouble their efforts to
bring about that essential element of reconciliation with
Belgrade. Those two processes are inseparable in order
to strengthen the trust of the entire population in the
institutional framework of Kosovo.

Political dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
initiated under the auspices of the European Union,
regularly takes place at the highest level. We
congratulate both parties for their unrelenting pursuit
of dialogue, which confirms the hopes of their own
peoples as well as of the international community. The
progress so far has been slow but real. We would like
in that regard to call on both parties to continue their
exchange with a view to the future. It is not merely a
question of working towards a formal normalization
of relations, but also of building authentic long-term,
mutually profitable relations as good neighbours.

In that regard, Kosovo's future also requires the
consolidation of the rule of law. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our unwavering support for
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), which works on a daily basis to support the
rule of law and security in Kosovo. We call on Serbia
to fully engage in the mechanism of mutual legal
assistance established by EULEX, in a spirit of active
cooperation. We also call on the Kosovar authorities,
which aspire to UNESCO membership, to guarantee the
protection of religious sites, in particular the monastery
of Visoki Decani. That is an absolutely fundamental
requirement.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
invoking the European perspective, which recognizes
the integrity of the Balkan countries as a whole. Over
the course of the past several years, Serbia has made
significant efforts to draw closer to the European Union,
whether through internal reforms or by improving its
relations with its neighbours. We congratulate them
once again for those efforts, encourage them to pursue
the full implementation of their existing agreements
with Pristina and reiterate our Wish to see themjoin the
European Union as soon as possible, once the necessary
conditions have been met. In that regard, we hope that a
first chapter in that negotiation process will be written
this year.

We are aware of and support Kosovo's wish to follow
the same path, which is equally necessary for the future
of that country. We know that the Kosovar authorities
are fully aware of the challenges. We reiterate our trust
in them and our full support for their efforts, proof of
which is the stabilization and association agreement
due to be signed in the very near future.
Finally, along with other delegations, in the light of
the progress made so far, which we tirelessly applaud
every three months, we hope that the Council will at
last reconsider the frequency with which it takes up this
matter as a prelude to a comprehensive review of the
entire set of international measures concerning Kosovo.

