I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons, Ms. Fathi Waly and Ms. Akbar for their briefings. The Dominican Republic commends, and reiterates its support for, the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), especially during this challenging time. The peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. We congratulate the efforts of the parties concerned in promoting the political dialogue and peace process and welcome the political agreement between the United States and the Taliban. As expressed on different occasions by the Council, Afghanistan has no alternative but a political solution. The Dominican Republic calls for inclusive representation of all sides in the negotiations. It is essential that women participate directly and meaningfully in the peace talks at all decision-making levels. We remain deeply concerned about the volatile security situation, especially the number of casualties attributed to the Taliban in the southern region. Furthermore, we condemn any sort of attack perpetrated against health-care facilities. Medical services must not be hampered by conflict. In this regard, it is of the utmost importance to reduce violence and establish a ceasefire to protect the civilian population, in particular women and children. The Dominican Republic reiterates that the parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. The economy and social development remain challenging. The country is facing harsh economic conditions during the pandemic. If Afghanistan does not have a solid foundation, it cannot have lasting and sustained prosperity. Resolution 2513 (2020) calls for the promotion of regional cooperation and connectivity. Afghanistan carries the terrible burden of being the world's deadliest conflict for children. And now, with coronavirus disease (COVID-19), women are at greater risk from a surge in gender-based violence. The humanitarian situation must improve. Before COVID-19, 9.4 million Afghans required humanitarian assistance. We call on all parties to fully exercise their role to ensure the delivery of humanitarian support, more so now during the pandemic. Before concluding, I call on the international community to remain engaged and continue to support Afghanistan, in accordance with the commitment to the ongoing transformation decade, 2015 to 2024. Finally, we wish to acknowledge the important role played by UNAMA in promoting peace in the country through outstanding contributions in areas such as human rights, particularly for women. That progress must be maintained.
