Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): Ithank you very
much, Madam President, for convening this meeting
and giving me an opportunity to speak to the Security
Council on non-proliferation issues pertaining to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I also thank
Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his comprehensive
briefing.

The Republic of Korea has consistently pursued the
Korean peninsula peace process to achieve complete
denuclearization and lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula. The process is at a critical juncture. Today's
meeting could be helpful in taking stock ofthe progress
made so far and consolidating our efforts towards
achieving the shared goal.

Over the past two years, an unprecedented
diplomatic endeavour involving strong commitment
and determination from the highest political levels
brought about a historic shift on the Korean peninsula.
It started with the participation of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's in the 2018 Pyeongchang
Olympic Winter and Paralympic Games, which then led
to three inter-Korean summits, two summits between
the United States and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and a trilateral meeting in Panmunjeom,
where the top leaders of the two Koreas and the United
States agreed to work together to establish lasting
peace on the Korean peninsula and achieve its complete
denuclearization.

Since then, there have been a series of talks and
negotiations to fulfil the commitments based on
the Panmunjeom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity
and Reunification of the Korean Peninsula and the
Pyongyangjoint declaration of September 2018, as well
as the broad agreement reached by the leaders of the
United States and the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in Singapore. The negotiations have had their ups
and downs, but, as has been rightly pointed out, a legacy
of 70 years of war and hostility on the Korean peninsula
cannot be overcome in a single day. We will need to
pursue the delicate path of dialogue with perseverance
and focus, and every effort should be made to keep the
momentum of the process going.

We are now, however, faced with the recent turn of
events, which, if left unchecked, will have a negative
effect on the historic process. My Government shares
the concern of the international community about the
repeated testing of missiles by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We strongly urge the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to fulfil its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions and to remain
meaningfully engaged in dialogue with the United
States and the Republic of Korea so that progress in
negotiations can lead to concrete results.

The international community, for its part, must
continue to work together to maintain the momentum for
dialogue. While fully implementing relevant Security
Council resolutions, the international community
should also provide meaningful support, including
humanitarian aid, for the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to make the right decision.

The Government of the Republic of Korea firmly
believes that dialogue and cooperation are the only
possible way forward, regardless of the hurdles we face.
For now, maintaining the hard-won momentum for
dialogue should be our utmost priority. We will continue
to work with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
under the principle that we will not allow a war on the
Korean peninsula and will guarantee mutual security
and seek co-prosperity, as spelled out in President
Moon Jae-in's speech at the General Assembly this year
(see A/74/PV.3).

The leaders of the two Koreas met in Pyongyang
last year and agreed to turn the Korean peninsula
into a land of peace, free from nuclear weapons and
nuclear threats. To fulfil that commitment, dialogue
between the two Koreas must be resumed. Genuine
peace for all Koreans living on the peninsula cannot
be achieved without improved inter-Korean relations.
Our commitment to improving inter-Korean relations
through exchange and cooperation projects remains
unchanged. In his General Assembly speech, President
Moon also proposed to transform the demilitarized
zone into an international peace zone to serve as a
physical guarantee of security between South and
North Korea and provide a stable environment for
continued, concerted denuclearization talks between
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
United States.

Peace on the Korean peninsula is inextricably
linked to peace around the world. We must seize this
opportunity to break free from the trap of the security
dilemma and the lingering fear of war and to establish
lasting peace on the Korean peninsula. That will not be
achieved by the projection of animosity and mistrust,
which will only lead to a downward spiral of enmity
and instability. It will be achieved through restraint,
courage and faith in the future of a wholly peaceful,
nuclear-free Korean peninsula and the great boost it will
give to regional and global peace and prosperity. My
Government is determined to stay the course. We count
on the unwavering support of the Security Council and
the international community in that endeavour.

