Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing, although we take strong
exception to the way she has been rather flippant in
setting the tone for others to follow, in that regard, when
she addresses one of the most respected African leaders
in our region, whose role in bringing about peace and
stability in our region means so much to the peoples of
our region. We know what the uproar would be like if
she referred to leaders from other regions in the same
way. As an African, I find this very sad. It is a double
standard that we continue to be haunted by.

Ethiopia's position on the issue of the Sudan and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) has been
very consistent and clear. I have already given a hint
concerning our narrative in that regard. It is in line with
the position of the African Union, which has repeatedly
called for the suspension of the proceedings against the
President of the Sudan, Omar Al-Bashir, and urged the
Security Council to withdraw the referral of the case in
the Sudan. We continue to believe that the Council has
abdicated its responsibility with regard to that matter.
The withdrawal of the referral would have enormous
positive implications for peace and security of our
region and the mandate of the Council. We continue
to believe that, given the extremely weak nature of
the case, its continuation makes absolutely no sense.
Increasingly available information is reinforcing our
conviction in that regard. In fact, it would only damage
the credibility of the Council, for the lack of action
concerning the matter would not be consistent with
the primary responsibility that the Council shoulders
with regard to international peace and security. Most
important, recent events underscore the need for the
Council to seriously re-examine its position on the
matter.

The Sudan has been playing a constructive role
in combating terrorism, human trafficking and illicit
migration, as well as dealing with other regional
peace and security issues, which has been broadly
acknowledged to date. It has enhanced its bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and engagement on all those
issues, and that has been considered very valuable
under the leadership of the Sudanese President. The
lifting of the bilateral economic sanctions imposed on
the Sudan by the United States for the past two decades
is a major positive development, which is a result of the
Sudan's improved international relations.

As we have been saying for quite some time now,
the situation in Darfur has continued to show marked
progress. The hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces have decreased substantially,
and the security situation on the ground has improved
significantly. The level of intercommunal violence has
once again plummeted, and humanitarian access across
Darfur continues to improve, which has been confirmed
by the joint strategic review of the African Union and
the United Nations that provided us with a very useful
analysis of the situation in Darfur. We therefore believe
that there is a need for a paradigm shift in our approach
to dealing with the Darfur situation. The Sudanese
Government has demonstrated its political will to
sustainably address the challenges in the region. It has
also exerted much effort to address the challenges that
the Sudan as a whole is facing. What is expected from
the international community is to intensify its efforts to
assist the Government's work to alleviate the suffering
of the people of Darfur.

Of course, we also recognize that much remains
to be done with regard to addressing the root causes
of the conflict in Darfur and ensuring long-term
stability. For that reason, we call on the Government
to redouble its efforts to implement all remaining
tasks. The international community should also live
up to its commitments, and the Council in particular
should exert pressure on armed movements to negotiate
seriously ending the suffering of the people in Darfur.

In the light of the positive developments that I just
mentioned and the constructive role that the Sudanese
Government is playing in a range of issues, it is only
appropriate that the international community change
its approach to dealing with the Sudan. That is why we
welcomed the lifting ofthe unilateral sanctions imposed
by the United States against the Sudan. It is also high
time that the Council begin seriously to consider the
issue of the Sudan and the ICC.

