Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow me
to join previous speakers in thanking the Security
Council, through you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in the discussion of one of
the most important and burning problems of our time.
We are convinced that the right time has been chosen to
discuss the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The majority of United Nations Member States,
including the Republic of Belarus, have already
submitted their reports to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, pursuant to paragraph 6 of that resolution.
Belarus has been carefully and closely following the
current work of the Committee and is grateful to its
Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his activities and
his efforts to carry out the activities of the Committee
in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue with all the
Member States of the Organization.

Cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in the framework of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) is one of the priority areas of
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
The timely submission of our national report, in
accordance with paragraph 6 of the resolution, is proof
of our attitude towards the work of the Committee. Our
report is a result of the intensive work of several
ministries and departments of the Republic of Belarus.
It contains a review of efforts being made by Belarus in
order to fulfil at the national level the requirements of
the Security Council resolution, as well as information
on the status of national legislation to combat
terrorism.

The report clearly shows that the President and
the Government of the Republic are making serious
and comprehensive efforts to fully implement the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). In this respect, it
is noteworthy that last October, at a meeting of the
Republic's Security Council, chaired by our head of
State, a decree and a plan of action containing
additional measures to combat terrorism were adopted,
taking into account the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). Furthermore, in order to enhance the
Republic's national legislation in the area of counter-
terrorism, the Parliament, on 11 December last, passed
a law in that respect.

We believe that the rule on the submission of
national reports to the Committee is important in two
respects. First, it makes it possible to create a system
for the effective monitoring of the implementation by
Member States of the provisions of the resolution.
Secondly, an analysis of the reports will allow for the
creation of a universal model for a legal regime to
combat terrorism in all States.

In this connection, a serious and comprehensive
review of national reports by independent and highly
qualified experts is extremely important. The Republic
of Belarus believes that the value and authority of the
Committee's conclusions on the reports will be greatly
enhanced if those experts who have a key role in the
review are appointed in a manner that ensures equitable
geographical representation and the representation of
the world's main legal systems. We hope that these
principles will be given greater attention in the
subsequent appointment of experts.

We would also like to support the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee aimed at assisting
Member States, through the provision of technical and
other assistance, in the creation of effective national
infrastructures to combat terrorism. In this connection,
Belarus welcomes the recommendations made to the
Committee in the declaration on global efforts to
combat terrorism, adopted in Security Council
resolution 1377 (2001).

Our State, which is located at the crossroads of
the main international and European transport routes
and on the dividing line between the eastern and
western parts of the Euro-Asian continent, deems of
particular importance the need to ensure strict border
control, in order to prevent the illegal transit of
weapons and ammunition, illegal migration, drug
trafficking and other activities that have links to
terrorism.

The Republic's border and customs entities are
making every effort, to the extent of their ability, to put
in place a viable system of border and customs control.
However, our economic problems - characteristic of a
country with an economy in transition - are
preventing us from providing the necessary technical
equipment to State border crossing points and to the
relevant border and customs services. This is hindering
the adoption of more concrete measures to combat
terrorism. Our Government will submit to the
Committee in the near future specific proposals on the
provision of assistance. We hope that effective
mechanisms will be found to help Belarus resolve these
problems.

As a whole, the Government of Belarus greatly
appreciates the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in its first three months. A solid foundation
has been laid for the successful discharge of its
mandate. In our view, this United Nations body has, in
a short period of time, assumed the necessary
international authority and established itself firmly as
an element of the anti-terrorist system of the United
Nations.

In future, we see the Committee as being a rapid-
response body of the United Nations in the area of
terrorist activities. In this connection, a priority area
for the further work of the Committee could be to assist
States in establishing, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a truly effective cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism in the framework of anti-terrorist
conventions. This would make it possible to further
strengthen the Committee's interaction with the various
structures and divisions of the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as with regional and national
organs combating terrorism, through the provision of
the necessary information and of databases.

