Mr. Mazimhaka (Rwanda): The delegation of
Rwanda is very pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
work of the Security Council for the month of March. We
are confident that your exceptional qualities as a seasoned
diplomat and your acute sense of consensus-building surely
constitute a significant contribution to our work.

We would also like to address our congratulations to
the Permanent Representative of Canada, Mr. Robert
Fowler, who presided with impressive diplomatic skills
and professionalism over the work of the Council during
the month of February.

Mr. President, we must thank you for organizing this
meeting, even though it comes at a time when, as we all
know, the African countries are already engaged in a
series of discussions, which previous speakers have
mentioned, on the subject of the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) have
held such meetings because of their concern at the
deterioration of the situation in the Congo, which has an
impact on the whole region, and also because of the
concern we know the international community has for this
problem.

We may sound more optimistic than previous
speakers, but Rwanda believes that this process is well
under way and that the Council should continue to
support it as it has in the past in its resolutions and
presidential statements.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the OAU,
SADC and other African and international organizations
for their continued support in the search for a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In this context, I would like to recall the efforts of
many leaders and their shuttle diplomacy - leaders of
such countries as Zambia, South Africa, Botswana,
Namibia, Gabon, Burkina Faso, Mozambique, Mauritius,
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, the United States of America,
France, the United Kingdom and Libya - and many
others who are closely associated with these efforts. I
wish to recognize all members of the Council and
congratulate them for their good work in this regard. The
efforts of these leaders and organizations were undertaken
with the support of this Council. The Secretary-General
of the United Nations was himself fully involved in these
efforts and he had the support of this Council.

The Rwanda delegation is of the view that this
process has been helpful and it is only appropriate that,
after this debate, the Council should reaffirm its support
of the aforementioned regional processes, especially the
Lusaka process, in which the OAU and the United
Nations continue to play a major role. We believe that the

 

Democratic Republic of the Congo should be encouraged to
have faith in the SADC fraternity of which it is a member.

The Lusaka process is anchored in the Pretoria
declaration reaffirmed in Windhoek. The declaration
envisaged the following aspects of the conflict and the
resolutions to them: the need for a cessation of hostilities;
a comprehensive round-table negotiation on political issues
by Democratic Republic of the Congo parties, including a
broad-based transition dispensation or Government; the
resolution of security concerns of neighbouring countries,
particularly Angola, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.

On all these issues, palpable progress has been made.
The OAU produced technical documents on a ceasefire
agreement and its implementation mechanisms, both of
which are under active discussion under the leadership of
President Chiluba. President Kabila has announced on
several occasions - and we have had occasion to hear that
here today - that he is ready to initiate talks with
Congolese parties. Maybe we can encourage the parties
concerned to find acceptable mechanisms and facilitation to
ensure that such crucial talks take place and bear fruit. This
is a direct result of the shuttle diplomacy that leaders of our
region have undertaken, and we believe that this represents
a significant step forward, knowing where we started from.

Countries concerned about their security in relation to
the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
submitted their complaints to a subcommittee set up for the
purpose. A comprehensive debate is awaiting the
disposition of the Congolese entity, which is the only one
that can discuss issues that relate to the sovereignty of the
Congo and can give guarantees under international law to
its neighbours. This will offer an occasion to test the
commitment of all involved parties to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of each other's countries.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been in
crisis for a long time. Rwanda, however, has been adversely
and directly affected since 1994. The presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of large numbers of
armed elements of Rwandan nationality, including former
Government forces and militia who are responsible for the
genocide of 1994, was to become a powder keg in our
historically good relations.

Factors that cause insecurity to Rwanda may not be
very clear for everyone to see, but they all relate to the
unfortunate episode of our history in which over 1 million
people perished. These factors are the presence of the
forces I have just mentioned. Their ability to reorganize and
rearm on the territory of the Congo and with the support
of the Congolese Government is a factor that is
destabilizing for Rwanda. We believe that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accepting this presence,
violates its own sovereignty. The launching of genocidal
attacks on Rwanda by these forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo territory, which have claimed
thousands of lives in north-western Rwanda and which
were also recently extended to the territory of Uganda,
with the loss of innocent tourists' lives in the Bwini
forest, is a reminder that this is a deliberate violation of
Rwanda's sovereignty by the Congo.
Another disturbing factor is the apparent embracing
of a genocide ideology by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo leadership. This has been heard in public
declarations, promoted in the media and followed by the
execution of civilians before the eyes of the entire
international community, as witnessed on the streets of
Kinshasa. This is a glaring violation of international law
that should be condemned by all of us.

Another phenomenon which has caused instability
for Rwanda is the attempts to disown nationals of the
Congo who happen to have a Rwandan culture. Their
persecution and expulsion to Rwanda create a destabilized
section of the Congolese population and impacts very
negatively on the relationship between our two countries.
In a way, this is a violation of the principle of the
intangibility of colonial borders, because we assume that
these borders contained populations when they were
drawn.

The use of Democratic Republic of the Congo
territory to channel arms and fascist ideologies to armed
non-State actors in the region is a destabilizing factor for
the region, not only for Rwanda. The Council was seized
of this particular factor in a report of the Secretary-
General in document S/1998/777 of 19 August 1998. In
its paragraph 69, the report states:

"The complications in the situation arising from
the links between the ex-FAR and other armed
groups in the region should be viewed in the light of
resolution 1011 (1995) by which the Security
Council prohibited the sale and supply of arms and
related materiel to Rwanda or to persons in the
States neighbouring Rwanda if such sale or supply
was for the purpose of the use of such arms or
materiel within Rwanda. Compelling reports [were
recorded] of ex-FAR involvement in procuring

 

weapons reportedly for use in Angola, Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda",

not to mention Rwanda and Burundi, but we know that was
also a fact.

In another report (S/ 1998/581), the Secretary-General
said the events described in the report of the team, which
was submitted on 29 June 1998, did not occur in a vacuum.
The background to them was the terrible 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, which cast an enormous shadow, which has not
yet been lifted, over the whole Great Lakes region of
Africa. This genocide led directly to the violence of the
1994-1996 period in the then eastern Zaire. This was
publicly denounced by the Rwanda Government as a
resumption in the neighbouring country of the 1994
genocide practices. That same violence resulted in the
creation of the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of the Congo, which successfully carried out a
military campaign against the regime of President Mobutu
Sese Seko, which ended in Kinshasa in May 1997. The
Council will recall that this resulted in the setting in the
place of the Government led by President Laurent-Desire
Kabila.

It is clear that as in 1994-1996, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo leadership, like the Zaire leadership
before, embraced the evil forces of genocide, inevitably
leading to the crisis of 1997-1999.

This is why Rwanda is persuaded that a
comprehensive resolution of the crisis in Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be reached, first, through a
resolution of the crisis of governance and leadership in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; secondly, through the
neutralization, dismantling and containment of the non-State
armies operating on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
territory; and, thirdly, through the condemnation and
isolation of all those who embrace the ideology and acts of
genocide in our region.

The concerns Rwanda has put before the Council in
this statement stem from acts of aggression against Rwanda
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But Rwanda
prefers to join the region and the international community
in searching for lasting solutions to the problems of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. We
think this is the only viable guarantee against the recurrence
of the prevailing state of war, gross violation of human
rights, genocide and the total disruption of historical ties
among our peoples. Many of the previous speakers have
referred to these threats.

Furthermore, let me reiterate, on behalf of my
delegation and the Government of Rwanda, our
commitment to respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all countries, especially as enshrined in the
Charters of the United Nations and the OAU. Secondly,
we call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo to use
its sovereign rights and put its act together in order to
dismantle the dozen non-State armies which are being
used in aggression against the territorial integrity of its
neighbours.

Thirdly, we reaffirm our respect for human rights
and humanitarian law and our resolve to join others in a
coalition against the recurrence of genocide and terrorism
in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere. The Entebbe
principles which were agreed upon during President
Clinton's visit to countries in the region would constitute
the basis for this coalition.

