Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina): We thank you,
Sir, for convening this meeting, Sir, on the conflict in
Darfur, which, unfortunately, is overshadowed by
deeply concerning circumstances.

We also recognize the participation of the
representative of the Sudan. We welcome him to our
meeting and rejoice that his Government has finally
responded positively to our invitation.

Finally, we thank the representatives of the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference for their
participation and statements at this meeting and for the
unwavering interest they have demonstrated in the
search of a solution to this crisis, which we believe has
gone on too long.

Only a few hours after the adoption of resolution
1706 (2006), which Argentina cosponsored, the
Government of the Sudan again rejected the United

Nations operation in Darfur with familiar arguments
and continued putting into effect its plan of action,
with particular emphasis on the military and security
chapter. The news from Darfur is very alarming,
including new waves of attacks against the civilian
population, humanitarian workers and even members
of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS).
Together with the renewed violence and suffering,
there are indications that call into question the
presence of AMIS after the expiration of its mandate
on 30 September.

As my delegation has already indicated on
previous occasions, the objective of this Council and of
the United Nations as a whole in getting involved in
the situation in Darfur is clear - we want to work with
the Government of the Sudan and join efforts to assist
in the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement
and in the protection of the civil population of the
region. We urge the Government of the Sudan and all
the Sudanese to understand that this is the aim we are
pursuing.

Argentina wants the Government in Khartoum to
understand that, along with the responsibility of each
individual State to protect its own population, the
international community has a responsibility to help
States exercise that obligation. In the context of the
crisis in Darfur, the only way to protect its civil
population is through the presence of peacekeeping
troops in the region - neutral and impartial troops that
would neither constitute an occupation force nor limit
the sovereignty or the territorial integrity of the Sudan.
In other words, we are trying to protect the lives and
security of millions of innocent civilians, since the
Government of the Sudan cannot do so.

Allow me to be clear here. There is no such thing
as a military solution to the conflict. As this Council
has already repeatedly stated, the solution must be
found through peaceful means in the framework of the
Darfur Peace Agreement. Only in total respect for this
Council's resolutions, the decisions of the African
Union and the Darfur Peace Agreement can we achieve
those objectives.

Therefore, we fully support the adopted approach
of immediately reinforcing AMIS, and at a later
stage - no later than 31 December, as established in
the resolution - the assumption by this Organization
of AMIS' responsibility. Without a doubt, we need the
Sudan to agree and cooperate with that approach;
without its agreement, it would be very difficult, not to
say impossible, to fulfil the proposed objectives. It is
also necessary for the international organizations most
directly involved to collaborate with their efforts in the
same regard.

We cannot and must not remain paralyzed in the
face of a situation that calls for immediate action.
Every passing day means more lives lost and greater
suffering for a people who have already suffered too
much. It is necessary to renew our commitment to
finding a solution to the crisis if we do not want to
continue to see the constant and persistent violation of
human rights on a scale that the international
community cannot tolerate without taking action to put
an end to it. We urge all actors present here to
cooperate in a constructive spirit in order collectively
to put an end to the crisis in Darfur and to help
establish the basis of a more just society in which all
the Sudanese can live in freedom and peace.

In conclusion, my delegation offers the people of
the United States our condolences on this fifth
anniversary of the terrible terrorist attack on this city in
2001.

