Mr. Hashmi (Pakistan): We congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and wish you success in your endeavours.
We also thank you for presenting the 90-day report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We take note of the recent report (GOV/2013/40)
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
the implementation in Iran of the safeguards agreement
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT).

The resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue is both
possible and necessary. Such a solution must also be
anchored in dialogue and negotiations. We welcome the
recent positive overtures and statements. We hope that
the new Government of Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council plus Germany (P5+1)
can resume their diplomatic engagement as early as
possible to find ways of resolving outstanding issues.

Demonstrations of political will and flexibility
by all concerned will be required, as well as mutual
confidence-building measures. A negotiated solution
can and should be facilitated by striking a balance
between sanctions and negotiations.

Iran, as a party to the NPT and the IAEA, is
entitled to certain rights that should be respected, in
line with the provisions of those instruments. At the
same time, Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
those instruments. We urge Iran to stay engaged with
the IAEA and extend its full cooperation to it, with a
View to addressing the remaining issues.

As other Council members have continued to
point out, the work of the Panel of Experts and its
activities should conform strictly to its mandate. Its
reports, analyses and recommendations must be based
on objectivity and impartiality and backed by solid
evidence. Their findings and reports will carry the
weight they deserve when they enjoy consensus within
the Panel.

At the same time, the 1737 Committee should
also adhere to high standards of neutrality and
professionalism. Security Council sanctions should
not be pursued as an end in themselves. Neither should
sanctions negatively impact legitimate trade activity.

The Council needs to support a negotiated solution
to the unresolved issues. We once again urge the Council
and the 1737 Committee to re-evaluate the objectives
and strategy as set out in the relevant resolutions.

Finally, the Council and the Committee will only
benefit by broadening the composition of the Panel,
particularly with members from developing countries.
The Secretariat must consult all Council members
prior to the commencement of the appointment, or
reappointment, ofexperts. The principle oftransparency
in recruiting must also be fully complied with.

