Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): In the view of the Russian delegation, the
draft resolution on the suspension of some sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is a significant
improvement over previous resolutions on this subject. In
particular, the draft resolution is now free of provisions
not pertaining to Belgrade's decision to close the border
with Bosnia to all but humanitarian deliveries. A step in
the right direction is the substantial - more than two-
fold - increase in the time-frame for the next suspension
of some sanctions. Bearing these aspects in mind, we
support this draft resolution.

We believe that the positive changes in the draft
resolution objectively reflect the conclusions contained in
the latest report on the operations of the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
submitted pursuant to resolutions 988 (1995) and 1003
(1995), which contains a clear affirmation that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continues to comply with its obligation to close the
border. The report's information on the adequate response
of officials of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
isolated incidents of violations of the border regime and
with Mission personnel are additional proof of Belgrade's
firm intent to fulfil the obligations it has undertaken.
In a broader context, the Russian delegation believes
that the constructive policy of the Yugoslav leadership
should meet with an appropriate response from the
international community. The result of the negotiations in
Geneva, expressed in the agreed joint declaration of the
parties and the signing of agreed basic principles, as well
as Belgrade's new policy towards the Bosnian question,
are convincing evidence of the fact that, in current
conditions, retaining the sanctions regime against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would run against the
spirit and letter of resolutions 757 (1992), 787 (1992) and
820 (1993). In fact, it is well known that these resolutions
were adopted in entirely different circumstances. In
today's broader and more positive atmosphere, the
absence of a reaction on the part of the Security Council
would clearly be unsatisfactory.

 

Sanctions should be completely lifted without delay.
In essence, their retention is already a hindrance to efforts
under way to reach a political settlement. Given our
position in favour of an immediate lifting of sanctions, we
take note of paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, which
reaffirms the Security Council's decision to consider further
steps with regard to measures applicable to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the
light of further progress in the situation. Such steps towards
a further easing of sanctions might be adopted at any time,
without waiting for the current resolution's deadline to
expire.

