Mr. Amorim (Brazil): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, as others have done, for
organizing this debate on a very important subject.

Indeed, as I was reflecting on the very title of the
agenda item for the debate, I thought that something was
lacking, namely, the word "international". The title of this
agenda item speaks about the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building. I thought that
omission was not so serious because, in reality, it could just
be implicit - as, for instance, some of the titles of the
Articles and Chapters of the Charter speak of threats to
peace, breaches of peace and so on. But, of course, the
word "international" was clearly implicit when the Charter
was written. In other Articles - such as Article 33, which
has to do with the maintenance of peace, the subject with
which we are dealing today - the word "international"
appears very clearly. But, as I said, it might have just been
a question of omitting a word that is implicit.

However, after having listened to some of the
interventions, I think that the moment might indeed come
when we could consider the interplay between internal and
international conflicts, because that in itself is an important
matter, and it is not without consequence. For instance, we
have heard today - as we have heard several times outside
this debate - that we are currently seeing increasing
numbers of internal conflicts and that such is the nature of
the conflicts we are having to face. Well, I do not think
that statement is completely accurate. To begin with - and
if you wish we could even go back to the French
Revolution or even further - many of the conflicts of the
past have been conflicts of an internal nature that have in
some way or other became international. So there is nothing
new about that - at least nothing extremely new.

On the other hand, many of the conflicts that we are
still dealing with today are clearly international, such as the
very important question of the Middle East. But even some
other conflicts that we tend to treat as internal conflicts are
really outgrowths of international conflicts. This is very
clearly the situation in Angola, which is an issue that we
have been trying to deal with here in the Council without
much real success. This is really a conflict situation that
is largely an outgrowth of the cold war. In fact, the
existence and activities of at least one of the parties to
that conflict are maintained largely due to the role it
played at a certain stage of the cold war.

So I think that this clear distinction, as if we had
moved from an era of international conflicts to an era of
internal conflicts, is a subject to which we should devote
a lot of attention and which should perhaps be the subject
of a future debate. This is also important with relation to
peace-building; and I will come to that in a moment. If
we think of peace-building as also being a result of
efforts to contain or solve internal conflicts, then I think
the Security Council may be tempted to become a kind of
resurrected Trusteeship Council. I believe that is a
temptation that it should resist.

I therefore think, as several of my colleagues have
already said, that when we deal with other aspects of
these situations - such as economic and social aspects
- we should pay attention to the appropriate
competencies of other organs. And even if these countries
do need some assistance in terms of good governance and
internal political stability, I think we should be very
careful as to how far we wish to take the action of the
Security Council.

Pardon my digression, which was not in my
prepared statement, but I think it was motivated by the
tenor of the discussion, which is indeed a very interesting
one and which can even motivate further discussions of
the Council in the future.

Moments of discontinuity such as the world has
experienced since 1989 can present Governments and
institutions with particularly complex challenges. With the
end of bipolarity, the potential for improved multilateral
cooperation in the promotion of peace was hailed across
the globe. The Security Council met at the summit level
in January 1992 to celebrate its reconquered unity and
entrusted the Secretary-General with the task of defining
a United Nations response to a new and promising
emerging order. The "Agenda for Peace" and its
supplement, cited here by Ambassador Dejammet,
provided the Organization with a new lexicon. They had
an unquestionable impact on the thinking within the
Organization and beyond. The prospects for a new
international consensus in dealing with conflict opened up

 

encouraging possibilities for the establishment of a world
system founded on justice and democracy, with the United
Nations Charter at its centre. The Security Council seemed
destined for a historic role in ensuring our transition to a
safer world.

And yet, as we approach the end of the millennium, it
appears that some in-depth thinking is required if we are to
draw all the necessary lessons from a period of intense
Security Council activity. At the end of a year that has
witnessed the outbreak of new crises and a deterioration of
several persisting conflicts, it does not seem possible for the
Security Council to proceed much longer without
scrutinizing its own performance. Whether or not we have
reached a point where a new Security Council summit is
called for is an open question, and one which we surely do
not want to address today. However, we should not wait for
the fractures in the Council's consensus to develop into
cracks or gaps before reassessing our strengths and
weaknesses.

According to a commentary published in a weekly
magazine in the United States a few months ago, "the
world hasn't looked this scary since the cold war". The
renowned editor of Foreign Afi'airs has made a similar
observation, to the effect that the post-cold-war era has
ended, and with it the illusion that the entire world would
be destined for conditions of rising wealth and stability in
which war seemed absurd.

In a world of constant and often perplexing change it
is fundamental to preserve the Security Council's authority
to act in the maintenance of peace and security. Innovative
ideas and policies have to be judged by this litmus test. We
are not against change. We have been among the strongest
advocates in the Organization for a reform of the Security
Council. But at the same time, we view with uneasiness
certain attempts currently being made that could undermine
the foundations of collective security as defined by the
Charter.

The United Nations has developed a valuable capacity
to deal with international crises and threats to peace. At a
time of transition such as ours, the need for global
institutions is greater than ever. National Governments, no
matter how powerful they may be individually or in the
context of restricted groups, cannot legitimately aspire to
promote a more peaceful world on their own while ignoring
the views of the broader international community. True
multilateralism on a global scale is and will remain the best
model for international cooperation for the years to come.

A blueprint for enhancing the Security Council's
authority should necessarily include a review of recent
experience in the field of peacekeeping. Improvements in
the Organization's rapid deployment capacity should
continue to be sought through more open and transparent
discussions. So-called "robust" operations have been tried
successfully in specific circumstances, as in the case of
Eastern Slavonia. It is important to recall, however, that,
although established under Chapter VII, the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) did enjoy the
consent of the parties and, in that respect, did not deviate
from the general peacekeeping doctrine which has
evolved since the days of the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF) and which remains the only acceptable
basis for the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.

As illustrated in the report Words to Deeds:
Strengthening the UN. 's Enforcement Capabilities,
prepared by representatives from a variety of countries
and backgrounds, there is a growing perception that the
shortcomings of our present machinery for ensuring
compliance with Security Council resolutions need to be
seriously addressed. The Words to Deeds Task Force,
which was ably chaired by Lord Carrington, was
uncompromising, however, in its reaffirmation of the
primacy of the Security Council as the sole body with
legal authority to mandate enforcement actions. Likewise,
it sustained that, in considering enforcement options, the
use of military force should be considered only as a last
resort. In addition, it stated that, when the use of force is
seriously contemplated, it is preferable to do so through
multilateral means. We fully subscribe to such views.

The fact that the United Nations has not, to this day,
put into effect its original architecture for military
enforcement might give rise to regret or relief, depending
on the point of view. However, this should neither
encourage Member States to look for unorthodox
solutions in defiance of the Charter, on the one hand, nor
prevent us from considering the matter in the Security
Council or in the General Assembly, for that matter.

The founders of the United Nations envisioned a
partnership between the world body and regional
arrangements and organizations. As everybody knows,
this is even enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Regional global burden-sharing would in principle make
as much sense for enforcement as it can make for
peacekeeping. Moreover, regional initiatives can be
particularly effective in the preventive or post-conflict
phases of stabilization efforts.

 

Unfortunately, however, numerous actions of doubtful
conformity with existing rules have taken place lately.
Without going into the motives of such attitudes, which
may have been legitimate in themselves and even have their
goals shared by many countries, the fact remains that overt
Violations of sanctions regimes, or armed interventions and
manifestations of readiness to use armed force by regional
actors without the specific authority of the Security
Council, raise serious legal as well as political questions.
Enforcement interventions with no clear legal foundation
will lack moral authority and will not be able to meet with
the approval of world opinion in the long run.

For some time, we have been concerned with the
absence of a satisfactory intergovernmental mechanism for
dealing with countries coming out of conflict. Frequently,
the most dire needs of such countries extend far beyond the
security aspects and require efforts in the realm of
economic and social development or institution-building.
Haiti is a case in point, and perhaps soon the Central
African Republic will be another, to cite just two examples.

The Secretary-General has recognized the importance
of promoting new forms of cooperation between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in his latest report on the work of the
Organization. As Ambassador Lavrov recalled, Article 65
of the Charter has been quoted by the Secretary-General as
providing a basis for achieving better communication and
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. Security Council resolution
1212 (1998), adopted less than a month ago, set the stage,
in an innovative way, for placing the situation in Haiti
within a different context by inviting United Nations bodies
and agencies, especially the Economic and Social
Council - and I want to underline that - to contribute to
the designing of a long-term programme of support for this
least developed country of the Caribbean. It is now up to
the Economic and Social Council to take up this
challenging task.

Many of the situations that have found their way onto
the Security Council's agenda involve very poor developing
countries, whose struggle to heal the wounds left by
conflicts often receive much less attention than the scenes
of violence depicted live by the media. In relation to many
such cases, it has been recognized that economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction - as also recalled today
by Ambassador Jagne of Gambia, among others -
constitute the major tasks facing Governments and civil
society. Without significant international assistance of a
kind the Security Council is not in a position, either legally
or materially, to supply, it would be unrealistic to
entertain the idea that stabilization and reconciliation are
attainable.

In the light of its recent experience, the Security
Council should consider a return to a simple and direct
approach to its responsibilities. In our view, Council
members should focus their attention on three broad
areas: first, diplomacy, or what might be said to fall under
"pacific settlement of disputes" in Chapter VI; secondly,
the establishment of parameters for peacekeeping
operations; and, thirdly, the question of enforcement. In
the specific context of enforcement, we would like to
underline the importance of preserving the indispensable
degree of harmony between regional initiatives and our
universal collective security regime, in line with the
Charter. As regards post-conflict situations, there is a
clear need for the development of approaches that will
permit a gradual disengagement of the Security Council
and a progressive engagement of other intergovernmental
deliberative instances with appropriate legal and
substantive competence.

To conclude, we believe that the Security Council
cannot go wrong by favouring diplomacy as the preferred
instrument for promoting peace; by refining the doctrinal
tenets and operational aspects of peacekeeping; and by
striving to observe the provisions of the Charter and other
instruments of international law in all matters falling
under its purview, and most of all with respect to Chapter
VII or enforcement action.

