Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to preface my remarks by
extending a very warm and cordial welcome to the
Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Oscar Adolfo Naranjo. I would like to
convey to him and to President Juan Manuel Santos
Calderon my country's appreciation for the tireless
efforts they have devoted to bringing about lasting peace
in Colombia. I would also like to convey my gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his presence with us
today and for his succinct briefing. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and detailed
report (S/2017/1117) on the situation in Colombia
published on 27 December 2017.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the successful progress
in the peace process under way in Colombia among the
country's various social and politicial stakeholders.
That success is due to the determination exhibited both
by the national authorities, led by President Santos
Calderon, and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). We
would also like to underscore the courage shown by the
entire Colombian people in facing the situation and, in
favour of peace, taking the steps to leave behind more
than five long decades of conflict. We feel particularly
sensitive to the situation in that brotherly country due
to the historic ties that link us as a result of our common
Hispanic cultural heritage.

The high-level ceasefire agreement and the Final
Peace Agreement on ending the conflict and building
a stable and lasting peace between the Colombian
Government and FARC-EP is the best example in
that the national peace process is making satisfactory
progress and has undoubtedly served as a source of
inspiration and positive encouragement for the peace
talks begun between the Colombian Government and
the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional, which has created
the conditions conducive to, and exciting expectations
of, the realization of comprehensive and lasting peace
and stability in Colombia.

In that regard, Equatorial Guinea endorses and
welcomes the unanimous adoption resolution 2381
(2017) by the Security Council on 5 October 2017
and supports the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on how the United Nations can best support
the Mission charged with monitoring the temporary
ceasefire between the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional
and the Colombian Government. The resolution allows
all members of the Security Council to provide the
necessary support to the work of the Verification
Mission in the process of monitoring the ceasefire,
which undoubtedly represents a very important measure
in building the necessary trust between the parties. We
hope it will lead to definitive and lasting peace, which
would allow that brotherly country to make the most of
all its immense potential.

While significant progress has been made,
significant challenges remain, such as the effective
reintegration of former guerrillas and the adaptation
and approval of legislative initiatives to allow for
the effective reinsertion and participation of former
combatants in political, economic and social life of
the country. To achieve that end, a positive approach
and contribution by all parties involved is crucial. The
judicial, political and legislative authorities have a
decisive role to play, both in tackling present challenges
and in preventing them from recurring in the course of
the process. In that regard, I recall the remarks of His
Holiness Pope Francis on 7 September 2017 in Bogota,
during his visit to Colombia:

"Despite obstacles, differences and varying
perspectives on the way to achieve peaceful
coexistence, this task summons us to persevere in
the struggle to promote a culture of encounter."

The ultimate success of the peace process
in Colombia will depend in large part upon all
parties involved in the negotiations respecting their
commitments, including those not covered by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We
therefore appeal to the political goodwill of all parties
in that regard.

I cannot conclude my statement without once
again expressing our gratitude to all those components
of Colombian society that have made it possible for
us today to speak of peace in Colombia, while also
underscoring the role of the Catholic Church and also
the invaluable support of a number of countries of
the subregion.

I end by expressing my thanks to our friend
Matthew for his warmth and the new life he breathed
into the work of the Security Council, as well as my
thanks for his support to my country in its first period
serving as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. We wish him the greatest of success in his
future endeavours.

