Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the future of Somalia and welcome you personally
back to New York. We congratulate the United
Kingdom on assuming the Council's presidency and
assure its of Germany's support, while thanking our
friends from Togo for their stewardship of the
Council's work in February. A great many thanks go to
the Secretary-General for his presence and his clear
analysis today, as well as to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahiga for his briefing and his
untiring commitment under very difficult
circumstances. My country aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union.

Today, I would like to focus on three points: the
political situation, the security at sea off the coast of
Somalia, and security on land.

First, with regard to the political situation, the
London conference was indeed a milestone on the way
to a better Somalia. We commend the British
Government for that initiative and the efforts it put into
that undertaking. It was particularly useful that all
major actors from within and outside of Somalia
participated and agreed to come to common solutions.
We therefore look forward to the upcoming Istanbul
conference, which will certainly continue this positive
trend.

The sustained engagement and support of the
international community should encourage the Somali
leaders to move forward and to achieve tangible
progress in the implementation of the road map. In this
context, we recognize the important meetings in
Puntland and commend the outcomes of the first and
second Somali National Consultative Constitutional
Conference, held in Garowe. While those are certainly
steps forward, many questions still remain unresolved.
Those pertain to the election of a new parliament and
the approval of a new constitution. Further, finding
administrative and security arrangements for newly
liberated areas in the south and centre of Somalia
remains a priority.

Somalia has no time to loose. Therefore, we see
with regret and frustration, to be quite frank, the
deadlock in the Transitional Federal Parliament and the
ongoing infighting in the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The Council has confirmed many times
that it is ready to act against spoilers that slow down
the country on its way forward. The time has come for
the Council to discuss what type of effective action it
can take against the spoilers of the Somali peace
process. There are no more excuses for derailing the
process, especially since the London conference and
this Council have confirmed once again that the
transition will end in August.

Let me now turn briefly to my second point -
the military and security aspects of the situation in
Somalia, including the issue of piracy. Piracy continues
to pose a threat to civil navigation in the waters off
Somalia and to the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid to the people of Somalia. Due to a
coordinated and resolute international response, the
number of successful attacks has considerably
decreased.

Lawlessness and the absence of reliable State
structures in vast parts of Somalia not only provide a
breeding ground for piracy, but also pose obstacles to
the prosecution of apprehended suspects. Prosecution
remains an element of our response to piracy that
should be further strengthened. We commend the
efforts of States in the region in this respect and
encourage others to join them. Germany has provided
substantial support to those efforts, both directly and
through the Trust Fund of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. We need to disrupt the
pirates' business model by increasing our efforts
against the beneficiaries of piracy and improving our
understanding of the financial flows generated by
piracy.

Let me turn to my third point - the security
situation on land. Germany commends the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which operates
under very difficult circumstances and has made
enormous sacrifices. It has been the determination and
commitment of those African Union (AU) forces that
have improved the security situation on the ground in
recent months, thereby also creating better conditions
for providing humanitarian aid.

With resolution 2036 (2012), which was adopted
on the eve of the London conference, the Security
Council extended considerably the mandate of
AMISOM. and the scope of United Nations support for
the Mission. In making that decision, the members of
the Security Council expressed their willingness to
seize the opportunity on the ground. It is now crucial
that the new strategic concept for AMISOM. be
implemented in a timely and comprehensive manner
and that all components of AMISOM. jointly work
towards fulfilling its objectives. We look forward to the
swift rehatting and arrival of new troops in line with
the agreed schedule. The Council will closely monitor
progress in this regard, based on regular reports in
accordance with resolution 2036 (2012).

That resolution recognizes the support provided
to AMISOM. by bilateral partners and regional
organizations. I would like to stress once more the
substantial contributions made by the European Union
currently and in the past, and reiterate the call of
resolution 2036 (2012) for new donors to support
AMISOM.

Finally, resolution 2036 (2012) also calls for the
speedy establishment of Somali security forces. It is
the Somalis themselves who will eventually need to
take care of their country and provide for the safety
and security of the population. Therefore, the
establishment of professional and reliable Somali
security forces is key. The international community
needs to support Somalia in this respect. My country
actively engages in the European Union training
mission for the Somali security forces and encourages
others to join these efforts.

For Germany, the ultimate goal of all efforts
remains a peaceful and functioning Somali State with
responsible State authorities that effectively serve the
people of Somalia.

