Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting and
facilitating these discussions, as per the Russian
Federation letter dated 13 April 2014 (S/2014/264).

I wish to thank the briefers, Mr. Miroslav Jenca,
Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Department of Peace
Operations; Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ertugrul Apakan,
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the
Trilateral Contact Group. I welcome also my colleague
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine.

It is very clear from the briefings we have heard
that there remains an urgent need for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine. The
continued violation of the ceasefire, including the
presence of heavy weapons and their use, in violation
of the Minsk agreements, are of serious concern.
It is also of great concern that the ongoing tension
and conflict are exacerbating the dire humanitarian
conditions on the ground. The parties need to ensure
that there is an urgent de-escalation of tension through
the implementation of the Minsk agreements so as to
allow for a situation that is conducive to the alleviation
of the humanitarian crisis.

In this regard, it remains necessary for all parties
to fully implement all of their respective commitments
under the Minsk agreements. At this point, the Minsk
agreements, including the package of measures agreed
under Minsk II, provide the most promising road map
for peace. It is also of critical importance that the parties
refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative
and that could further impede a peaceful resolution of
the situation in line with the Minsk agreements.

Furthermore, it is important that the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe be allowed
unhindered access to monitor and verify compliance
with the Minsk agreements, in line with its mandate.
South Africa encourages the various parties to
strengthen all political efforts to produce a sustainable
and peaceful solution.

In conclusion, we listened very carefully to the
remarks made by some of our colleagues on the issue of
Ukraine. We hope that those very same colleagues will
walk the talk on Venezuela: respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Venezuela; respect for
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, on refraining from military aggression against
other States Members of the United Nations; and,
thirdly, not to undermine the Venezuelan economy by
holding large sums of Venezuelan funds in their own
banks and in their allies' banks. If they do that, they
will win our respect.
