The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See.

Brother Carroll (Holy See): My delegation wishes
to thank the presidency of Uruguay for bringing the
question of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
to the attention of the international community.

One of the saddest developments in the evolution
of armed conflicts is that more and more victims are
innocent civilians. In the early 1900s, approximately
5 per cent of such fatalities were civilians, while in
the 1990s, more than 90 per cent of the fatalities were
non-combatants. It continues to worsen. All the reports
and studies on the theme during the past six months,
in particular the June 2015 report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2015/453), unanimously affirm that the deliberate
targeting of, and indiscriminate attacks on, civilians
continue to increase.

The consequences are there for the whole world to
see: huge civilian casualties, including many children;
massive population displacements; the refugee and
migration crisis; the intentional destruction of civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and medical facilities;
the use of civilians as weapons of war by depriving
them, inter alia, of food and other basic necessities;
the total disregard for the safety of humanitarian
workers and journalists; and other clear violations of
international humanitarian law.

The whole international community is implicated
in those heinous crimes in one way or another by silence
and indifference, for instance, or by the fact that the
destruction of civilian infrastructure and the slaughter
of innocent civilians are perpetrated with weapons
manufactured and supplied by the industrial engines of
the world and sold on the open or black market or given
or loaned to client States. The extent of responsibility
goes well beyond those directly massacring civilians.

Nobody can remain indifferent before this tragedy.
We must act with the utmost urgency. First, this
barbarity must be denounced by all without exception
and in the strongest possible terms. Secondly, the
international community must do all it can to stop these
heinous crimes, including the legitimate use of force
to stop atrocities and war crimes. Thirdly, the tools
at the disposal of the Council and of the international
community to protect civilians in armed conflict and
bring perpetrators to justice must be enhanced and
further strengthened where necessary. Fourthly, the
international community and individual States must
have the will and readiness to use those tools. Fifthly,
those responsible must be held accountable. Sixthly,
civilian populations who have been affected by mass
atrocities and war crimes deserve all the help we can
and must provide.

Pope Francis, in his 11 January address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, gave voice
to the victims of wars, saying:

"We hear Rachel weeping for her children who
are no more. Hers is the plea of thousands ofpeople
who weep as they flee horrific wars, persecutions
and human rights violations, or political or social
instability, which often make it impossible for them
to live in their native lands. It is the outcry of those
forced to flee in order to escape unspeakable acts
of cruelty towards the most vulnerable persons,
such as women and children and the disabled, or
martyrdom solely on account of their religion."

In the name of Pope Francis, my delegation
wishes to convey profound gratitude to the countries,
communities and individuals who are extending the
hands of solidarity and fraternity in the midst of so
much human suffering. The Pope explicitly thanks
Lebanon and Jordan, as well as the frontline countries
of Italy, Greece and Turkey, for all their efforts and
commitments to save lives and ease this horrendous
suffering. Those countries need the help of the entire
international community to face the challenges posed
by massive movements of refugees and migrants.

There is a panoply of interdependent problems that
can only be resolved by establishing peace through
dialogue and negotiations. We are encouraged by
progress towards finding political solutions to some of
the most violent conflicts in the Middle East. Care for
the civilians caught in the crossfire and used as weapons
of war calls for full support for ongoing dialogue and
negotiations. Peace achieved through these means is
our best guarantee to avoid resorting to war again.

The use of civilians as weapons of war represents
the worst of human behaviour. The international
community should show itself at its best by conquering
evil with good, by beating our swords into ploughshares
and our spears into pruning hooks, by combatting
indifference with solidarity and by rising above narrow
national and geopolitical interests to spare us all from
the scourge of wars.

