Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
being present today at this important debate on small
arms. I commend you, Sir, on your initiative, and on
the excellent work that has been done by the Mission
of Colombia, headed by Ambassador Valdivieso, in
preparing for this meeting.

I would also like to thank you most especially,
Mr. President, for your condolences for the loss of an
excellent civil servant, an excellent friend and an
excellent servant of the United Nations, Counsellor
Ana Moglia, and I am sure members of the Council
who were here last year when Argentina was a member
will remember her qualities. I am particularly grateful
for your words of condolence and I will certainly
convey them to her family.

Today, the international community is aware of
the magnitude of the problem caused by the
proliferation and the excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons around the world. As has been
noted in this debate, the United Nations has made it
clear that the uncontrolled circulation and easy
availability of these weapons currently causes the death
of more than 500,000 individuals annually as a
consequence of civil war, conflicts and crime. It is
estimated that 40 per cent of the global arms market is
diverted to the black market, fuelling the majority of
regional conflicts that have arisen since 1990.

The Secretary-General has noted that small arms
and light weapons must be the next focus of urgent
global attention, since these arms exacerbate conflicts,
cause flows of refugees, undermine international
humanitarian law and engender a culture of violence
and impunity. These arms destroy the social fabric and
constitute a menace to peace, development, democracy
and human rights.

Reducing the steadily growing access to these
arms in the world is one of the most serious challenges
the international community faces today.

To combat this, more laws and regulations are
needed, and especially the political commitment to act
with resolve when looking for affective answers to
solve this problem. To do this, it is necessary to adapt
and optimize existing resources in order to prevent,
control and reduce this menace responsibly and
efficiently.

Every region and country has its own
characteristics, and the solution must be developed
taking these particularities into account.

In contrast to the progress achieved in the field of
arms of massive destruction, a framework of global
standards and norms for eliminating the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons was lacking.

Among the initiatives previous to the recent
Conference in New York, we can mention the United
Nations resolutions on the matter, and especially the
commitment shown by heads of State at the
Millennium Summit, where it was resolved to take
concrete action to end illicit arms-trafficking as part of
a broad common vision for a secure and peaceful
world.

Aside from the initiatives mentioned, we should
add the pioneering work of the Organization of
American States in creating the first binding regional
instrument on the issue: the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials, which supplements the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects has marked a turning point in the stance of
States in combating illicit trafficking in these weapons.
The Programme of Action adopted at that Conference
establishes a series of measures to put an end to illicit
trafficking, to try to make transfers of weapons
transparent and to support regional disarmament
measures.

Argentina notes with satisfaction that this
included a commitment to establish penal measures
criminalizing the manufacture and the illicit trafficking
of these arms, as well as administrative regulations and
monitoring bodies for their production, circulation,
export and import. It is encouraging to see the
development of international criteria on the arms
brokering, the detection of the routes of illicit trade and
the location of its points of supply.

We underscore in this respect the appeal to
countries to cooperate with the United Nations system
for the effective implementation of arms embargoes
decreed by the Security Council in accordance with the
Charter.

An international programme of action could not
be implemented if the proper instruments were not
developed at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels. Within the framework of the
Southern Common Market and Bolivia and Chile,
initiatives have been taken to address this problem:
first, the creation of a common registry of vendors and
purchasers of firearms, their parts and ammunition; and
secondly, the creation of a firearms group, whose
mission will be to harmonize legislation, increase
cooperation and act as the focal point for coordination
in following up the Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference.
Argentina, like many countries, is not spared the
consequences of the illicit circulation of small arms.
The increase in the rate of urban violence, which in my
country has taken a tragic number of innocent victims,
is often the consequence of the illicit arms trade and
the ease with which any individual can acquire a gun
on the black market. These facts are a cause of great
concern and are among our Government's priorities for
action.

We trust that the Security Council will play an
important role in adopting an integrated approach to
this problem. We believe that there are two important
aspects to be taken into account: the first is the
inclusion in the mandates of peacekeeping operations
effective measures for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants; the second is the
creation of mechanisms to monitor effective
compliance with sanctions. The mechanism created for
Angola and that established on 30 July by resolution
1363 (2001) for Afghanistan are positive concrete
examples.

The goal is to pool our efforts to tackle a
multifaceted problem that cannot be attacked on just
one front but must be attacked on various fronts
simultaneously and concertedly. Coordination and
international cooperation are fundamental for achieving
this. Only in this way can the problems of war and
violence be reduced to manageable levels, and
conditions for the security of the population be made
favourable. This is an indispensable factor for life,
liberty, peace, solidarity, economic progress and
harmony in international relations.

