Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Today
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO): Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the
Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Belarus. We
are grateful to the Security Council for taking this
important initiative to hold a debate on United Nations
cooperation with the three international organizations
in Eurasia - CSTO, the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO). To underline the importance of continued and
close dialogue between the United Nations and those
organizations, we have only to recall that the countries
we represent are home to half the world's population.

The member States of CSTO supportthe development
of effective partnerships with the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Both the General Assembly and the Security Council
have emphasized the importance of such cooperation
many times. Whether on the economic or security front,
such collaboration between the various international
and regional bodies represents a requirement of modern
life and the conditions needed to ensure countries' and
peoples' sustainable development and to provide a
peaceful, safe environment for progress and prosperity.

The Collective Security Treaty Organization is a
major partner of the international community in that
regard. Since its beginnings, CSTO has transformed
itself into a genuinely multifaceted body with a broad
potential for responding to today's challenges and
threats. I would like to emphasize that this is not
just about ensuring our member States' national and
collective security. CSTO's functions and aims include
coordinating its member States' foreign policies,
working together in order to strengthen our defensive
capacity, improving our system for practical cooperation
between our crisis response mechanism and national
armed forces in order to ensure our States' security,
and combating international terrorism, drug trafficking
and illegal migration, as well as cooperating in areas
such as information security and the prevention and
elimination of emergency situations. CSTO is ready to
initiate multilateral cooperation mechanisms in all those
areas, and in fact is already doing so in practice. In 2015,
for instance, CSTO held an international conference
on anti-drug operations, aimed at eradicating heroin
distribution channels and synthetic drugs coming out of
Afghanistan, attended by 25 countries as well as CSTO
members, in an example of the joint efforts that affirm
CSTO's practical contribution to enhancing regional
and international security.

Productive cooperation with the United Nations is a
priority for our States. That is solidly founded on CSTO's
observer status in the General Assembly, and periodic
Assembly resolutions reflect the mutually beneficial
cooperation between the two organizations. Our two
secretariats' cooperation is based on two framework
documents, the 2010 Joint Declaration of Cooperation
and the 2012 memorandum of understanding between the
CSTO secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations.

CSTO member States are involved in enhancing
cooperation with the United Nations based on the
progress we have already made. We believe that
cooperation on peacekeeping between CSTO and
the United Nations is a promising direction that can
benefit both of our organizations and the international
community, and we have made it a priority. The CSTO
agreement on peacekeeping activity and related training
represents a legal basis for developing our peacekeeping
capacity and putting it into practice. We will very soon
be ready to submit proposals for joint action with the
United Nations for a substantive discussion on the
possible involvement of CSTO member States in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We also propose considering other possible forms
of cooperation between the United Nations and CSTO.
There are many current topics that are of interest to both
organizations and indeed the whole world, including
the fight against terrorism, dealing with humanitarian
emergencies and countering human trafficking and
illegal migration. We would like to jointly consider
how CSTO and the United Nations could combine
their efforts to confront such challenges and threats,
for example, by organizing specific measures with the
leadership of both organizations participating.

It is symbolic that today's debate includes
organizations that are engaged in a wide range of issues,
from peace and security to economic, humanitarian and
cultural cooperation, which we see as a reflection ofthe
commitment of States Members of the United Nations
to considering the world's most pressing problems as
they react on each other. CSTO States are committed
to participating actively in that process, in their firm
belief in the inseparability of peace, security and
gradual sustainable development.

I would now like to make a few comments in my
national capacity regarding Belarus's cooperation
with CIS and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Belarus's natural path to development has always been
through integration within CIS. For us, integration is a
tool by which our countries' joint efforts can achieve
our key goal - increasing our citizens' well-being and
quality of life. This year CIS is celebrating its twenty-
fifth anniversary, and during the years of its existence
it has acted to resolve the many complex challenges
related to the collapse ofthe Soviet Union, to encourage
the establishment of sovereign independent States and
to preserve and further develop our historical ties to
one another.

Today one of our priorities in cooperating with CIS
today is on the economic front. In our View, successful
cooperation in areas such as energy, transport,
trade, industry and the development of innovative
technologies should be one of the Commonwealth's
uniting functions. Our experience of cooperating within
CIS has contributed significantly to our development of
integration processes in various formats, including the
establishment of the Eurasian Economic Union. Mutual
cooperation and the integration of these elements in the
Eurasian space is very important for global political
stability and well-being.

Since July 2015, Belarus has been an observer
of the Shanghai Pact. For four years before that we
had the status of Dialogue Partner of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. With Belarus' participation,
the organization has been dealing with current threats,
economic integration and cooperation the Eurasian
Economic Union in establishing the Silk Road Economic
Belt. We are ready to become a western portal for the
SCO.

Over recent years we have seen considerable
success in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization as it
has grown. The membership of India and Pakistan has
significantly enhanced the authority of the organization
and broadened its political and economic potential. The

national interest ofBelarus lie injoining with the SCO in
the fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism,
which are areas where we can and must collaborate with
the United Nations and other international and regional
organizations if we are to achieve international peace
and security.

