Ms. Mufwankol (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, first of all, let
me convey the warm congratulations of the Congolese
delegation for the effective way in which you are
directing the Council's deliberations in this month of
April. I would like to thank you in particular for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on
children and armed conflict, the difficult subject that
we are debating today. In this regard, I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his very objective
and informative report (8/2009/ 158). My thanks go as
well to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whom we had
the honour to receive in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for the presentation of her edifying report
on this subject, highlighting the obligation to put an
end to recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. Her visit and others, which have helped
advance the cause of women and children, have had
positive repercussions.
The theme of today's meeting on violence against
children is of vital importance for our country, because
in this area the Democratic Republic of the Congo is in
the centre of the storm. The Democratic Republic is
coming out of a long political, social and economic
crisis that has been worsened by disastrous
consequences of the war of aggression and armed
conflict, with their stream of acute violence, in which
women and children, who have been massively
exposed, exploited and impoverished, have been the
primary victims.

Here, we would say specifically that increasingly,
the recruitment and abusive use of children is the effect
of both foreign and national armed groups belonging to
various rebel factions. We would also note that, for the
purposes of peace and national reconciliation, the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) itself, the regular Congolese army,
has been engaged in a long process of folding in large
waves of former rebels of all grades, even
commanders, since 2003.

Given the scope of the challenge, my delegation
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the plea
regarding the need for effective support by the
international community in seeking a stable peace and
in promoting democracy, both in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in other countries in the
Great Lakes region and throughout the world.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 158)
has edified us on progress made and on measures taken
by the parties with a view to eliminating grave
violations, which are nevertheless still continuing.
Concerned by this situation, the elected institutions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by
President Joseph Kabila, are doing everything they can
to put an end to these grave violations of the
fundamental rights of children.

Among the efforts made, one can cite the
promulgation in January 2009 of the statute to protect
children, which brings in international standards for the
protection of children and is a complement to the law
against sexual violence of 2006. We can also cite the
establishment of the Fund to Protect Children and
Promote Women, as well as the Agency for Combating
Violence against Women and Children. Also significant
are the reinforcement of the programme to fight
impunity and to help programmes for disarmament,
09-31740
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration,
especially with respect to child soldiers.

Moreover, in a determined political will, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
through the Ministry of Gender, Family and Children
Affairs, has launched an appeal for a general
mobilization to combat violence and other violations of
human rights perpetrated against women and children.
In November 2008 this general mobilization was
expressed by the Campaign of Congolese Women at a
level of national outrage in the form of the petition
"Je denonce" and in a gigantic protest march on
16 December. This message translated the essential
concern of Congolese women and children regarding
their right to life, peace, security, human dignity and
well-being.

All these efforts have been made possible thanks
primarily to the cooperation between my Government,
the United Nations system and other partners that
support development. We therefore support
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General as contained in the different reports
on children in armed conflict as well as
recommendations of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The programmes for disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration and for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation, both for national armed
groups and foreign groups, must continue and must be
brought to completion.

In order to put a real end to the agony of
Congolese children, my delegation can only reiterate
the position of Congolese women and children, which
calls for greater and more resolute involvement by the
Security Council to strengthen international solidarity
to build peace, territorial integrity and sovereignty in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It calls for the
complete eradication of foreign and national armed
groups, created by the poor management by all of the
international humanitarian corridor of 1994, whose
goals to save 1 million people's lives following the
genocide were nevertheless noble. However, for the
peaceful innocent Congolese hosts, that corridor
became a conduit for exporting death, for the
widespread rape of children and women, for pillaging
national resources and for the prevalence of AIDS,
with a heavy toll of 5 million dead and 2 million
displaced, primarily women and children.
09-31740

We need the Security Council's support for the
promotion of an international emergency
reconstruction plan for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo following the example of Marshall Plan, with
Congolese children and women as the main target.
Lastly, democracy needs to be promoted in the other
countries of the Great Lakes Region, and national and
intercommunity dialogues should be held, with a view
to eliminating latent conflicts in neighbouring
countries that are feeding destabilization of peace in
the subregion, resulting in the huge and cyclical
suffering of our respective populations.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
thank you once again and the many other speakers for
their positive contributions towards lasting solutions
not only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but
also for all countries concerned. For us, it is a question
of putting an end to war, impunity and the unspeakable
suffering of our populations and, in particular, of
children in areas of conflict.

