Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for having organized this
meeting on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). My thanks also go to Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
only for his important statement, but also for everything
he is doing in his capacity as Head of the Mission.

The crisis in South Sudan, which has gone unabated
for more than three years, requires today urgent action
to put an end to human rights violations and ensure
the protection of civilians, of whom approximately
1.4 million are internally displaced. The situation is
further compounded by the famine in several parts
of South Sudan. It is therefore essential that the
international community act quickly to prevent people
from dying of hunger and to ensure a swift resolution
of the conflict.

We call on all parties to the conflict in South Sudan
to immediately resume their dialogue and implement
thee Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. We believe that the
process of national dialogue, launched last December
2016 by President Salva Kiir, could play a key role in
bringing peace to the country if it is inclusive, free
and transparent.

With regard to UNMISS, the delegation of Senegal
welcomes the genuine progress made in preparing for
the deployment of the regional protection force with
the upcoming arrival of the first wave of the regional

protection force in Juba, pending the security clearances
of the Transitional Government of National Unity.
We commend the progress made in the Government's
allocation of the second land parcel required for the
northern base of the regional protection force, with a
site 10 kilometres north of Juba, whose capacities will
be assessed by UNMISS. We note that UNMISS had
already secured an area next to the airport to serve as a
temporary base for a Rwandan battalion. Nevertheless,
we call for more cooperation from the Transitional
Government of National Unity on the allocation of
the tasks of the regional protection force in Juba and
encourage the authorities of South Sudan to take all
necessary measures for the swift deployment of the
regional protection force.

In the meantime, UNMISS continues to come up
against numerous obstacles in its daily operations.
Among these are requests for visa payments to the
staff of the Mission since last January by the national
immigration authorities. This violates the terms of the
status of forces agreement and has a negative impact on
the Mission's ability to plan, including as pertains to the
regional protection force. To address this issue, we call
for the cooperation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity, in particular in establishing a one-stop
shop that will handle visas and other authorizations
for UNMISS.

With regard to the ongoing restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNMISS, these restrictions
continue to undermine the Mission's ability to take
action swiftly in the event of attacks against civilians in
a context of increasing ethnic violence and in violation
of the status of forces agreement. Targeted attacks and
threats to humanitarian workers are continuing, as are
restrictions on humanitarian access to certain parts of
the country, including in areas such as Wau, Yei and the
western part of Bahr el-Ghazal.

Overall, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate in many regions and the
consequences of this considerable violence have
affected a large number of civilians. We therefore call
on all armed actors to immediately cease hostilities and
to allow UNMISS and humanitarian workers to access
civilians in need of assistance. Without such unimpeded
access, the situation is likely to worsen and the local
populations will to suffer from it.

This is the right moment to pay tribute to the
efforts of UNMISS which, despite all the difficulties
encountered, continues to operate in a hostile
environment. I should also like to pay tribute to the
troop-contributing countries for their dedication to the
cause of peace in South Sudan.
