Mr. Roux (spoke in French): I deliver this briefing
on behalf of our Secretary-General, Mr. Jiirgen Stock.

(spoke in English)

It is a great privilege to address the Security
Council once again. I would like to thank the Egyptian
presidency for convening this meeting and for their
recognition of the role of the INTERPOL in this
framework.

Preventing foreign terrorist fighters from accessing
weapons is of utmost importance and is one of the
five action streams in INTERPOL's Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We have been reminded time and
again that no country can claim itself immune from the
threat. Yet this also means that we can all be part of the
effort to stop their movement and break the supply. It
is vital to mobilize international cooperation, not only
across regions, but also across action domains ranging
from international and domestic legislation to police
work in the field. I therefore welcome Egypt's initiative
to bring this issue to the forefront of discussions at the
United Nations, and I look forward to the outcomes of
today's meeting.

Although neither weapons nor their use by
terrorists are new phenomena, today's threat landscape
is one of unprecedented complexity. Convergence is the
keyword - convergence between organized crime and
terrorism; between old and new technologies; between
military and law enforcement. We see firearms used in
conflict zones reappear on the streets of major cities;
legal commercial products turned into components for
improvised explosive devices; and guns manufactured
decades ago found reactivated and for sale in the
marketplaces of the Dark Web. In parallel, foreign
terrorist fighters may be exploiting the tactics and
knowledge learned from the battlefield; the contacts
and supply chains of organized crime groups they often
used to belong to; and technology allowing the creation
of modular firearms and 3D printing to access and use
weapons.

The challenge may seem daunting. Where can we
start in tackling these threats?

There are many crucial actions that the international
community can undertake with the support and
expertise of the United Nations. Standardizing end-
user export controls, ensuring secure stockpile
management and strengthening and implementing
strong national legislation are all essential steps. Yet
like the Secretary General of the world's largest law
enforcement organization, and as a police officer
myself, I must look at weapons trafficking from a
narrower but equally pivotal focus on what frontline
officers can do to prevent foreign terrorist fighters
(FTF) from acquiring weapons and how international
policing can assist them.

The first step involves tracing the weapon back to
its source. That is where every single gun turns from
being a threat into an asset for the purpose of police
investigations. The gun might turn out to be part of
an arsenal discovered by the military in a conflict
zone. It might be found at the crime scene of an armed
robbery or a murder. It might be recovered on a suspect
or in the trunk of a car. Traditionally, investigations
would end at that point, with the seizure of a firearm.
INTERPOL suggests that the recovery of a weapon
is just the beginning. Until proven otherwise, a gun
used in the commission of a crime must be considered
as part of a larger scheme, not an isolated piece of
evidence. INTERPOL has developed a firearms
recovery protocol, which has been made available to all
member countries and provides a guide to obtaining the
necessary intelligence and investigative leads to trace
the source of the supply.

The questions for any investigator are simple
but fundamental. First, who has had contact with the
firearm? To answer that question, the identifying data
obtained from the gun's exterior - the make, model,
calibre, and serial number - should be checked so as
to find its status and transaction history. INTERPOL's
Illicit Arms Record and Tracing Management System
(iARMS) can be used to search and trace lost, stolen,
smuggled or trafficked firearms internationally. For
instance, the iARMS platform was used to issue trace
requests in the aftermath of the Charlie Hebdo terrorist
attacks. More recently, INTERPOL-coordinated
operations in the Balkans and Eastern Europe have
shown how international tracing can become a
multiplier, thereby leading to new weapon recoveries
and arrests. In parallel, latent fingerprints and DNA
can also be examined, where possible, through using
INTERPOL's forensic databases, as well.

The next question is 4 in which crimes has the
gun been used? The ballistics data from inside the
gun can be used to link crimes, guns and suspects,
whether through domestic ballistic comparison or
across borders. In such cases, the INTERPOL Ballistic
Information Network provides a means by which to
conduct international searches to determine if the same
gun was used in multiple crimes and crime scenes
across different countries. The intelligence generated
can help track a gun used in a crime to a trafficker and
cut off a supply of firearms. Every hit in the system
and every subsequent link count. That is how key
individuals can be identified, new trafficking routes
detected and responses designed.

Secondly, we are focused on the weapons. We
should never forget about the individuals. They are
the ones driving the demand and ultimately putting
those commodities to use. Preventing foreign terrorist
fighters' access to weapons also builds on preventing
their mobility across borders and achieving positive
identification in the field. In that regard, I must
emphasize once again the need to strengthen and
integrate border management in compliance with
resolution 2178 (2014). Since its adoption, we have
witnessed FTF-related information sharing through
INTERPOL channels increase dramatically. That
momentum can be seized by maximizing the use
of INTERPOL's first-line screening tools for travel
documents and nominals at all borders in members'
respective jurisdictions so as to set up a tripwire and an
early warning system against terrorist mobility.

The same applies to known weapons traffickers
who may be moving abroad to coordinate shipments
and manage their operations, whether upstream towards
the source, or downstream for distribution. If flagged
through INTERPOL channels, any random search or
border control may lead to the detection, identification
and apprehension of such high-value players. In a
nutshell, strong borders and improved coordination are
the first defence in both FTF interdiction and preventing
the illegal, cross-border movement of weapons.

The capabilities, which I have described, hold
enormous potential in assisting law enforcement
officers to prevent terrorist access to weapons. Yet in
order to be unleashed, that requires proactive action.
The databases must be populated, the trace requests sent
and responded to, and the access to secure information
system extended to border control points and other key
frontline locations. I would respectfully ask each of
the delegations represented here to reach out to their
respective capitals and national security services and
inquire whether that potential is being maximized at
a time of unprecedented threats. INTERPOL stands
ready to assist all member countries represented here
today in that endeavour.

