Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The position of the
German Government with regard to the occupied Golan
Heights is clear. I refer to my statement yesterday (see S/PV.8489) and to the common European position.
Security interests, as urgent as they may be, do not
justify annexation. However, the presence of troops of
the Syrian regime and of Iranian-backed militias close
to the border violates the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and constitutes a threat to Israel. Those
presences should end.

Today's meeting was scheduled partly in response
to a request by the Syrian regime, which called for this
meeting

"in order to discuss the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan and the recent flagrant violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions by a
permanent member State".

That request is deeply cynical. The Syrian Government
has grossly violated the international laws of war for
the past eight years and is responsible for grave war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In response
to peaceful protests, the Syrian regime has reacted
with brutal violence against its own population. It
has bombed protected facilities, including hospitals,
schools, markets and civilian homes. It has used
indiscriminate and illegal weapons, including cluster
bombs and internationally banned barrel bombs, to kill
and terrorize civilians.

The Syrian regime has repeatedly used chemical
weapons against its own population - a flagrant
violation of international law - and continues to refuse
to fulfil its obligation to the Council to account for
discrepancies in its declarations on chemical weapons.
The regime has arrested, disappeared, tortured and
killed tens of thousands of dissenters, activists,
journalists, students, professors, medical workers,
lawyers and others, including minors.

There are horrific reports and accounts of sexual
Violence. We have seen the Caesar photos displayed in
the halls of the United Nations Building in New York.
They provide horrifying evidence of the crimes that are
happening behind bars in Al-Assad's hell-hole prisons
and detention facilities. Tens of thousands are dead,
killed by that ruthless regime out of sight of cameras.
Those detention atrocities, testimonies by incredibly
brave torture survivors, the Caesar photos and regime
documents all form the basis of the criminal cases now
being investigated by the German Federal Prosecutor,
the international arrest warrants issued by Germany
and actual arrests being carried out in Germany. It is
profoundly cynical for a regime known for its atrocious
crimes and for its ruthless brutality against Syrians to
come to the Security Council and criticize others for
violating international law.

