Mr. De Soto: When the Quartet met recently in
Washington, it underscored the critical need to end the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Last week, a very important
step forward was taken in the cause of stability and
unity among Palestinians with the agreement to form a
national unity Government, reached in Mecca. Next
week, President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert are
scheduled to hold a trilateral meeting with United
States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice for the first
07-23690
Israeli-Palestinian discussions on the political horizon
of the peace process in six years. The Quartet will meet
again on 21 February in Berlin.

A newly active Quartet, a more closely involved
Arab world, a Palestinian national unity Government
and the beginning of political dialogue between the
parties have, when taken together, the potential to help
restore calm and re-energize efforts to achieve a
two-State solution. However, as violence and tension
during the past few weeks attest, many immediate and
longer-term dangers and challenges to stability and
peace will have to be overcome.

I turn first to the agreement to form a Palestinian
national unity Government reached under the auspices
of His Majesty King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, whose
efforts, along with those of several other Arab leaders,
to support Palestinian unity have been widely
recognized, including by the Secretary-General.

The process of forming a new Palestinian
Government as such has yet to begin. Some names of
ministers were agreed upon in Mecca, including the
important ministries of foreign affairs and finance,
which will be occupied by independents well known to
the international community, but other posts, including
the key position of interior minister, are still to be
finalized. The agreement incorporates the text of the
commissioning letter that President Abbas would send
to Ismail Haniya, which would initiate the process of
Government formation. The letter calls upon him "to
respect the agreements signed by the Palestine
Liberation Organization".

As the Council will be aware, on 9 September
1993, in a letter to the Israeli Prime Minister as part of
an agreed exchange of letters, the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) Chairman stated that "the PLO
recognizes the right of the State of Israel to exist in
peace and security. The PLO accepts United Nations
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). The PLO renounces the use of terrorism and
other acts of violence".

The commissioning letter also calls upon the new
Prime Minister "to respect international legitimacy
resolutions". Such resolutions include not only
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), but also resolution 1515 (2003), in which the
Council endorsed the road map. The commissioning
letter also includes a Government commitment to work
to achieve Palestinian national goals "as ratified by the
07-23690

resolutions of the Palestine National Council and the
basic law articles and the national conciliation
document and the Arab summit's resolutions". As the
Council will be aware, a Palestine National Council
resolution of November 1988 accepted Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
rejected terrorism in all its forms. The Council would
also be aware that among the Arab summit resolutions
is the 2002 Arab peace initiative.

I cite those references because they show the
potential of the agreement reached in Mecca. I use the
word "potential" advisedly because the agreement has
other aspects that also need to be examined, has yet to
be implemented and has not been the subject of full
discussion among Quartet partners. As they indicated
in a statement on 9 February, Quartet principals hope
that the desired calm would prevail as a result of the
agreement. They are awaiting the formation of the new
Palestinian Government and have reaffirmed their
support for a Government committed to non-violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements and obligations, including the road map.

The Quartet will meet in Berlin on 21 February to
give full consideration to developments. The Berlin
meeting will come just two days after the trilateral
meeting convened by United States Secretary of State
Rice on 19 February in Jerusalem, which initiative the
Quartet discussed and welcomed when it met in
Washington, DC, on 2 February. Intensive
consultations are continuing between senior United
States, Israeli, Palestinian and regional officials in
advance of that meeting, and Quartet envoys are
meeting in Jerusalem this coming Friday. The goal of
the trilateral meeting, as stated by Secretary Rice at
Luxor, is "to have discussions about the broad issues
on the horizon so that we can work on the road map
and try to accelerate the road map and move forward
towards the establishment of a Palestinian State". That
would help to define more clearly the road map's
destination - a permanent status agreement that
resolves all outstanding issues, including, of course,
borders, refugees, Jerusalem, settlements and security.

Quartet partners are determined to give active
follow-up to that and any subsequent trilateral
meetings, as well as to the continued efforts being
pursued bilaterally between Israel and the Palestinians.
They intend to remain closely engaged with each other
and regional partners in an effort to move the parties
towards meaningful negotiations.
3

While we have reason to sound more hopeful

today than we have been in previous briefings, no one

should underestimate the enormousness of the tasks

that would face any new Palestinian Government or the

many difficulties in the way of fruitful discussions
between Israel and the Palestinians.

The first challenge is to curb violence of several
kinds. This year alone, 137 Palestinians, including 13
children, have been killed by fellow Palestinians in
internal clashes, while 445 have been injured. That
compares with 146 killed in 2006 and 11 in 2005.
Before Egypt brokered a ceasefire prior to the Mecca
meetings, factional violence in Gaza crossed previous
red lines with assaults on a presidential compound and
convoy, on the Islamic University, and on training
camps of rival forces. Rocket-propelled grenades,
heavy machine guns and other heavy weapons were
used by both sides. Schools, shops and businesses had
to close, and United Nations humanitarian operations
were interrupted. The violence has taken a terrible toll
in civilian lives, living standards, social fabric and
psychological well-being.

It is equally important to calm Israeli-Palestinian
violence, which has been deeply concerning in the past
few weeks. In Eilat, a Palestinian suicide bomber killed
three Israelis in an atrocity condemned around the
world. At least 36 rockets have been fired from Gaza
since 25 January. Israel has shown commendable
restraint in the face of those unjustified attacks from
Gaza. However, the number of Israel Defence Force
(IDF) search-and-detention campaigns in the West
Bank has jumped by 58 per cent since the start of 2007,
while armed and unarmed clashes between Palestinians
and the IDF in the West Bank have risen by 88 per
cent. The IDF must, when carrying out operations
involving searches and detentions, adhere strictly to all
international legal obligations, including human rights
obligations. This year 19 Palestinians, including 5
children, have been killed by the IDF, and 72 have
been injured.

We are also deeply concerned about continuing
tensions over Israel's construction work on a new
walkway to restore a broken bridge leading to the
Mughrabi Gate of the Haram al-Sharif - or Temple
Mount - compound in the Old City of Jerusalem, and
accompanying archeological digging. Israel says its
work is purely for safety and access reasons, but there
has been a strong reaction in many quarters of the Arab
and Muslim worlds. The Israeli Defence Minister has
also indicated that proceeding with the work posed a
security risk. That prediction seems to have been borne
out late last week, when clashes broke out between
Palestinians and Israeli security forces at the site and in
other places in Jerusalem. While the Cabinet approved
continuation of the work on Sunday, the Mayor of
Jerusalem has suspended construction, but not
excavation, pending a new zoning plan that would
involve public consultation.

A second set of challenges, also noted by the
Quartet on 2 February, relates to preserving and
building the capacity of institutions of Palestinian
governance, as well as developing the Palestinian
economy. The economy cannot be developed without
major steps from both parties to implement all aspects
of the Agreement on Movement and Access. Although
there have been some improvements this year, the
implementation of the Agreement remains very patchy.
Between 1 January and 10 February 2007, exports
through the Karni crossing, which is the primary transit
point for goods into and out of Gaza, reached
approximately 46 trucks per day, a four-fold increase in
the number of truckloads exported in November 2006
but still only 11 per cent of the target set by the
Agreement.

Other aspects of the Agreement remain
completely stalled. The effects of falling so far short of
the Agreement's targets are being seen: factories are
closing, farmers are not investing in export crops and
labour markets have contracted. Today, 80 per cent of
Gaza residents rely, at least to some extent, on food
aid. Meanwhile, in the West Bank, closures now stand
at 529, an increase of 25 per cent over last year, despite
commitments made at the meeting between Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas in December.
Without greater movement and access, trade will
continue to drop, and reliance on aid will continue to
increase.

Palestinian institutions - including schools,
hospitals and ministries - have been badly harmed
over the past 12 months. The extended strike over the
non-payment of salaries has also taken its toll. The
financial management system of the Palestinian
Authority has been degraded, with consequent
weakening of transparent reporting on fiscal
operations. The security sector remains oversized,
factionalized, unevenly trained and under split
command. The fiscal crisis of the Palestinian Authority
is severe. Any new Government will face a budget
07-23690
deficit of about 30 per cent of gross domestic product,
unless the currently unsustainable fiscal position is
addressed - which would require reducing the wage
bill, improving the collection of taxes and utility bills
and streamlining social transfer. Israel must also
consistently hand over the clearance revenue that it
collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. At
present, Palestinian Authority public expenditures are
supported mainly by external funding, and total
revenues amount to less than two thirds of recurring
costs.

During the past year the programme of the
current Palestinian Authority Government hampered
the ability of donors to help to address those issues.
Interventions have largely been through parallel
mechanisms, which have gradually undermined the
very institutions intended to serve as the foundation of
a future Palestinian State. To facilitate the recovery of
those institutions, resumption of direct support and
more holistic approaches to both development and
institutional reform are needed. We hope that the new
Palestinian Authority Government's programme will
facilitate a return to that approach.

A third set of challenges relates to the continued
lack of any positive Israeli action to remove settlement
outposts and the continued settlement activity and
barrier construction on occupied Palestinian territory in
the West Bank despite the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. It is vital that action is
taken to ensure that final status issues are not
prejudiced by the creation of facts on the ground.

In Lebanon today at least three people were
killed, and many others wounded, in a double bus
bombing that took place near the mainly Christian
town of Bikfaya, north-east of Beirut. Those bombings
have occurred at a time of acute political tension in
Lebanon. The domestic political impasse continues,
with no change in the positions of the parties. The
League of Arab States has continued its efforts at
mediation. The United Nations representative, Geir
Pedersen, who was recently appointed as Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, has continued to work
closely with all the parties to advocate dialogue and
consensus on the various issues in contention.

The general calm that has been prevailing in
southern Lebanon since the cessation of hostilities last
August was disrupted temporarily on 7 February.
07-23690

Mr. Guehenno briefed the Council on that day
regarding an incident that the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) subsequently had the
opportunity to investigate more thoroughly. The IDF
had signalled to UNIFIL that it intended to cross the
Israeli technical fence to clear a number of mines that
it claimed to have identified north of the fence but on
Israeli territory. While acknowledging Israel's security
concerns, UNIFIL urged the IDF to suspend its action
and to resolve the matter by relaying its concerns
through UNIFIL's liaison channels and through an
urgent tripartite meeting, so as to avoid an increase in
tension along the Blue Line. The UNIFIL Force
Commander, Mr. Pedersen and I remained in close
touch with the parties to urge restraint and the
resolution of this issue through peaceful means.

Despite UNIFIL appeals, the IDF proceeded with
the operation later that night. The Lebanese army
opened small arms fire after the IDF made an opening
in the technical fence but while they were still on the
Israeli side of the Blue Line. The Lebanese armed
forces intensified fire, using both rifles and
machineguns aimed at the IDF bulldozer, which by that
time had crossed the fence. The IDF responded with at
least one missile. No casualties were reported.
Subsequently, the IDF bulldozer and excavator worked
in the earth to clear the area of mines and violated the
Blue Line in the process. The incident took place at the
same location where the IDF had shot at and destroyed
four improvised explosive devices on the Lebanese
side of the Blue Line two days before.

The firing by the Lebanese armed forces
constitutes a violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and a
breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement. As I
mentioned a moment ago, the Israel Defense Force also
violated the resolution by crossing the Blue Line. The
exchange of fire posed a threat to the lives of UNIFIL
troops patrolling in the area.

These incidents illustrate the continued volatility
of the situation in southern Lebanon and the
concomitant need for all sides to respect fully
resolution 1701 (2006) and to continue to act with
restraint at all times. In this regard, it is of paramount
importance that concerns are addressed through the
tripartite mechanism chaired by UNIFIL, which has
proved effective in finding solutions when the parties
have chosen to engage in it.
5
On 6 February, the United Nations signed the
agreement between the United Nations and the
Lebanese Republic on the establishment of a special
tribunal for Lebanon. The accord was earlier signed in
Beirut. The signing was carried out in line with the
mandate given by the Security Council to the
Secretary-General to proceed, together with the
Government of Lebanon and in conformity with the
Constitution of Lebanon, with the final steps for the
conclusion of the agreement. The United Nations
remains hopeful that the Lebanese institutions will be
able to perform their tasks and fulfil their
responsibility on the way toward the establishment of
the tribunal.

With the initiatives now under way on the Israeli-
Palestinian track, we have the opportunity to foster a
dynamic in which positive developments are mutually
reinforcing. That must now be the goal.

The Mecca agreement signals a rejection by
Palestinians of internal violence to resolve their
differences. It marks a renewed commitment by the
Arab world to supporting Palestinian unity and
moderation. We hope that it will lead to a Government
that donors can support for three reasons: first, because
only if the security forces work cohesively, rather than
facing off in the streets, can the terrible violence in the
occupied Palestinian territory be seriously tackled and
security sector reform be durable. That is as vital for
Israel as it is for Palestinians. Secondly, further delay
in supporting Palestinian institutions and reviving
economic life could have devastating and long-term
consequences. Thirdly, while negotiations with Israel
remain the province of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and in the hands of President Abbas, the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority also have
responsibilities to ensure that Palestinian obligations
are met under existing agreements.

We are therefore watching developments
carefully to see how the Mecca agreement is
implemented in the coming period and what actions are
taken by the parties to sustain the new dynamic. Action
by Israel to address the longstanding issue of prisoners
and by the Palestinian side to secure release of the
Israeli soldier held hostage in Gaza will be crucial to
achieving lasting progress.

We also look forward to next week's trilateral
meeting. Excessive expectations should not be placed
on one such meeting, but we hope that it will be the
beginning of a genuine dialogue leading to negotiations
that can define the end-goal for the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples, and clarify the path to achieving it.
Certainly, all Quartet partners are determined to work
together in supporting such an effort.

Our goal is clear: an end to the occupation that
began in 1967 and the achievement of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace with Israel. The overall goal of a
comprehensive peace between Israel and all its Arab
neighbours must not be neglected. We must act with
the right mixture of firmness and flexibility with all
parties to ensure that they move decisively down this
path.

