The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belgium, Israel, Italy and Spain,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Waxman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/454, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, France, Italy,
Spain and the United States of America. I wish to draw
the attention of participants to documents 8/2010/352
and S/2010/430, containing the thirteenth report of the
Secretary-General on Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) and a letter dated 11 August 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1937 (2010).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon, who wishes to make a statement following
the voting.


