Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): In his letter of
19 April 2012 (S/20l2/238), the Secretary-General
recommended that the Security Council authorize the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS). The Mission will have to not only monitor
a cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all
parties, but also to monitor and support the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy's six-point
proposal. Resolution 2043 (2012) is the Council's
unified and swift reaction to those recommendations.

Today, the Security Council has sent yet another
clear and united message to the Syrian authorities that
the cessation of armed violence must be respected in
full and that immediate action is needed on all aspects
of the six-point proposal. In that regard, we express our
grave concern over the escalation in violence and
casualties in recent days and over the fact that the
cessation of armed Violence in all its forms remains
clearly incomplete, in a serious breach of resolution
2042 (2012).

Also, the widespread violations of human rights
continue unabated, as stated in shocking detail in the
Secretary-General's letter. They must cease forthwith,
and accountability for such violations must be
guaranteed. Likewise, the humanitarian situation is
worsening by the day. Full and unimpeded
humanitarian access is of the utmost urgency. Portugal
renews its call to all parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian organizations.

In that regard, allow me to express my country's
deep appreciation for the assistance that neighbouring
States have been providing for over a year now to those
fleeing violence, persecution and repression, despite
the disruption that the situation in Syria has brought to
their own countries.

As we have repeatedly stated, the six-point
proposal represents the last chance for a peaceful
political solution to the Syrian crisis. The Syrian
authorities must, once and for all, demonstrate serious
intent and match actions with stated commitments.
Portugal sincerely hopes that, following 13 months of
horrific repression, which has caused many thousands
of deaths and unimaginable human suffering, the
deployment of the United Nations Supervision Mission
will indeed help to change the dynamics on the ground
and create the conditions conducive to a Syrian-led
political transition that meets the legitimate democratic
aspirations of the Syrian people.

For that to happen, the Syrian Government must
implement immediately and visibly all its commitments
under the six-point plan in their entirety, including the
withdrawal of troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks to facilitate the
sustained cessation of violence. It must also ensure the
technical operation of the Mission as set out in today's
resolution and the preliminary understanding of
19 April 2012.

As I already stated, the six-point proposal
represents the last hope of avoiding an all-out civil war
in Syria with dire consequences for both the people of
Syria and the region. That is why we voted in favour of
today's resolution, notwithstanding all the inherent
risks.

We call upon all parties to seize the opportunity
that today's resolution represents for a sustained peace
and a meaningful political process in Syria, and
therefore to cease all armed violence in all its forms
and cooperate fully with the United Nations
Supervision Mission. We also reiterate our appreciation
and full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. We urge all parties to
engage constructively with Joint Special Envoy Annan
on a credible Syrian-led political process that will meet
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for
peace, freedom, democracy and equality.

