Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish first of all to thank Mr. Danilo Turk,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
the information he has given us.

Mexico believes that the successful completion of
disarmament and the adoption of a constitution are
essential to consolidating peace and laying the
foundations for the development and economic growth
of Bougainville, particularly at a time when the
international presence is being reduced and the people
of the island are preparing to take charge of their own
future. In that effort, the donor community has a
fundamental role to play in supporting the
establishment of sustainable economic and social
conditions by channelling resources to infrastructure,
education, health care and development projects, thus
strengthening the peaceful transition towards a stable
political future for the island.
I take this opportunity once again to express our
gratitude for the work and support provided to
Bougainville by Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu, first through the Peace Monitoring Group and
later through the Bougainville Transitional Team,
which has almost completed its work.

We note with satisfaction the measures being
taken by the Government of Papua New Guinea, such
as the delegation of powers to the Bougainville Interim
Provincial Executive Council, including control of the
police command in Bougainville, as well as the
cooperation seen among some of the former
combatants in the area of security, particularly in Buka
and Arawa. Although security conditions have
remained stable, there is a need to strengthen the
disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes for former combatants, as well as the
structural aspects of Bougainville's economic and
social development, in order to avoid a resurgence of
the conflict. We appeal to the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the Bougainville authorities to report
on advances in the implementation of those
programmes, particularly concerning the final decision
reached on the ultimate fate of the weapons collected
during phase two of the weapons disposal programme.

We have also taken note of the progress made in
drawing up a draft constitution for Bougainville, the
third revision of which is now being prepared. As I
have already noted, Mexico believes that the successful
conclusion of disarmament and the adoption of the
constitution are fundamental elements in the
strengthening of peace and in the laying of foundations
for Bougainville's development and economic growth.
In that connection, the support of the United Nations is
necessary, especially with regard to the holding of
elections and the establishment of an autonomous
government and the strengthening of its institutions.

My Government has received the note regarding
the request made by the Government of Papua New
Guinea to the Secretary-General concerning the
extension of UNPOB's mandate until elections are held
on the establishment of a Bougainville autonomous
government. We have also taken note of the Secretary-
General's proposal to establish a United Nations
observer mission in Bougainville with a six-month
mandate beginning on 1 January 2004. Mexico will
study the Secretary-General's proposal, bearing in
mind any decision's financial implications for Member
States and the best way that the United Nations can
continue to support the strengthening of the political
process in Bougainville. The delegation of Mexico will
take a constructive approach in considering the draft
resolution to be introduced in that regard.

Lastly, I would once again like to express
Mexico's gratitude for the work of Ambassador Noel
Sinclair and the staff of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville. Their devotion has led to
progress towards achieving a lasting solution to the
conflict in Bougainville.

