Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is important that
Ukraine is regularly discussed here in the Council.
Ms. Mueller told us that the leading cause of death of
children in Ukraine is landmines, and that is a grim
reminder of the real impact of this ongoing conflict,
as also set out by our briefers from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Thirteen
thousand people have died, 30,000 have been injured
and 3.5 million are in need of humanitarian aid in this
modern conflict in Europe.

Why are we here? We are here because Russia
sent troops to Crimea and later grabbed it after an
illegitimate pretence of a referendum, held at the barrel
of a Russian gun. Russia's actions were clearly illegal.
One hundred Member States voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 68/262 in March 2014, and not one
country around this table voted with Russia. Russia sent
troops and supported separatists in eastern Ukraine and
continues to destabilize those regions, with devastating
humanitarian consequences. Last year Russia attacked
Ukrainian ships in the Sea of Azov, and it continues to
impose daily restrictions on vessels in a blatant attempt
to destabilize Ukraine's economy. All those who care
about the territorial integrity of Member States and
the principle of non-interference should ask Moscow
to stop interfering with its neighbour and get off its
territory. We therefore condemn President Putin's
recent decision on passports, which is further evidence
of Russia's aggressive actions aimed at destabilizing
Ukraine and undermining its security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

Rather than creating further obstacles to the
reintegration ofthose communities into Ukraine, Russia
should focus on implementing the Minsk agreements
endorsed by the Council, ending its support for armed
separatist formations and ensuring the safe delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance by international
agencies. That is the only way to end the fear and
suffering of ordinary people in eastern Ukraine.

Last month was the fifth anniversary of Russia's
illegal annexation of Crimea. Apart from their
illegal seizure of Ukrainian land, infrastructure and
economic assets, the Russian authorities have held
illegitimate elections and imposed Russian citizenship,
law and military conscription on the population in
that part of Ukraine. We have seen an increase in the
persecution of ethnic and religious groups such as the
Crimean Tatars, including the unlawful detention of
23 Crimeans following recent raids on their homes.
There are continuing reports of arbitrary detentions and
arrests, forced disappearances and torture of political
opponents and minorities. Seventy-three political
prisoners are currently being held in Crimea and Russia.
It is unacceptable that the Russian Federation has not
cooperated with the General Assembly's calls to allow
access for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

I would like to extend my congratulations to
Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky on his success in the
presidential election. That peaceful election process is
a testament to the development of Ukraine's democracy
and an example to some of Ukraine's neighbours. As my
Prime Minister has said, we look forward to working
with Mr. Zelensky. The Russian Federation had an
opportunity to show willingness to work with the new
President, reduce tensions, bring calm and work for
peace. Sadly, Russia has continued down its aggressive
path instead.

