Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
introduction of the report under consideration (see S/2011/283). We take note of the hopeful note in which
he concluded his statement, just as we have taken note
of the progress highlighted in the report in the area of
security and of the difficulties that are unfortunately
hampering the comprehensive implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. I would like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of Gabon, to once again
commend Mr. Inzko and his team for their efforts on
the ground to implement the Agreement, as well as in
connection with the reforms aimed at contributing to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's integration into Europe.

As we underscored at our previous debate (see S/PV.6421), Gabon fully supports the efforts made by
the international community to establish the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of stable and
lasting institutions. We reiterate our support for the
implementation for the Dayton Agreement, which is
the foundation for the political process in the country.
The report that has just been introduced to us provides
a new opportunity to evaluate both the implementation
of the Agreement as well as the current political and
security situation.
With regard to security, my country welcomes the
central role that the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) continues to play in
ensuring a stable environment in the region in spite of
an increasingly tense political situation. We also
welcome the decision taken recently by senior Bosnian
officials to suspend the issuance of licences for the
export of weapons and military material.

We are also pleased to note that current political
developments are marked by improved cooperation
among the three members of the new Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That original mechanism
makes it possible to lay the foundation for breaking the
political deadlock and to begin to establish an agreed
transitional Government.

My Government also welcomes the fact that the
general elections held in October 2010 were conducted
smoothly and that the European Union has lifted visa
requirements for Albanians and Bosnians in the
Schengen area.

However, the gains made in the context of the
Dayton Agreement are today at risk, and the
international community must endeavour to preserve
them. We are concerned at the persistence of several
obstacles that are hampering the political process and
the establishment of normally functioning institutions.
I refer here to the difficulty of establishing a federal
Government; the absence of an agreement on State
property and on defence; and the challenge involved in
ensuring the effective rule of law and the fiscal
management of public finances. These are
preconditions for the consolidation of peace and the
building of a democratic State in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We remain convinced that it is only through
dialogue and political agreement that the parties will be
able to achieve reconciliation in a situation
characterized by two diametrically opposed
approaches: that of a multi-ethnic, democratic and
Euro-Atlantic society, and that of shared power among
three nationalist oligarchies.

We urge all parties to engage in dialogue and to
display tolerance, which are indispensable
requirements for reconciliation and inter-communal
unity. We condemn any calls for division or for a
reassessment of the Dayton Agreement. We call on all
parties to strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative, EUFOR, NATO and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

We would also note that EUFOR has played a
vital role in improving the security situation. The
international community in its turn must increase the
aid it provides to the parties in order to achieve the five
objectives pursuant to the Dayton Agreement and the
two conditions established by the Peace
Implementation Council. Respect by the parties for
those requirements will facilitate the transition process
whereby the Office of the Special Representative will
replace that of the High Representative. Given current
conditions, the mandate of the High Representative,
which was extended until 31 August 2011, should be
further extended. In that respect, we await the
conclusions of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in July.

The building of Bosnia is first and foremost the
responsibility of the people of Bosnia. We call on the
political parties and actors to reject division and
intolerance so as to construct a common destiny, one
that reflects their deepest aspirations in a united
resolve to live together with newfound unity.

Lastly, I should like to conclude by once again
expressing our support for the work of the High
Representative and for the recommendations he has
made regarding future action.

