Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to recognize your effective stewardship
09-49586
of the Security Council during the present month. I
would also like to acknowledge the leadership shown
by your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, as President of the Council in July.

In a few days it will be the third anniversary of
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006). In these three years the Lebanese Government
has reiterated time and again its commitment to the
implementation of that resolution in its entirety and to
working closely with the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Today, my Government would like, first and
foremost, to thank all members of the Security Council
for their decision to renew UNIFIL's mandate for a
further year, without amendment to its mission, its
rules of engagement or its concept of operations, as per
the request of my Government. I am sure that members
realize how important today's decision is for all
Lebanese, who have been the victims of repeated
Israeli aggression since the 1978 invasion, which led to
Security Council 425 (1978) and the creation of the
first UNIFIL.

Allow me also to take this opportunity to praise
UNIFIL for its remarkable work in close coordination
and cooperation with the Lebanese army, to commend
the wise leadership of General Graziano, the Force
Commander, and to thank all troop-contributing
countries as well as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

Three years after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), however, we need to acknowledge the fact that
the resolution has still not been fully implemented.
That is not only because Israel continues to breach the
Blue Line and to violate Lebanese airspace on a daily
basis, as stated by the Secretary-General in his latest
report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2009/330); it is also because Israel continues to
refuse to withdraw from the northern part of al-Ghajar,
and because a solution has not yet been found to the
issue of the Sheba'a farms and the Kafr Shuba hills,
even on an interim basis, as earlier proposed by the
Lebanese Government. And how can I not mention in
this context the operations of Israeli spy networks,
about which the Council was briefed by Mr. Michael
Williams on 8 July: do they not constitute a serious
Violation of Lebanon's sovereignty and consequently
contribute to undermining Security Council resolution
1701 (2006)?
3

Given all those indisputable facts, I am sure that
Council members have no doubt about the identity of
the party which must be held responsible for
obstructing the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). More disturbing, however, is the fact that
Israeli officials have recently been launching a series
of alarming threats against Lebanon, which raise
serious concerns about Israeli intentions. It is enough
to mention here the words of Israel's Defence Minister,
Ehud Barak, who said on 7 August 2009 that "Israel
did not strike at Lebanon's infrastructure hard enough
during the summer war of 2006" - I stress "Lebanon's
infrastructure" and "did not strike hard enough" -
and who emphasized that a future attack would have
even more destructive effects on Lebanese
infrastructure than the July 2006 war.

Do I need to remind members of the Council that,
during its 2006 war on Lebanon - over and above the
thousands of civilian casualties and the hundreds of
thousands of displaced persons - as far as
infrastructure is concerned, Israel destroyed 91 bridges
and damaged 137 roads, five airport runways,
58 telephone exchanges and dozens of transmission
centres, and 1,514 water network points and dozens of
reservoirs and pumps - in addition to 929 schools,
which were totally or partially destroyed or damaged?
That is not to mention the bombing of the fuel oil tanks
at our geothermal station, which led to the release of
more than 15,000 tons of fuel oil into the
Mediterranean Sea, causing the physical and chemical
contamination of the Lebanese coastline, with serious
implications for human health, biodiversity, fisheries
and the economy of Lebanon.

What Mr. Barak is promising us is only more acts
of that kind: acts which not only are in violation of the
letter and the spirit of resolution 1701 (2006) but run
counter to the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, let alone the rules and principles of
international humanitarian law. The credibility of the
Security Council requires that such threats against my
country also be condemned in the strongest words.

