Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I have listened carefully
to the briefing by Mr. Roed-Larson and the statements
by the members of the Council. As evidenced by the
rapid development of events in recent days and clearly
demonstrated in the briefing and the statements, the
road map is at a critical juncture. Japan is gravely
concerned by this situation because peace in the
Middle East is key to the peace and stability of the
region as a whole, and the road map remains the only
viable way to achieve peace. In order to salvage the
road map from the current crisis, the ongoing vicious
circle of violence and mistrust must be broken without
delay. For that purpose, it is a matter of absolute
necessity for both the Israeli and the Palestinian sides
to restore calm to the situation immediately and to
resume their dialogue and cooperation in accordance
with the road map and, above all, to exercise the
utmost restraint and to exert the maximum effort
possible to bring the violence to a halt.
At this point, I would like to say a word with
respect to the decision announced by the Israeli
Government on 11 September to remove President
Arafat. The removal by force of the President, who has
been elected by the people, will not contribute to the
improvement of the situation but will lead instead to a
further worsening of conditions. Japan strongly
requests that Israel not go forward with that decision. It
is our fervent hope that Israel will fully consider the
consequences of its own actions and proceed with
prudence and caution.

At the same time, Japan recognizes and
understands Israel's concern for the security of its
people. The Palestinian Authority must be resolute in
the battle to stop the violence being perpetrated by the
extremist factions. Japan will continue to urge the
Palestinian side to take action against the extremists
and to strengthen their security apparatus as quickly as
possible. We will continue our efforts to assist them in
that area.

Terrorism cannot be justified for any reason.
Japan reiterates its condemnation of the brutal terrorist
attacks that continue to victimize large numbers of
innocent people.

Japan will continue to support to the fullest extent
possible the efforts by both parties to achieve peace.
We hope that under the leadership of the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Ahmed Qurei, the new cabinet of the
Palestinian Authority will be formed swiftly and will
bring renewed vigour to the efforts being made towards
the successful implementation of the road map. Japan
is committed to continuing its active support of such
undertakings. The international community needs to
assist the new cabinet.

However, let me repeat once again: it is
imperative for both parties to end the vicious circle of
violence and mistrust immediately. Only then can a
true dialogue be initiated, based on mutual trust
between the parties.

