Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the eighth report (S/2019/934) of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We
also wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her detailed briefing; Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of
Belgium, in his capacity as Facilitator, for the excellent
work he has carried on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and Ambassador Olaf Skoog, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for his coordination of the Joint Commission
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

My delegation takes note of the findings of
the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and calls on
Member States, as well as all stakeholders, to comply
with the recommendations related to the nuclear issue,
including arms transfers, travel bans, assets freezes and
ballistic missiles. Concerning the illicit transfer and the
discovery of remnants of arms that may have fuelled
conflicts in the Middle East, cote d'Ivoire is in favour
of the establishment of a consensual investigation
mechanism in order to shed light on all aspects of
those allegations.

Turning specifically to the issue of ballistic
missiles, my country calls on all stakeholders to reach
an agreement on the interpretation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) in accordance with the letter
and spirit of paragraph 3 of annex B. We remain
convinced that many points of contention could be
resolved through the Joint Commission established by
the JPCOA in its annex IV. My delegation also calls for
capacity-building for Member States to enable them to
better master the procurement channel procedures for
the efficient implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Furthermore, with regard to the situation in the
Persian Gulf and in the Strait of Hormuz in particular,
my country calls on the parties to exercise restraint.
We urge all those concerned to refrain from any
action likely to rekindle regional tensions and threaten
navigation in that vital strait for trade.

We note with concern that, despite efforts by
the international community to limit the quantity of
nuclear weapons across the globe, the non-proliferation
architecture - one of the pillars of our collective
security - continues to be undermined. We would
therefore like to reiterate the urgent need for all States
to spare no effort to safeguard international peace and
security, which constitutes the very foundation of many
multilateral frameworks, notably the United Nations
and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), as well as the JCPOA.

Although we are concerned by the latest
developments regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran's
uranium enrichment rates, cote d'Ivoire remains
convinced that the Iranian nuclear issue can be resolved
only within the framework of the JCPOA. We would
therefore like to reaffirm our full support for the
agreement and call for the further implementation of that
text, which was arrived at following long and intense
negotiations. My country welcomes the cooperation by
the Iranian authorities in that regard, as demonstrated
by the excellent verification work carried out by the
International Atomic Energy Agency on the ground
following the conclusion of the JCPOA. In its regular
reports, the Agency highlights the non-diversion of
declared nuclear material and the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities. It also affirms that Iran
continues to apply, on a provisional basis, the Additional
Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement it entered into as
part of its ratification of the NPT.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire calls for the unity of
the Council on the Iranian nuclear issue with a view
to maintaining opportunities for its swift and final
resolution. We call upon all parties to maintain their
level of commitment to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action in order to build confidence and step up
cooperation to that end, while honouring all of their
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). My country
reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful resolution of
conflict and to dialogue as the most effective and lasting
means to settle disputes, no matter how complex.

