Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
welcoming Mr. Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to sincerely congratulate him on the election of his
country as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, an indicator of the trust of the international
community in his country. It will be a pleasure for us to
serve together on the Council next year. We are also
happy to see Mr. Inzko among us once again. I want to
thank him for his leadership, as well as for his report
(S/2009/588*) and his introductory remarks today.

Turkey considers itself historically a part of the
Balkans, and a sovereign, democratic and stable Bosnia
and Herzegovina is, therefore, important to us.
Developments in this country occupy a distinct place
on our foreign policy agenda. We continue to make
every effort to keep Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
right track, as evidenced by our Foreign Minister's
recent visit.

We are glad to see that, since the conflicts of the
19905, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great
progress. We firmly support the aspirations of the
peoples of that country to fully integrate with the Euro-
Atlantic institutions, including NATO, through the
Membership Action Plan, and hope that those
institutions will be forthcoming in embracing Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that such integration will
eliminate any feelings of exclusion, instil confidence in
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure its
future as a strong, stable, secure and whole European
country.

Having said that, we cannot help but agree with
the analysis presented by Mr. Inzko on the current
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country is at
a critical point. While the international community
anticipates ever more steadfast and ambitious steps
towards the consolidation of an effective, stable and
viable State, as foreseen in the Dayton Peace Accords,
what is offered is rather, to paraphrase the High
Representative, nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric and
actions that challenge the sovereignty and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

What we want to see is a common vision and
joint action, not the pursuit of narrow ethnic interests.
In these circumstances, the international community is
also faced with serious challenges. Unless we tackle
that situation in a prudent manner, we may be faced
with more serious problems in the Balkans.

Turkey is a member of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) and feels a
special responsibility towards Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It has been almost two years since the PIC Steering
Board set five objectives and two conditions for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
(OHR) to an enhanced European Union (EU) Special
Representative mission. While there has been
important progress on some issues, there are important
outstanding problems. The overall process is quite slow
and, in certain instances, there have been steps
backwards. This situation is keeping the PIC Steering
Board from concluding that its requirements have been
fulfilled in a satisfactory manner.

Let me emphasize once again that we do not want
the OHR to remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever.
We want Bosnia to take ownership of its own future
and pursue the aspirations of its peoples to become a
part of the Euro-Atlantic structures as soon as possible.
However, it will not be possible to proceed in the OHR
transition before those objectives and conditions have
been met in their entirety. Recently, there have been
again some steps forward, but we would like to be
convinced that those are not tactical but real and
concrete, based on sincere and serious political will.

In that context, let me also underline that we are
firm in our support for the High Representative. We
ask him to continue his efforts. We expect him to make
the decisions that he sees fit and to use the powers
granted to him as needed to enforce those decisions.
We do not agree that the actions of the High
Representative and OHR personnel are unlawful. Such
challenges are certainly not helpful to the international
community's deliberations on the transition of the
OHR.

Turkey welcomes and supports the discussion on
the constitutional reform process initiated by the EU
and the United States. We know that this process is not
easy. The reform package has not been embraced by all
of the founding leaders. We hope that the political
leaders will seriously engage in those efforts, show
commitment and flexibility, and eventually agree on a
workable package that ensures a functional State
structure. It is natural that each of them should have

different expectations of that process. The important
thing is to be able to reach a compromise that
addresses some vital issues and increases the State's
capability to govern.

In that regard, we share the opinion of the
European Commission, reiterated by the High
Representative, that the problem of blockages due to
abuse of entity voting rules need to be addressed and
that a stricter definition of the vital national clause in
the Constitution is necessary. It is true that
constitutional reform is not a part of the 5+2
requirements. At the same time, the second condition
for the closure of OHR is for the PIC Steering Board to
make a positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that success with regard
to constitutional reform will help decrease political
tensions and lead to a general normalization of the
political climate.

Therefore, one cannot deny that any progress in
the reform process will have a positive impact on the
evaluation of whether the 5+2 requirements have been
fulfilled. We are also of the opinion that it would be
best to act prudently to consider the implementation of
constitutional reform in parallel with the
transformation of OHR and to not act in haste so as to
prevent possible administrative gaps.

Let me repeat that Turkey fully supports the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into relevant
Euro-Atlantic structures. We also support and
appreciate the efforts of the EU to assist that country in
taking its rightful place in the European family of
nations and to provide stability through its Police
Mission and peacekeeping force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the EU-led peacekeeping
force is an important part of the EU's comprehensive
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we encourage
the EU to keep a military presence in the country as
long as necessary.

Being fully committed to peace and stability in
Bosnia Herzegovina, Turkey contributes actively to
both EU missions. Turkey also remains ready to assist
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina in any way it
can in achieving their aspirations.

