Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for convening such an
important open debate. We also thank Mr. Martin, ofthe
Security Council Report, for his informative briefing.

Although the working methods are not a substantive
agenda item, they are one of the most important
subjects that the Council has to address, since it is
an awareness and understanding of those methods
that put non-permanent members on an equal footing
with Council members as they carry out their official
duties. It also gives the general membership a better
understanding of the workings of the Council. Today
our work is still governed by the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, which were adopted
in 1946. Although their provisional nature gives the
Council greater flexibility, that flexibility also gives
permanent members a disproportionate advantage over
non-permanent ones. That is why the Security Council,
through the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, should be conducting
dialogue and negotiations aimed at adopting definitive
rules that are in line with the realities and dynamics of
the twenty-first century.

Nevertheless, despite still managing with the
provisional rules of procedure, we have come a long
way since 1993, when we established the Informal
Working Group and embarked on a productive path
of systematizing, codifying and implementing our
working methods. Almost 14 years passed between the
adoption of the first note by the President (S/2004/939)
on working methods and last year's adoption of the note
contained in the annex to document S/2017/507. I would
like to take this opportunity to echo my colleagues in
acknowledging the work of the delegation of Japan
and of Ambassador Koro Bessho in particular, whose
leadership saw the adoption of the largest compendium
to date on Security Council working methods.

Returning to the issue at hand, I note that over the
years, we have been able to systematize many of the
practices that govern our work. We have gone from
an oral tradition, based on common practices, to a
compendium that systematizes much of the Security
Council's work. Among the most significant are the
early election of new members and their participation
as observers in all meetings of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies, beginning on 1 October of the
previous year, until they become full-fledged members
in January. Such practices, now codified in note 507,
ensure that elected members are better prepared
when they assume their responsibilities as members
of the Council. We would also like to highlight the
improvements in the process of electing the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies. Note 507 states that the process
must end no later than 1 October and must include the
participation of all members of the Council, making it
more democratic, just and transparent. Nevertheless,
despite these significant steps forward, there is still
room for improvement. For example, we believe that
at least one informal meeting of the Informal Working
Group should be held during the selection process.

With regard to the subsidiary bodies, we should
mention the Sanctions Committees. Sanctions have
become one of the Organization's most frequently used
tools, and their implementation depends entirely on
the cooperation of all Member States. That is why we
must all develop a better understanding of sanctions if
we are to enhance their effectiveness. We need clear
and systematized rules on the Sanctions Committees'
working methods so that they are more accessible and
transparent. Sanctioned countries must understand the
sanctions mechanism in order to get sanctions lifted.
Nor should sanctions be an end in themselves, which is
why the underlying goals of each Sanctions Committee
must be clear. Periodic reviews must be conducted to
determine whether the sanctions are effective and if
they are hurting local populations.

With regard to the issue of penholders, note 507
outlines key elements that represent a step forward,
such as the idea that any member can be a penholder,
reaffirming that all Council members must be able
to participate in the preparation of documents,
encouraging penholders to ensure that all resolutions
that are not technical rollovers or presidential statements
go through at least one round of informal consultations,
and ensuring that a reasonable period of time is allotted
for all documents so as to give all members the time
needed for analysis and consultations. However,
despite that progress, it is the permanent members
who are the penholders almost exclusively. The level
of participation of elected members in the adoption
of documents continues to be at the penholders'
discretion. The same applies to the amount of time that
is seen as sufficient and reasonable for considering
a document. All of these points still require greater
systematization and codification, and will surely be
debated during the next review of note 507. For the
time being, we must encourage more appointments of
elected members as penholders on specific issues and
we, as elected members, should work to achieve the
effective implementation of what has been agreed.

We are also concerned about efforts to include
items on the Council's agenda that are better suited
to the mandate of other bodies in the United Nations
system, an issue that the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia discussed much more eloquently. Moreover,
the relationship between the Council and other organs
of the system should be reviewed. It is very curious, for
example, that the last time that the Council requested
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice was more than 40 years ago.

Finally, I should mention the structural reforms
that the Council needs. My delegation believes that the
veto is an anti-democratic and anachronistic privilege,
and that the lack of equitable regional representation
in the Council is one of the worst symptoms of how
far behind the times it is. The overrepresentation of the
Group of Western European and other States and the
underrepresentation of Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean and Asia are a case in point. The countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean, along with Africa,
make up almost half of the members of the entire
Organization but only one third of the members of the
Council - none of them permanent and none with a
veto right.

In conclusion, it is essential that we launch reforms
that can lead to a Council that, along with its rules of
procedure, is commensurate with the challenges facing
the international community in the twenty-first century.
