Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde)(interpretation from French): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to express our certainty
that, under your guidance, the Council will be successful
in its work.

Your predecessor, my brother Ambassador Cabral of
Guinea-Bissau, also merits our great thanks for the
effective manner in which he discharged his duties during
the month of September.

In expressing my pleasure at the opportunity
afforded my delegation to participate in this meeting on
the situation in Angola, I should also like to thank you
and, through you, the Security Council for having
organized it.

We would like to express our special appreciation to
the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
which took the initiative of proposing the meeting. That
initiative attests to the growing determination in Africa to
give greater impetus to the search for solutions to the
problems of our continent.

As an African country, and one that has been
especially close to the tragedy of the Angolan people,
which has lasted all-too long, Cape Verde hopes that the
present SADC initiative in the Council will be successful.

Now that the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) is again being
considered, we should like to pay a tribute to the
persistent efforts of all of the parties, in particular those
of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and
the representatives of the three observer States, to ensure
the success of the peace process in Angola.

The success of the peace process in Angola requires
us to help the parties to the conflict - namely the
Government of Angola and UNITA - to restore peace
and achieve true national reconciliation.
 

Considerable success has been achieved, as compared
to the situation that prevailed not too long ago. We
recognize this and are gratified. However, the progress
made has been insufficient and erratic. The process has not
been sustained and the progress made has proved to be
unstable, uneven and, obviously, too slow.

The peace Accords and in particular the Lusaka
Protocol, must be implemented scrupulously and forthwith.
Delays must be compensated for and confidence
reestablished and nurtured between the parties.

With regard to implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
the Secretary-General's report of 4 October 1996 and the
UNAVEM. III briefing of 23 September inform us of an
evident failure on the part of UNIT A, in contrast to the
very positive conduct of the Angolan Government.

We should therefore congratulate the Government of
Angola and encourage it to follow through and to take steps
now to compel UNITA to meet all of its commitments. We
hope that the proposals to that effect that are before the
Security Council will be adopted and implemented.

While we regret the lost opportunity of 2 October
1996 to involve the leader of UNITA in an exercise to
build confidence and clarify perspectives, we hope that an
upcoming meeting between the Head of State of Angola,
His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo Dos Santos, and the
President of UNITA, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, will constitute a
stage - perhaps the decisive stage - towards the final
resolution of the problem and the rapid implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol.

It would be wise to be realistic and, taking account of
past events, endeavour to avoid the worst. Intense efforts by
the political leaders, essential though they may be, cannot
end the suffering of the Angolan people - far from it.
First, the major problem of the demobilization and social
reintegration of more than 100,000 combatants must be
dealt with effectively. Furthermore, the return of refugees
to the country and of displaced persons to their activities
and lands so that they can survive and flourish, are urgent
matters.

Other tragic experiences have taught us that such
matters must be dealt with in timely fashion. Moreover, this
has been acknowledged, and pledges of international
support have been given, notably at the Round Table
Conference held in Brussels in 1995. However, it cannot be
denied that the results have been very disappointing. We
must therefore reject the conditioning of assistance on a
 

complete normalization of the situation on the ground.
That would be mistake with serious consequences.
Financial, technical and material support must always
accompany peace efforts, providing credibility,
encouragement and real incentive.

Southern Africa is not alone in providing assistance
and encouraging international support for the
reconstruction of Angola. The entire African continent is
engaged in this task.

Once again, we would like to thank you, Mr.
President, and express our confidence in the Security
Council's wisdom in its deliberations on the question
before us today.

