Mr. Kolby: Let me start by underlining the fact
that I am speaking in my personal capacity and not on
behalf of the members of the 661 Committee.

During the past two years, the volume of work of
the Committee has continued to increase. The
Committee has dealt with a wide range of issues of a
complex and diverse nature. Due to the complexity of
the issues on the agenda, the meetings of the 661
Committee have often been marked by frank discussion
and even controversies. We have not been able to
achieve results on all issues, but we have been able to
handle the work, I believe, to the benefit of the Iraqi
people, while implementing loyally the different
resolutions of the Council.

The Committee has attached high priority to the
processing of contracts submitted under the oil-for-
food programme. Much of the Committee's attention
has been focused on the question of holds on contracts,
and the Committee has completed its series of informal
meetings on sectorial activities, with presentations by
the United Nations agencies and programmes
concerned.

Earlier this year, the Security Council put into
operation the Goods Review List and a new set of
procedures, thereby easing the flow of humanitarian
goods into Iraq. This was a milestone during my tenure
as Chairman, and I would like to pay tribute to the
members of the Council who worked so hard to make it
possible to adopt resolution 1409 (2002).

The Office of the Iraq Programme, the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy

Agency have ensured a smooth transition to the revised
procedures on schedule, and I would like to pay tribute
to them as well.
The implementation of the Goods Review List
and its procedures has brought about much-needed
improvement in the flow of goods into Iraq. However,
the benefits have, to some extent, been affected by a
shortfall in the funding for the humanitarian
programme. The funding shortfall has been of great
concern to the Committee. The question of maximizing
revenues for the humanitarian programme has been
extensively discussed in the 661 Committee.

A great deal of time has also been devoted to
discussing reported violations of the sanctions, as well
as to humanitarian exemptions under resolution 661,
passenger shipping services and flights to Iraq, and
application of Article 50 of the Charter. For further
details on the work of the Committee in this regard, I
would like to draw the Council's attention to the
various reports submitted to the Council by the
Committee.

Since 1 January 2001, the Committee has held 33
formal meetings. As Chairman, I have given oral
briefings to interested missions and to the press about
the work of the Committee after each formal meeting.
The Committee has also held frequent informal
consultations at the expert level.

As the Secretary-General said in his report to the
Council dated 12 November, the humanitarian
Programme in Iraq was not intended to be a substitute
for normal economic activity. As long as the sanctions
remain in force, there is no alternative to the
Programme for addressing the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Despite its shortcomings, the Programme has
made, and continues to make, a major difference in the
lives of ordinary Iraqis.

Let me conclude by extending my deep gratitude
to the Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq
Programme, Mr. Benon Sevan, and his staff and to the
Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Jingzhang Wan, and
others in the Security Council Subsidiary Organs
Branch. Their support and guidance has been
invaluable.

