Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis for his
update to the Council and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his remarks. I
will focus today on four areas: elections, security,
engagement with the Government of Afghanistan and
counter-narcotics.

Since the Council last met to discuss Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.7139) we have seen some extraordinary
moments of courage from the Afghan people. In April
and again earlier this month, they showed the world
their desire to have a say in their country's future by
turning out to vote in the presidential elections. They
voted for peace, as Ambassador Tanin said. That is a
huge achievement.

As the electoral process enters the final stages,
it is essential that all stakeholders act in the interest
of stability and national unity. Special Representative
Kubis has underlined the need to find a way forward.
We urge both presidential candidates and their teams
to demonstrate the same patience and respect with the
electoral authorities that they did during the first round.

At this critical time in the process, both candidates
need to work with the Independent Election Commission
and Independent Electoral Complaints Commission and
their established legal mechanisms for investigating
and adjudicating complaints, as the representative
of Australia and others have said. We also urge the
electoral institutions to conduct their investigations
thoroughly and transparently.

The fighting season in Afghanistan is under way,
and security is a challenge for all concerned. Over the
past three months, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/420) highlights, a high number ofincidents have
been reported. Innocent civilians have been targeted
and killed. Those attacks must be strongly condemned.

We pay tribute to the courage and sacrifice of
the security forces operating in Afghanistan at this
challenging time. Their dedication has allowed the
Government of Afghanistan to build the foundations
for a stable and democratic country. In particular, we
recognize the contributions of the Afghan National
Security Forces. Their security plans, implemented as a
backdrop to insurgent attempts to disrupt the elections,
were a testament to both their confidence and their
capability. The support of NATO and the international
community will be vital to ensuring that security in
Afghanistan lasts. The NATO Summit to be hosted by
the United Kingdom later in 2014 will be an opportunity
to underline the establishment of NATO's military,
financial and political support to Afghanistan beyond
2014 and to mark the achievements of the International
Security Assistance Force. Regional initiatives such
as the Istanbul Process, for which China will host the
next meeting in Tianjin at the end of August 2014, will
continue to play a vital role.

Once a new President and his team are in place in
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom will work in close
cooperation with partners on the Council and the wider
international community to pursue shared aspirations.
Together we must set out a constructive approach that
allows the new Afghan President and his team the
space to formulate their own vision for the future while
pressing ahead on the key reforms and priorities we
know must happen quickly.

For the United Kingdom, the signing of the United
States-Afghan bilateral security agreement and the
NATO status-of-forces agreement is key. Subject to
those agreements, the Resolute Support mission will
be a vital part of NATO's engagement in Afghanistan
beyond 2014. President Obama's announcement of the
United States contribution, which the representative of
the United States just referred to a moment ago, is a
significant step forward.

We also want to signal the importance of a peace
process and engagement with key regional partners on
how best to sustain the progress made in the region. On
the economy, steps to shore up longer-term confidence in
Afghanistan's economic future will be vital, including
by adopting and implementing important economic
legislation. The support of the Council and the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will be essential in that effort, both in signalling our
expectations and delivering key assistance on the
ground.

Finally, as Mr. Fedotov has outlined to the Council,
the challenge posed by drugs to Afghanistan and the
wider region is serious. The United Kingdom recognizes
the importance of tackling the drug trade and the
significant challenges that remain. That is a complex
problem, which requires a comprehensive approach
combining tougher law enforcement, economic
development initiatives and the promotion of alternative
livelihoods. The United Kingdom will continue to work
with the United Nations and international partners to
support the Afghan Government in that effort.

For all the challenges that lie ahead, we see many
reasons to be hopeful in Afghanistan. The United
Kingdom will continue to play a strong and committed
role in supporting the Government of Afghanistan in
building a more peaceful and prosperous future for all
Afghans.

