I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the situation in Abyei (S/2020/308). In his report, dated 16 April 2020, the Secretary-General draws attention to the need for the Sudan and South Sudan to build positive momentum in their bilateral relations in order to make progress towards resolving the border dispute between them over Abyei. In that regard, the Niger welcomes the political progress made in both countries, including the peacebuilding process under way in the Sudan and the formation of a Transitional Government of National Unity in South Sudan. Those developments are conducive to peace in Abyei. Congratulations are due to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), on the one hand for the efforts made in the prevention of inter- community conflicts, particularly through the implementation of quick-impact projects to support the local population, and on the other hand for the efforts it has kindly made to organize several rounds of peace conferences in the Abyei region - conferences that brought together the traditional chiefs of the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya. My country strongly condemns the tragic events that took place in the Kolom region on 19 and 22 January and calls on the parties to jointly investigate those events and take measures to bring the perpetrators to justice. That would promote a rapprochement between the two warring communities. We call on the parties to continue the process of border demarcation, focusing on bilateral political consultations leading to the establishment of a political administration. We also call on them to consider meetings with both the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to facilitate and render effective the border demarcation process within the framework of the Joint Border Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. In addition, we support the appointment of a civilian head for UNISFA and call on the Abyei partners to opt for a compromise solution in the border demarcation process. In conclusion, my country supports the extension of the mandate of UNISFA for six months and commends the mission for the preventive measures implemented in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Given that culture of performance, the Niger is pleased to note that the mission has appointed a COVID-19 coordinator, assisted by a working group, not only to protect personnel but also, above all, to ensure that its activities continue unabated for the greater good of the people of Abyei.
