Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation, like others that spoke before
it, would like to thank the briefers, Mr. Sidikou and
Mr. Zerihoun, for their very constructive presentations.
We also thank France for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting, which is evidence of its tireless
commitment to this issue following its co-leadership,
with Angola, of the visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Luanda. The presidential statement
that we have just adopted (S/PRST/2016/18) is a further
demonstration of the leadership of those two countries.
We are pleased to see the Council devote particular
attention to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This is justified given the vital national
and regional importance of the country's stability given
the country's strategic position in the Great Lakes
region, a region that has been beset for years now by
complex security and political crises. During our visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we were
able to see the complex realities on the ground, which
remain characterized by various trends despite the
clear progress represented by the political agreement
of 18 October emanating from the political dialogue
facilitated by the African Union.

In our opitnio, this agreement remains a good
basis for our work, but needs to be consolidated
by the commitment of the whole of the range of
common stakeholders and also international partners
support. That is why my delegation urges the Security
Council to support the efforts of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo aimed at bringing
together the positions of the political actors on the
electoral process, the mechanisms for managing the
transition and measures for re-establishing trust. And
while we welcome Angola's efforts as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
we also encourage the African Union and the regional
mechanisms and frameworks to continue to work for a
peaceful political process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo conducive to free, fair, credible, inclusive,
transparent and peaceful presidential elections.

That goal is still attainable for the Congolese people,
their political actors and the international community.
The only issue that matters is enabling the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to attain it. In our view, for the
Security Council to do that, as it did during our visit
there, it must with one voice encourage the country's
political actors, civil society and its people as a whole,
first, to explore further the inexhaustible possibilities of
dialogue with, on the one hand, a formal, unequivocal
commitment to peace and respect for human and civil
rights and to preserving the people's life and property
and ensuring public order and stability; and, on the other
hand, to demonstrating a genuine willingness to seek
compromise and reinforcing a spirit of mutual trust.

Secondly, the Council should urge the political
actors, civil society and people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to engage in a peaceful, open
and inclusive political process, which is still the only
path that can lead to the calm, credible elections that
we all desire. Clearly, we have to consider the financial
challenge that the political process presents and that
is crucial to its predictability. In this atmosphere of
uncertainty, we must also act quickly or run the risk
of seeing the economic and humanitarian situation
deteriorate, exacerbate tensions and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful political process. Lastly, the
continued worrying situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo should absolutely not become a
distraction from the essential task of focusing on the
political process.

In this context, the challenge for the United
Nations generally, and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in particular, is to maintain its
level of engagement in the East regarding the protection
of civilians and the fight against the armed groups in
support of the Congolese security forces' actions. To
that end, we believe it vital that the Mission's forces be
reconfigured with the aim of dealing with the potential
risk presented by the country's overall political and
security situation in a very delicate electoral context.
In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like to
assure MONUSCO - which we warmly commend
for its extraordinary efforts, considering the size and
complexity of the problems it is dealing with and
which, by the way, we were able to see for ourselves
during our visit - that it has the continued support of
the Senegalese delegation and of Senegal itself, which,
as the Council knows, is a troop contributor to this
important Mission.

