Lieutenant General Gaye (spoke in French):
The impact of the conditional support policy on the
security and protection of civilians is positive, first in
terms of the Congolese military authorities' awareness
of protection issues. Secondly, that policy has obliged
us in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), now the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
to develop procedures - primarily to monitor
activities of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) within the dictates
of conditional support policy. But it is clear that by
reducing our support to the FARDC, as required by the
conditional support policy, we have thus created
conditions where more FARDC forces may live off of
the population. There has been a growing awareness of
human rights issues and respect for international
humanitarian law, but a reduction in the number of
battalions supported and thus an increased risk that
FARDC forces will seek to live off the population.
(spoke in English)

Concerning technology assets for providing
additional intelligence to the force commanders, I think
that all of the force commanders will welcome this
important step. The issue will be to examine its cost-
effectiveness and political implications, notably as
concerns the relations between the force and the host
country, and, last but not least, to look at this from a
military perspective. Will we focus on tactical
intelligence, operational intelligence or strategic
intelligence? But there is definitely a need, particularly
when operating under Chapter VII, to provide the force
with intelligence assets. That will definitely help
improve the protection of the population.

Concerning cooperation among neighbouring
missions, that has already been done. There is a
framework for meetings among MONUC, the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT), the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). Several meetings have already been held in
Entebbe and in the various missions. Unfortunately,
because of visa issues, we did not succeed in holding a
meeting in the Sudan or one in MINURCAT. But
definitely, at the Force Commander level and also at
the level of Head of Mission, there is a framework for
regional coordination.

At the tactical level, MONUSCO's intent is to set
up a joint operations centre in Dungu among the
FARDC - that is the Congolese military -
MONUSCO and the Uganda People's Defence Forces
(UPDF), because UPDF is currently operating in the
four countries I have just named - Uganda, Southern
Sudan, Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - so their participation will be
part of the coordination.

