Today is a good day for the Security Council. We have collectively answered the Sudan's call to support its political transition from an authoritarian regime to an inclusive and representative government. But more importantly, we hope that this day marks the beginning of even stronger and more coherent support by the United Nations for the Sudan's transition - support that delivers concrete benefits and helps to fulfil the aspirations of the Sudanese people for a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous future. The new United Nations Mission that the Security Council has established today (resolution 2524 (2020)) offers a broad support package, based on the requests of the Government of the Sudan. The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) will work to achieve four strategic objectives: political transition, democratic governance and protection, and promotion of human rights; peace processes and implementation of future peace agreements; peacebuilding, civilian protection and the rule of law, in particular in Darfur and the Two Areas; and mobilization of economic and development assistance and coordination of humanitarian assistance. Let us be realistic - all of these tasks are enormous, and the United Nations Mission cannot deliver on those objectives alone. It is an assistance mission. The Sudanese Government and all Sudanese stakeholders need to work together. The United Nations should and will be there to support, advise and assist. There are some areas where we will need to have a broader international support package. This is true in the area of economic recovery and development, which is why Germany is partnering with the Sudan, the European Union and the United Nations to host a virtual high-level partnership conference on 25 June from Berlin. With this conference we want to send a strong signal of joint support for a successful democratic transition. In addition, we aim at mobilizing financial resources from international partners to assist the urgently required reform process in the Sudan. Let us also be frank about some other areas where the Mission will have to work in close coordination and complementarity with others, namely, peacebuilding, strengthening accountability and rule of law institutions, and protecting human rights, especially in the conflict-affected regions of the Sudan. Although UNITAMS has a clear mandate for these tasks, it is not a peacekeeping operation, and as much as Germany supports a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, concerns about the protection of civilians in Darfur, which merit a peacekeeping response, remain. This is why it is important that the Council has also extended the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until the end of this year (resolution 2525 (2020)) and has asked the United Nations and the African Union to provide the Council with an analysis of the situation on the ground before any decision on the future of UNAMID is made. Today is also a good day because it ushers in a new era of partnerships - in particular a partnership between the new Sudan and the Security Council - which should be built on trust and not on confrontation, as was sometimes the case with the former regime. We value the open and frank discussion with our partners in the Sudan about this new mandate. Partnership is also relevant when it comes to the role of the African Union. Germany very much welcomes the intention of the African Union to continue to assist the Sudan on its path of political transition. We would like to thank all partners in the Council for their support during negotiations that have led to the unanimous adoption of the two resolutions. It would be remiss of me not to thank our fellow penholder, the United Kingdom, for the truly outstanding collaboration we had throughout the long months of preparing this mandate, and we offer a special thanks to the United Kingdom's team in New York.
