Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, I would like to
thank Mr. Kalomoh for his briefing. I would also like
to associate myself with the statement to be made later
in this discussion by the European Union presidency.

The informative report of the Secretary-General
underscores the fact that despite encouraging
developments, the Central African region is still
affected by crises and conflicts. We share the
Secretary-General's analysis that a subregional
approach offers the best chance for a comprehensive
strategy that takes into account the complex and
diverse root causes of the conflicts. The peace
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi will, hopefully, have an impact on regional
stabilization, despite the many challenges that need to
be met. In that respect, we regret that the
multidisciplinary assessment mission to the Central
African subregion was unable to Visit the Central
African Republic. Despite some steps in the right
direction, the situation there remains fragile and
requires the Security Council's continued attention.

The subregional approach, in our View, means,
first and foremost, strengthening existing subregional
mechanisms. Let me highlight that with two examples.
The first is the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), which enjoys the broadest
membership of countries in the subregion and should
therefore be in an ideal position to develop regional
strategies. Like other subregional organizations
however, ECCAS suffers from inadequate capacities.
Another example is the lack of effective regional
capacities for conflict resolution in the Great Lakes
region. The United Nations, the African Union and
individual African countries play an important role in
mediating between parties to conflicts and in
peacekeeping in the Great Lakes region mainly because
there are no adequate subregional structures in place.

One of the outcomes of the Great Lakes region
conference will be programmes and action plans for
regional cooperation and development. We believe that
such initiatives should also aim at strengthening
existing mechanisms and organizations and at
furthering cooperation between them.

It is for the countries in the Central African
subregion itself to establish clear guidelines and to
avoid duplication of efforts. A clear division of labour
and responsibilities between the regional organizations,
as well as between them and the African Union, would
be most useful. Also cooperation between the
subregional organizations and the United Nations
would undoubtedly benefit from such streamlining
efforts.

Likewise, the United Nations itself must avoid
duplication of mechanisms. It is difficult to see how a
mandate for an additional special envoy for Central
Africa could avoid overlapping with the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, which the Security Council has
just renewed for another year. We would therefore
prefer for the United Nations missions in the Central
African subregion to identify possible areas of
cooperation aimed at effectively addressing cross-
cutting issues. Cross-cutting issues are trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, the proliferation of
armed groups and programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and the successful reintegration of
former combatants into regular armies or civilian life.
These are all key issues for most of the countries
emerging from conflict.

The Multicountry Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme (MDRP) is an initiative to
address that multifaceted problem. Germany's
contribution to the programme amounts to 30 million
euros, which is roughly $35 million.
MDRP has substantial means at its disposal and
stands ready to fund projects in addition to the quick
impact projects for demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers that have already been put into place.

But while MDRP follows a pragmatic and
flexible approach, national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are a
prerequisite. We urge the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi to establish their national
programmes. In this respect, it is an encouraging sign
that the transitional Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has formed a technical
coordination and planning committee to this end.

