Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The text that we shall be adopting today
represents an important step in the right direction. Before
the Secretary-General's important visit to Baghdad it was
essential for us to be able to express our support for his
report and his recommendations for improving the
arrangements provided for in resolution 986 (1995).

Four basic principles emerge from this draft
resolution. The oil quota has been raised to the highest
level of Iraqi pre-war production. Iraq, therefore, will be
able to export its main resource without restrictions.

The utilization of funds has been rebalanced to the
advantage of infrastructure. This was the desire expressed
by United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations in the field. After seven years of embargo,
the humanitarian situation in Iraq can no longer be treated
like a natural disaster: sending medicine and food is not
enough. Iraq must be able to have a minimum of
agricultural production; the population must have drinking
water; and children must be able to go to school.

The important role of the electricity sector is being
recognized. Without electricity there are no hospitals
worthy of the name; vaccines cannot be preserved; and
healthy living conditions cannot be maintained. We await
with great interest the report of the Secretary-General on
this sector and on the means of financing that he may
propose to us.

The last principle is that consideration of the means
necessary for Iraq to achieve its oil quota has begun. A
report from a group of experts is being requested
promptly. The Council expresses its readiness to
implement their recommendations and to authorize the
sanctions Committee to approve the contracts pertaining
to the spare parts needed to maintain oil pipelines and oil
wells.

This text is only one stage. Its implementation will
require the conclusion of arrangements between the
Secretary-General and the Iraqi Government. Those
arrangements must be in keeping with the spirit of the
memorandum of understanding reached between Iraq and
the Secretary-General in 1996. The sovereignty of Iraq

 

must be preserved, and the temporary nature of the
distribution plan should be underlined. The discussions
between the Iraqis and the Secretary-General will provide
an opportunity to spell out several of these
recommendations more clearly, to test their feasibility. They
will enable us to review priorities. It will then be for the
Iraqis to present a distribution plan before this draft
resolution can enter into force.
This draft resolution is only one stage. Others must
follow. The Council has not taken a decision on the means
to be granted to Iraq to achieve its quota. It has stated its
position only on the principle and on the basis of a report.

We would have wished the text to go farther at this
point. This was not possible. We shall therefore have to get
back to work. Everyone knows that, in the view of
international experts and of the principal country concerned,
Iraq, that country cannot have exports worth more than $4
billion every six months. Thus, as soon as the report is
submitted, the Council must enable Iraq to achieve its
quota. Otherwise, today's exercise will have been in vain
and in retrospect will appear more political and less
realistic.

The Council will soon have to take a position on the
Secretary-General's report on the electricity sector, which,
according to the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the United Nations Development
Programme, plays a key role in stabilizing the situation. If
external financing from international donors cannot be
found, it will then be necessary to reintroduce the electricity
sector, which is modestly addressed in the provisions to be
adopted today, into the distribution plan.

I believe it is necessary to bear in mind how
catastrophic the humanitarian situation is in Iraq. I would
recall that, according to information provided by the World
Health Organization and UNICEF, infant mortality rose
from 24 per thousand in 1990 to 168 per thousand in 1996.
That is a sevenfold increase. Monthly deaths of children
under the age of five tripled, from 1,500 to 4,500, in 1996.
The mortality rate has tripled since 1990 among people
over the age of 50. I shall stop there.

The decision we are to take today is therefore
important; however, only the lifting of the embargo, which
in turn depends upon the full implementation of paragraph
22 of Security Council resolution 687 (1991) will truly
make it possible to resolve the present humanitarian
situation. Iraq's cooperation with the Special Commission
and, in the immediate term, the success of the Secretary-
General's mission in this regard are essential.

