Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the African Union
(AU) Commission, allow me to warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to thank you for convening this very important
debate on strengthening multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations.

It is indeed a very commendable initiative of your
delegation to convene this discussion at a time of
unprecedented and serious threats to the international
multilateral order. In that regard, the rising tide of
nationalism and exclusionist tendencies, the emerging
pattern of unilateral actions, as well as the deepening
rifts in international relations, have already had serious
implications for the fulfilment of existing norms and
established practices of international law. Furthermore,
the declining commitment towards the United Nations
and its different agencies, including when it comes
to fulfilling incumbent financial obligations, is very
indicative of the current turmoil that the international
multilateral order is going through.

In the face ofthat crisis, the international community
must voice its concerns and reiterate its commitment
to a rules-based system, which remains the best and
safest way to enhance cooperation and address global
issues of peace and security. It is only through strong
multilateral institutions that we can collectively tackle
the global challenges we are currently facing, transcend
all sorts of differences among our respective societies
and achieve the greatest possible benefits for all.

The African Union, which is deeply committed
to multilateralism and respect for international law,
will spare no effort to overcome the current crisis and
preserve the multilateral system. Africa has always
supported existing international norms and the genuine
process of the codification and progressive development
of international law to promote friendly relations
between Member States and the peaceful settlement
of disputes and conflicts. On that note, permit me to
underline the following key points.

First, the importance of strengthening the
Organization's leading role in coordinating international
responses to the world's most pressing challenges cannot
be overemphasized. The past 70 years since the creation
of the United Nations have witnessed substantial gains
that should be recognized and defended. We need to
reaffirm the validity of the Charter of the United
Nations and strengthen our collective commitment to
observing its provisions, in particular when it comes to
the use of force in international relations.

Secondly, we ought to acknowledge the pressing
need for reforms. In that context, the African Union
welcomes the ongoing reforms that have been initiated
by the Secretary-General to enhance the performance
of the United Nations in the most visible areas of
action. In addition to that, every effort should be made
to conclude the long-stalled Security Council reform
process to better reflect the geopolitical realities of
our present world and correct the historical injustice
done to the African continent. We strongly believe that
adequate representation of an entire continent, to which
the Council devotes approximately 70 per cent of its
work, is fundamental to ensuring the legitimacy of the
Council's decisions.

Thirdly, The African Union's commitment to
multilateralism is also illustrated by its growing
strategic partnership with the United Nations. I
welcome the progress achieved so far, including the
conclusion of two landmark frameworks for enhanced
AU-United Nations partnerships in peace and security
and sustainable development, respectively. We have
also embarked on the work to amplify that partnership
through broader arrangements comprising other
actors, including the European Union, the League
of Arab States, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Undoubtedly, multilateralism is also
about building strategic partnerships based on mutual
respect, solidarity and adherence to the principle of
comparative advantage.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the African
Union's commitment to advancing multilateral
cooperation and to working constructively with its
partners towards addressing the current threats to
peace and security in line with its long-standing
policy of conflict prevention, mediation and enhanced
peace support operations. The ongoing reform process
of our Union will hopefully chart the path that will
enable us to transcend our weaknesses and promote
efficient and effective mechanisms and tools to carry
out the ambitious agenda of achieving a peaceful and
prosperous Africa.

