Mr. Moncada Colindres (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Nicaraguans love peace. We comprehensively
strengthen security and promote and champion human
rights. The Government and the people of Nicaragua
defend the principles of independence, sovereignty
and self-determination of peoples, as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations. As such, we call for
and demand an end to all interventionist policies that
violate international law. There is consensus in the
Security Council that Nicaragua does not represent
a threat to international peace and security. That
is why its inclusion on the agenda of this meeting is
clear interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua
and a violation of the United Nations Charter and
international law.

The reality, as recognized by the international
community, including United Nations organs and
agencies, is that our country has been a factor for
regional stability, peace and security - with strong
positive indicators of economic, political and social
development, poverty reduction, gender equality and
citizen security. It has been an example and a protective
barrier in the fight against transnational organized
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking activity in
the region.

According to the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean, Nicaragua has shown
an average sustained economic growth of 5.2 per cent
in recent years, which has allowed it to almost double
its gross domestic product. One of the most significant
advances in Nicaragua is a sustained reduction of
poverty. General poverty and extreme poverty at the
national level have been halved in recent years, as
recognized by various international organizations.

Nicaragua is party to human rights agreements and
conventions and honours its commitments. The Council
is not the appropriate body to address this issue. The
topic of human rights should be discussed through
constructive, non-confrontational and non-politicized
dialogue, based on the principles of universality,
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity. Our people
will continue to champion the peace, stability, security
and progress that we have been building.

The people of Nicaragua has a right to live and
progress in peace. It has the right to continue to make
progress in eradicating poverty and to pursue its quest,
in sovereignty and dignity, for sustainable development
and a decent life for our people, without exclusion of
any kind, in order to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Our Government and people reaffirm their deep
commitment to peace and therefore promote real
dialogue among Nicaraguans. That is the path; that
is the route that we are taking and the most effective
dialogue there can be - dialogue within our people and
within our family. That is the dialogue that the people
ofNicaragua have built, and we will continue to ensure
the peace, stability and progress of our country.

We thank the States members of the Security
Council and our brother States that have recognized
that Nicaragua poses no threat to international peace
and security and that it does not deserve being included
on the Council's agenda. That solidarity is consistent
with the reality of our country and with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

We recall that the United States was condemned
by the International Court of Justice in The Hague in
1986 for military activities, paramilitaries activities
and acts of terrorism against Nicaragua. The people of
Nicaragua and the international community waits for
the United States to fulfil the terms of its conviction
by compensating Nicaragua and ceasing all acts of
aggression and interference. That is how the United
States can respect the human rights of the people
of Nicaragua.

