The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, document S/ 1998/59.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the successful
completion of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), as described in the
report of the Secretary-General of 22 January 1998
(5/1998/59). The experience of this multifunctional
operation may be useful for similar situations in the
future.

"The Security Council commends the
commitment shown by the Government of the
Republic of Croatia to the implementation of its
comprehensive programme of national reconciliation,
and stresses the need for continued progress in this
regard. The Council is also encouraged by signs of
increasing participation in Croatian political life by
the region's ethnic Serb citizens, and underlines the
importance of continued efforts by the Government
of the Republic of Croatia to ensure full
participation by the Serb minority in the political life
of the country, including through urgent funding of
the Joint Council of Municipalities.

"The Security Council notes that, despite the
positive conclusion of UNTAES and the efforts of
the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
including its request for the establishment of the
civilian police support group, much remains to be
done. The Government of the Republic of Croatia
remains responsible for the rights and safety of
members of all ethnic groups within the Republic of
Croatia and bound by its obligations and
commitments under the Basic Agreement on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (S/l995/951) and other international
agreements. In this regard, the Council calls upon
the Government of the Republic of Croatia to
intensify its efforts to promote full reintegration of
the region, in particular to resolve property issues
and other problems which are hindering the return of
refugees and displaced persons, to protect human
rights, including by taking action against harassment,
to address in full uncertainties about the
implementation of the Amnesty Law and to take
measures to improve public confidence in the
Croatian police.

"In this context, the Security Council
emphasizes the key role of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
throughout the Republic of Croatia, including in the
Danubian region. The Council strongly supports the
closest possible cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, in particular between the
OSCE mission and the support group and other
United Nations offices and agencies in the Republic
of Croatia as envisaged by the Secretary-General,
and, to that end, encourages the support group and
the OSCE mission to keep each other fully
informed.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the
dedicated men and women of UNTAES, and. in
particular, expresses its appreciation to the Transitional
Administrators and the Force Commanders for their
leadership of the UNTAES mission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.50 pm.

