Mr. Laassel (Spoke in French): I would like
first to thank congratulate you, Madam, on Nigeria's
accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month, and to thank you for the invitation extended to
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Morocco and Chairman of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Ambassador Hilale has asked me to
convey his regrets for not being able to attend today's
briefing. I am honoured to represent him this morning
and to express, on behalf of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
strong commitment of its members to continuing to
work closely with the Council.

I also take this opportunity to greet the Special
Representative of the Secretary General in the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Babacar
Gaye. I convey the warm regards of Ambassador
Omar Hilale, who thanks him once more for his warm
welcome to Bangui at his most recent visit. We have
followed with interest Mr. Gaye's briefing, which
highlights the issues and challenges facing the Central
African Republic at a crucial moment for its future and
its history.

As is pointed out in the report of the Chairman
of the configuration following his visit to Bangui,
which has been transmitted to Council members, the
current period is critical for the country's future. All
interlocutors expressed their desire to move on and are
aware of the opportunity that is offered to them through
the support of the international community. It is time
for the Central African Republic to enjoy its many
treasures. It is time to silence the guns forever and yo
intensify efforts to build a strong and stable State, with
institutions capable of meeting the basic needs of all its
citizens.

The Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission welcomes the significant
progress that has been made in recent months thanks
to the combined efforts of the transitional authorities,
MINUSCA and the United Nations Development
Programme. Among these improvements, we note the
launch of the electoral process and the redeployment
of State authority. The organization of the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation was also a crucial
step in the political transition process. I pay tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa, Mr. Bathily, for his role in the success
that event. In that regard, we stress the importance
for all active forces of the nation to demonstrate their
continued and absolute commitment to resuming the
path towards reconciliation and peace, in accordance
with the agreements signed at the conclusion of the
Forum.

As the country prepares to vote in a constitutional
referendum and national elections, all political actors
and civil society must ensure that these deadlines are
met place in a free and inclusive manner and in a secure
environment. All these conditions are sine qua non for
the credibility and legitimacy of the process, and so
that the State in all its forms can assert its authority to
the people.

In that regard, the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
solemnly calls on all Central African political actors
to respect the Transitional Charter. Indeed, the country
must take this opportunity to move forward and find
solutions to all its afflictions. It is time to set aside
differences that tear at the social fabric, and to build
the future on a sound basis, characterized by trust and
cooperation. The agreements signed at the Bangui
Forum, including the Republican pact for peace and
the agreement on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR), allow us to see
more clearly the future and give impetus towards the
conclusion of the transitional period.

However, we are all aware that the success of the
transition is not an end in itself. We must now start
thinking about how to identify ways to support the new
authorities so that they can meet the challenges that will
following this period. In a country where more than
half of the population still depends on international
humanitarian aid and Where the security situation has
been slow to stabilize, it is unfortunately still difficult
to have a clear picture of the short term.

Once the transition is complete, the configuration is
committed to supporting the new national authorities in
the implementation of a peacebuilding strategy for the
medium and long terms, in close cooperation with all
international partners of the Central African Republic.
Prior to that, it is essential that the preliminary steps be
completed successfully. As highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, programmes
related to the DDRR phase will require significant
funding. Also, no meaningful development can be
achieved while the humanitarian and refugee situation
remains precarious and underfunded. The support
of the international community remains essential to
overcome all those challenges.

On his return from Bangui, the Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration began an awareness-
raising campaign in New York, mainly about the deficit
in the budget for the elections. In collaboration with
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
partners, the configuration held a meeting to raise
awareness among the members of the configuration
on this matter. The Chair also invited several Member
States not members of the configuration, given their
interest in the issue. To date, nearly $10 million is still
needed to finance the budget for the elections. We hope
that new donations will be announced in the coming
days to ensure that elections can be held in the required
conditions of transparency, inclusiveness and safety.

As we heard earlier, the re-establishment of the

judiciary system and the setting up of the Special
Criminal Court remain a priority for the country.
The problem of impunity has been part of all of the
meetings that the Chair of the configuration has held
with the representatives of civil society. In that regard,
following the participation of the Chair in a meeting
with the Minister of Justice organized by the Permanent
Mission of the Central African Republic on 27 May, it
was decided to establish a reference group on the rule of
law and the Special Criminal Court. The group, which
is a flexible and informal arrangement, is intended to
inform all interested delegations on the progress in
strengthening the rule of law and on the preparations
for the establishment of the Special Criminal Court.

I take this opportunity to welcome the holding
of the eighth meeting of the International Contact
Group, which took place on 27 July at Addis Ababa. I
also welcome the meeting's conclusions, including on
refugee voting and respect for the ineligibility clause.

We would like to pay tribute to the countries and
leaders of the region for their commitment and support,
especially to His Excellency President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, international Nediator for the Central African
crisis, as well as to Gabon, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Chad, which are hosting more 400,000
thousands refugees from the Central African Republic.
The mobilization of the Economic Community of
Central African States has been crucial in ensuring the
region's ongoing role, which is essentialto supporting
the country. I must also pay tribute to the tireless efforts
of Mr. Gaye and his team, who work assiduously for
the return of peace and stability in the Central African
Republic.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the full readiness
of the configuration to continue working closely with
MINUSCA, the different parts of the Secretariat, the
transitional authorities and all national and international
partners of the Central African Republic in order to get
the country on the road to peace and stability, for the
benefit of all Central Africans.

