Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): With the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH)
coming to a successful conclusion, we would like to
commend the men and women of UNSMIH for their

 

outstanding service in the cause of peace and democracy in
Haiti and of the well-being of the Haitian people. We are
also grateful to the countries which have contributed troops
and civilian personnel to the Mission.

Since its establishment in June of last year, UNSMIH
has played a significant role in helping the Government and
the people of Haiti achieve considerable progress in their
quest for democracy and lasting stability. It is
disappointing, however, to note that progress has not been
sufficient to warrant the termination of the United Nations
presence at this stage. The overall situation in Haiti still
remains precarious and fragile, as shown by ongoing
political disturbances, social unrest and a surge of crime,
compounded by the country's economic plight. In the light
of these dire circumstances, we are deeply concerned that
the Haitian National Police is not yet fully prepared to cope
on its own with the daunting security challenges currently
facing Haiti. The young police force still has to grapple
with many problems in crucial areas, including lack of
leadership, poor logistics and an insufficient level of
specialization.

Korea has consistently held the View that the
establishment of a full-fledged Haitian National Police
Force is the keystone of peace and security in Haiti. It is
with this conviction that my Government has already
contributed $200,000 to the voluntary fund established by
resolution 975 (1995) to support the Haitian National
Police. My Government is considering further ways of
assisting the Haitian police, on a bilateral basis, in the area
of police equipment, with a View to enhancing the
operational capability of the young police force at this
critical juncture.

In View of the current situation in Haiti, so ably
described today by the representative of Haiti, we cannot
but conclude that the primary objective of UNSMIH's
mandate has not yet been fully accomplished, and that
sustained international assistance remains essential. For
these reasons, and also taking due note of the request of the
Haitian Government and the wishes of the countries of the
region, we support the establishment of a United Nations
Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH), as recommended
by the Secretary-General.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that the draft
resolution before us reflects the progress already achieved
by UNSMIH as well as the essential requirements for the
new Mission. The mandate is fully geared to the most
pressing task, that of the professionalization of the police
force; the mandate will be limited to a single four-month
period; and UNTMIH retains a military element to ensure
the safety of the civilian police personnel.

We are also pleased to note that the difficult
financial situation of the United Nations has been duly
addressed in the draft resolution, through a substantial
reduction in troop strength. In this connection, we
welcome the readiness of the Governments of Canada and
the United States to continue to provide generous
voluntary contributions to support the Mission.

In our view, the history of United Nations missions
in Haiti exemplifies remarkable success in combining a
traditional peacekeeping operation with post-conflict
peace-building. With the establishment of UNTMIH, Haiti
now embarks on a transition from a peacekeeping phase
to a peace-building phase. It is our earnest hope that the
Government and the people of Haiti, together with the
international community, will make concerted efforts to
make this transition smooth and complete in the coming
four months.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that the ultimate responsibility for the future of Haiti lies
with the Government and the people of Haiti themselves,
and that international support cannot be a substitute for
their efforts to consolidate the rule of law and democracy
and to achieve economic development.

With these remarks, Korea will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

