Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I extend my thanks to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for
his briefing this morning.

In spite of the important progress achieved by the
international community since the mid-twentieth
century in the development of enhanced international
law mechanisms to protect civilians and determine
criminal responsibility for the massacres of thousands
of civilians in armed conflicts, we continue to witness
new and tragic forms of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, including
deliberate killing, rape, the confiscation and
destruction of property, forcible displacement and other
blatant Violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. Belligerents resort to such means
chiefly in order to exert the greatest possible political
pressure and to achieve battlefield victories at the
expense of innocent civilians, especially children,
women, the elderly and the handicapped, as well as
humanitarian and media workers, with full impunity in
many existing conflicts.

We believe that the continuation of this problem
is not due to a lack of a humanitarian and legal
framework established by the United Nations for this
purpose. That framework is almost comprehensive and

includes international instruments such as the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and its Additional
Protocols of 1977 and many other resolutions and
presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council for protecting civilians. We think the problem
lies in the non-compliance of the combatant parties
with those instruments and their selective
implementation in some conflict zones.

In our opinion, that non-compliance requires that
the international community, particularly the Council,
reconsider the standards for observing the measures for
protection of civilians during armed conflicts
according to resolution 1674 (2006). The resolution
recognizes not only the primary responsibility of States
for protecting their civilians, but also the joint
responsibility of the international community to help
States shoulder their responsibility in this respect.
Therefore we affirm the importance of the following
points.

First, we must strengthen the Council's important
and coordinated international role in cooperation with
the Secretariat's various specialized departments and
agencies and United Nations bodies such as the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council, particularly in taking
effective, prompt and decisive action to prevent
civilian suffering in conflict zones and in creating a
safe environment for civilians as a priority in cases of
armed conflict and as one of the priorities for the
Council's work in maintaining international peace and
security and building peace in accordance with the
Charter. In that regard, we stress the importance of
developing mechanisms for observing and monitoring
practices against civilians during armed conflicts and
procedures for urging all States and parties to conflicts
to ensure their compliance with their commitments
with regard to the non-targeting of civilian populations
and the protection of their property and legitimate
interests, without double standards. Procedures should
include full respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs and should not
prejudice the specificities of their cultures and beliefs.

Secondly, we affirm the need to set up a
strengthened, humane and unconditional international
strategy for relief and assistance, to be sustained by
adequate resources and the necessary political support
based on neutrality, objectivity and justice. Such a
strategy should be implemented by the United Nations
bodies, organs, committees and humanitarian agencies in
cooperation with regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations, to secure humanitarian
corridors and provide the necessary relief and
humanitarian assistance to reduce the suffering of people
affected by conflicts. According to the provisions of
international law, the plans and programmes of this
strategy should not be linked to the settlement of
conflicts, as is the case in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

In this connection, we call upon the international
community to take the necessary measures to protect
the Palestinian civilians from collective punishment
and from the occupying Power's daily excessive
violent measures against them. We appeal to it to exert
the necessary pressure on Israel to oblige it to comply
fully with its commitments, as set out in the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We urge Israel to lift the
inhumane and illegal blockade imposed on the
Palestinian territories since 2006, especially on the
crossing points of the Gaza Strip, and to end its
arbitrary and unjustified constraints on access by tens
of thousands of Palestinians to humanitarian assistance,
including fuel and water, food aid and other basic
assistance.

Thirdly, we affirm the need to enhance the system
set up for monitoring, reporting and exchanging
information on crimes against humanity committed
during armed conflicts and for punishing the
perpetrators so as to ensure that those crimes are not
repeated. We call for developing the judicial
arrangements made for addressing those crimes and for
strengthening national and international capacities for
investigation and prosecution. The rehabilitation
process for the victims of those crimes and attacks
must be improved, and the chances for victims to reach
national and international criminal courts in order to
obtain justice and the necessary compensation for
crimes must be increased.

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns all
forms of targeting civilians during and after armed
conflicts. It has participated in several humanitarian
and relief assistance programmes and peacekeeping
operations, including rehabilitation and mine clearing
operations in many areas, with a View to mitigating the
suffering of affected populations. It supports the five
measures recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report on the issue, which was endorsed by the
Council. We hope that our discussions on this item
today will help in creating the political will required to
strengthen effective national and international efforts
to protect civilians in all areas of armed conflicts.

