Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): Like the
delegations that have spoken before me, I should like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for the very thorough update of the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Despite the many problems facing UNMIK, we
must acknowledge that remarkable progress has been
achieved in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which aims to set up
democratic, multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo.

My comments will touch on the following points.

From a political standpoint, my delegation is
grateful to Mr. Haekkerup and to the entire UNMIK
staff for the tireless efforts they have been making in
preparing for the general elections to be held on 17
November. We believe that the proper organization of
these elections is crucial for the participation of all of
the communities of Kosovo. That is why we call on all
of the peoples of Kosovo to take part en masse in these
elections, which constitute a vital framework to combat
intransigent extremism and ethnic intolerance.

The participation of all of the communities, in
particular that of the Serb minority, which boycotted
the municipal elections last October, is of major
concern for my delegation. We welcome the
registration of the four Serb parties, and we invite
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to take the
necessary security measures to encourage all of the
Serb refugees to return home and to actively take part
in the election and in the building of a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in Kosovo. The development of a
reliable electoral registry is necessary to move ahead
the electoral process under way in Kosovo.
From a security standpoint, my delegation
expresses its deep concern over the continuation of
ethnic and political violence as well as organized crime
in Kosovo. There is no doubt that violence against
minorities in the province is perhaps the major obstacle
to achieving the international community's goals of
peace, democracy and prosperity in Kosovo. We
strongly condemn this indiscriminate violence which is
affecting minorities and which, regrettably, is the
greatest obstacle to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

The setting up by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of Pillar 1 and the existence of
legislation suppressing organized crime, the illegal
possession of arms and terrorism are useful measures
that could considerably improve the security conditions
in Kosovo. We also support the concrete measures
taken by UNMIK and KFOR concerning the
monitoring of the administrative borders of Kosovo, in
particular the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

All of the necessary measures must be taken so
that Kosovo will not serve as a base for sending
weapons to Albanian rebels and to the UCK. We launch
an urgent appeal to the Macedonian army and to the
UCK to respect the ceasefire that went into force on 5
July, and we condemn any form of violence against
democracy and the rule of law.

From an economic standpoint, even though
efforts have been made in this area by UNMIK, the
very high unemployment rate that prevails in Kosovo
as well as the fragile state of the economy are sources
of concern for my delegation. We are convinced that
economic development is a major element in
stabilization, and therefore my delegation recommends
that the international community mobilize additional
funds for economic recovery programmes for Villages
in Kosovo.

From a humanitarian standpoint, the situation of
thousands of Albanian refugees from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia who are fleeing
confrontations between Macedonian forces and
Albanian extremists and who have found refuge in
Kosovo are a source of concern for my delegation, and
we believe that the international community should
render them substantial assistance.

Finally, while taking note of the enormity of the
task facing UNMIK, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Hans Haekkerup for the work he has
done as head of UNMIK and to the entire local and
international staff of UNMIK and KFOR for their
determination and commitment to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The international
community must step up its efforts to assist UNMIK in
this crucial phase of its commitment to Kosovo in order
to enable the achievement of the objectives of peace,
security and sustainable development.

