Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I wish to welcome you, Sir, as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile to preside over
the Security Council today. As this is the first time I
have taken the floor in the Council this year, I would
also like to welcome all new non-permanent members
of the Council and to express our hope that there will
be close and constructive cooperation with them in the
period before us.

The situation in the Palestinian track of the Middle
East settlement remains among the major contentious
items on the international agenda. It has already been
almost a year since Palestinians and Israelis broke off
negotiations, and the alienation between them only
continues to grow.

Against this background, the situation on the
ground continues to deteriorate. The situation in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, remains
tense, frequently teetering on the edge of open, armed
confrontation. The ongoing settlement activities of
Israel in the occupied territories play a considerable
role in this. There are further pending issues relating to
normalization around the Gaza Strip in the wake of the
bloody conflict that took place in the summer of 2014.

In such conditions, any opportunity must be seized
to rekindle the peace process. Guided by that kind of
logic, Russia supported the draft resolution (S/2014/916)
proposed by Jordan in December, which, unfortunately,
was not adopted, although it did not contradict the
existing international consensus on the Palestinian-
Israeli settlement. On the contrary, it referred to the
fundamental principles of the peace process, including
confirmation of the relevant resolutions of the Council.

In our View, the developments on the Palestinian
track are being transformed before our very eyes into a
dangerous chain reaction, when any step by one of the
parties automatically triggers counter-actions by the
other side. The resulting spiral exacerbates the negative
backdrop of relations between Palestinians and Israelis.

In this kind of climate, the task of remedying the
situation in the peace process would appear to be a
highly complex one. But this is one of those challenges
where, if we fail to respond in a timely and appropriate
manner, we risk worsening the situation with respect
to the Palestinian issue and the situation in the Middle
East in general.

The complexities of the task of rekindling
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations mean that the
international community needs to step up its efforts to
revive the talks. We believe that the best mechanism
for this is the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, whose work, above all at the ministerial level,
should be promptly reinvigorated. Close involvement of
the Security Council in the Middle East peace process
must be an important element in international support
for the Palestinian-Israeli contacts. Discussions alone,
even on a monthly basis, are, of course, not enough.

The excessively protracted Syrian conflict is
having an extremely negative impact on the situation
in the Middle East. It is quite clear that relying on the
military option to overthrow the regime has not been
justified. Those who would follow such an approach
have only worsened the plight of the Syrian people.
We would like to emphasize once again that the only
way to end the conflict is through dialogue. In order
to truly launch a process of national reconciliation, all
opportunities must be made use of.

Intra-Syrian consultations are planned from 26 to
29 January in Moscow. This is a practical contribution
by Russia to international efforts to assist in advancing
the peace process in Syria. The purpose of these
meetings is to lay the groundwork for launching,
without preconditions, an inclusive dialogue among
Syrians based on the Geneva communique of 30 June
2012.

We do not view the Moscow event as a one-off. It
must have specific applicable results. We realize that
the Syrian crisis also has international and regional
dimensions, meaning there is a critical need for a
comprehensive settlement of the situation in and around
Syria. We expect that our approach will meet with
understanding and support from all external actors
who have leverage with various segments of the Syrian
opposition. Those who decide not to participate in this
event will lose their standing in the whole negotiation
process.

The Moscow gathering is a unique opportunity
to start directs talks on an equal footing between the
representatives of the Syrian Government and the
opposition. To let this opportunity slip away would
be an unforgivable mistake, as it is in the interest of
a speedy end to the fratricidal conflict in Syria and of
the consolidation of positive forces of Syrian society to
counter international terrorism and violent extremism.
We hope that our appeal will be heard by the Syrian
sides, influential outside forces and regional players
alike.

