Mr. Vantsevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me first of all to welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you
preside over this meeting of the Security Council. Belarus
highly appreciates Argentina's initiative to hold this
discussion on the protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel. We are
convinced that under your effective stewardship this
meeting will be able to identify further steps that the United
Nations and the entire international community must take
in this important area.

The last report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization does not give reason for great optimism
regarding a decrease in conflicts throughout the world in
the foreseeable future. Despite all the efforts made by the
United Nations, the Security Council and world community
as a whole, wars continue to be today's most urgent and
serious problem. In this connection, the United Nations is
making additional efforts to step up its role in the area of
peacekeeping. Every day, United Nations personnel are
deployed to various regions of the world in noble
peacekeeping missions. Ensuring their security is an
extremely important task for the entire world community.

Over four years ago, Belarus became the thirty-fourth
State to accede to the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. The Convention
incontrovertibly creates a viable legal basis for the
protection of those who perform peacekeeping duties. The
main task at this stage is to develop a reliable mechanism
for its implementation. Belarus believes that a special role
has to be played in this regard by the national parliaments
of the States that have acceded to and ratified the
Convention, as well as by the international community,
which must focus its efforts on developing additional
mechanisms to ensure the implementation of this
international legal instrument.

The Security Council must play a special role in this
regard. It is not enough merely to condemn acts of violence
against United Nations and associated personnel. It is
essential to foster the search for real steps that could be
taken to punish those responsible and prevent such
nefarious practices. We hope that today's discussion will
enrich us with new ideas. In this connection, Belarus
welcomes the relevant provisions included in the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of our
meeting.

Last year was an unprecedented year for the United
Nations from the standpoint of the involvement of its
personnel in peacekeeping and peace-building. Yet the
work of the first civilian administrations in history - in
Kosovo and East Timor - and of the peacekeepers in
Georgia and Burundi have proved to be directly related to
the commission of acts of cruelty and violence against the
personnel of those missions. Reports of casualties are
becoming more frequent. This eloquently attests to the
fact that the issue of personnel security should become a
priority in all efforts to prepare and deploy missions. A
mandatory part of that work should be the proper training
of mission personnel.

The protection of United Nations personnel is
directly connected with the problems associated with
combating international terrorism. Belarus considers that
last year's Security Council meeting on this issue, which
was convened on the initiative of the Russian Federation,
laid the groundwork for improving the response of the
United Nations and the Security Council to terrorist
activities, whose victims are not only local populations,
but also United Nations personnel. We believe that such
a systematic approach should be continued. What is
paramount is the inadmissibility of the View that it is
impossible to eradicate the causes of lawlessness and that
there can therefore be no targeted strategy to counter it.

At this meeting, we must pay tribute to those who
have fallen in the performance of their lofty humanitarian
duties: the United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian workers who gave their lives to save the
lives of others and to restore peace and stability in the hot
spots of our planet.

