The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral (Guinea- Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 3 November 1998 from the Permanent Representative
of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 1998/ 1028).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the agreement
reached on 1 November 1998, in Abuja, between the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the Self-Proclaimed
Military Junta during the 2lst Summit of the
Authority of the Heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
(8/1998/1028, annex). In this context, the Council
commends the mediation efforts of ECOWAS and of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), and their respective Chairmen, and recognizes
the role of other leaders, in particular the preponderant
role of the President of the Gambia in the
negotiations that led to that agreement.
"The Security Council affirms its firm
commitment to preserve the unity, sovereignty,
constitutional order and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council considers the agreement
to be a positive step towards national reconciliation
and lasting peace in Guinea-Bissau. The Council
calls upon the Government and the Self-Proclaimed
Military Junta to respect fully their obligations under
the Abuja Agreement and the Praia Agreement of 26
August 1998 (S/ 1998/825). The Council welcomes,
in particular, the decision immediately to put in
place a Government of National Unity and to hold
general and presidential elections not later than the
end of March 1999.

"The Security Council takes note of the
agreement regarding the withdrawal from Guinea-
Bissau of all foreign troops and of the simultaneous
deployment of the interposition force from the
Military Observer Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG),
which will take over from the withdrawn forces. The
Council calls upon all States to provide voluntarily
technical, financial and logistical support to assist
ECOMOG to carry out its mission.

"The Security Council appeals to States and
organizations concerned to provide urgent
humanitarian assistance to displaced persons and
refugees. It calls upon the Government and the Self-
Proclaimed Military Junta to continue to respect
relevant provisions of international law, including
humanitarian law, and to ensure safe and unimpeded
access by international humanitarian organizations to
persons in need of assistance as a result of the
conflict. In this regard, it welcomes the decision to
open the international airport and the seaport at
Bissau.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

