The President: I will now deliver my own statement
in my national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for
his detailed briefing. Japan expresses strong concern
about the increasingly desperate situation in Syria. It
is intolerable that eastern Aleppo, Menbij and some
other places appear to be on their way to being added
to the list of besieged locations. We are disappointed
that July's humanitarian access plan has been poorly
implemented thus far. We commend the enormous
efforts made by the United Nations, such humanitarian
bodies as the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, and the co-chairs of
the International Syria Support Group to secure access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas.

Meanwhile, it is obvious that increased airstrikes
and fighting on the ground block and delay sustained
humanitarian access. Mr. O'Brien reminded us of the
importance of implementing our own resolutions,
especially resolution 2286 (2016), which addresses the
protection of civilians, medical personnel and facilities.
This resolution does not focus on any specific conflict
area, but Syria is a place where such protection is
definitely necessary. In that regard, ongoing efforts by
the United States and Russia to extend the cessation of
hostilities to hotspots like eastern Aleppo are critically
important.

Even a temporary ceasefire can allow the United
Nations and humanitarian bodies to reach those Syrians
who are desperately awaiting interagency convoys.
Japan fully supports Mr. O'Brien's proposal to hold
weekly, 48-hour cessations of hostilities to secure
United Nations inter-agency humanitarian access. I
wish to conclude by stating that Japan, along with other
Council members and the International Syria Support
Group, will continue to support and work towards a
lasting political settlement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

