Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss the
destructive war that is being waged against Iraq and its
repercussions, including, naturally, the tremendous
humanitarian suffering of the fraternal Iraqi people. We
hope that the Security Council will be able to put an
end to what it taking place and that it will shoulder its
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security, as mandated by the Charter of the
United Nations.

It is an established fact that this war is being
waged outside the context of the United Nations and
without any authorization by the Council. It is also a
fact that the majority of the members of the Security
Council, not to mention the majority of the Members of
the United Nations, were against this war and had
called for time to be given to the inspections regime to
fulfil its mandate under resolution 1441 (2002).
Furthermore, this war will have far-reaching and
profound repercussions for the Middle East region and
for the system of international relations, including on
the United Nations itself.

The international community must therefore give
in-depth consideration to the issue, so that we can
promptly arrive at a solution that will mitigate such
destructive tendencies. The Palestinian people - given
the long suffering that they have experienced under
occupation and aggression - cannot but oppose the
use of force in settling international disputes.

Our people stand side by side with our other Arab
brethren, and we stand, therefore, in full solidarity with
the Iraqi people, who are suffering as a result of the
military operations being carried out by forces led by
the United States. Our people are becoming
increasingly angry and frustrated and feel hostility
between themselves and those whom they deem
responsible for whatever is currently happening, in
addition to what has happened throughout the years.

We support the resolutions adopted by the
summits of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Arab
Summit, as well as the decision of the Council of
Ministers of the League of Arab States. We call for an
immediate cessation of the military operations against
Iraq, and we call for the withdrawal of foreign troops
from Iraqi land.

We stress the importance of Iraqi unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We condemn any
attempt to erode Iraq independence. We must fully
respect the Geneva conventions, not only those relative
to the protection of prisoners of war but also those
relative to the protection of civilians. We welcome the
renewed interest in and importance attached by some to
those conventions, and we call for their full respect at
all times, in compliance with the legal commitments
undertaken by the High Contracting Parties.

Change, even for the better, cannot come from
outside, nor can it be imposed on peoples, particularly
through the use of military force. Nor can political
systems be imposed from outside. This was one of the
basic principles of the international system until now.
Therefore we cannot but express our concern over what
is described as the conceptual basis of what is
happening, and not only at the developments on the
ground.

We in Palestine are concerned over what is
happening, because there is a real fear that Mr. Sharon
and his Government - one of the primary
beneficiaries of the war - will escalate their bloody
military campaign against our people and take
additional illegitimate measures on the ground.

We call on the Security Council to remain
attentive to the situation in the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, in the coming weeks.
Nothing angers Arab and Palestinian citizens more than
the double standards we have come to experience, or
sometimes the absence of any criteria when the
situation has to do with us Arabs and Palestinians, and
therefore there is a need to put an end to that. We have
good reason not to believe that this will happen, and
hope that we are wrong.

