Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2042 (2012), which authorizes the
deployment of an advance monitoring team to Syria.
We regret that it comes only after the Syrian people
have for more than one year suffered unimaginable
brutality at the hands of a regime that has prioritized its
own survival over the needs, rights and aspirations of
the people it should serve and protect.

For more than one year, the Syrian regime has
murdered, arbitrarily detained, tortured, abused and
2

terrorized innocent civilians. The death toll stands at
more than 10,000; more than 10,000 remain in
detention and 45,000 have fled across the borders.
Throughout, the Syrian regime has ignored the calls of
the international community, the League of Arab
States, the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council to stop the killing. It
has made numerous commitments that it has failed to
implement.

The six-point proposal of Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the Arab
League, offers the last opportunity to finally put an end
to the bloodshed. We pay tribute to Mr. Annan for his
tireless efforts over the past six weeks. The relative
de-escalation of violence achieved on 12 April was a
tentative and positive first step towards ending the
crisis. But it is just that, a first step. Tens of innocent
civilians have been killed since 12 April, and heavy
weapons remain deployed in population centres.
Nevertheless, a narrow window now exists to improve
the situation on the ground. That is why the Council
has authorized the deployment of an advance mission
to monitor the cessation of violence - and why, if it is
sustained, we will work quickly to authorize a larger
mission to monitor the cessation of violence and
support the full implementation of Mr. Annan's six-
point proposal.

Today's resolution is absolutely clear about the
commitments that the Syrian regime must now fulfil.
First, it must end the movement of troops towards, and
begin to pull back from, population centres, and cease
the use of heavy weapons. As the Joint Special Envoy
has made clear, it must also return troops and heavy
weapons to their barracks. Secondly, it must implement
the full six-point proposal in its entirety. Thirdly, it
must ensure that the monitoring mission that we have
authorized can operate effectively, with full freedom of
movement and access, freedom to interview individuals
without retaliation against them, allow unobstructed
communications and guarantee the mission's safety
without prejudice to freedom of movement. The
opposition, too, must refrain from violence and ensure
that it gives the regime no excuse to renege on its
commitments. Once the cessation of violence has been
sustained, all parties must move quickly to engage in a
Syrian-led political transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.

