Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her very comprehensive
briefing. My delegation has taken note of the thirtieth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the investigation of the situation in
Darfur, submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Today I will focus on three issues.

The first is the recent developments in the Sudan.
The security situation in Darfur remains relatively
stable, with few disruptions in the trends that have
emerged since 2016. We have witnessed some
remarkable developments since Ms. Bensouda's last
briefing in June (see S/PV.8554) that present a real
opportunity for a fair and comprehensive peace in
Darfur. A transitional Government is now in place
and has taken significant steps to secure peace in
Darfur. We are encouraged by the ongoing peace
talks, which for the first time in the modern history
of the Sudan involve almost all of the armed groups
in the country. Indonesia supported the adoption in
October of resolution 2495 (2019), which renewed the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for 12 months, in line
with the request of the Prime Minister of the Sudan.
We fully endorse the focus of UNAMID's mandate on
supporting the peace process and the implementation
of any peace agreement. Those gains should serve as a
stepping-stone to further tangible progress, including
sustainable peace and socioeconomic recovery.

Secondly, concerning the many persistent
challenges on the ground, several conflict drivers
remain to be addressed. Internally displaced persons
(IDPs) are confronted by security challenges and a
lack of access to land and economic opportunities.
My delegation consistently stresses the imperative for
the full protection of civilians and the observance of
international humanitarian law. We remain concerned
about incidents that have had an impact on human
rights and the protection situation that continue to
occur across Darfur and target the most vulnerable,
including IDPs, women and children. We extend our
deepest sympathies to the victims and to the people
of the Sudan who have been impacted by the conflict
in their country. There is an urgent need to uphold
accountability and ensure that the Sudanese regain their
confidence in law enforcement and judicial institutions.

That brings me to my third point, namely, the
proceedings of the ICC. Efforts to pursue justice
must be part of the wider efforts to achieve peace in
Darfur. While peace cannot be complete or sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence
of peace. The Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that the Sudan complies with the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005). At the same time, according to
the Rome Statute, the role of the ICC is complementary
to national criminal jurisdiction. My delegation
believes that the referral of the situation in Darfur
should neither nullify the principle of complementarity
or prevent the Sudanese national court from invoking
its jurisdiction. While calling on the Sudan to take up
those responsibilities promptly and properly, we must
also empower the Sudan's judicial authority to exercise
its sovereignty, including through adequate capacity-
building in the justice system.

