Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to those who gave briefings today on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau.

Events in that country are alarming. They are part
of a series of coups d'etat or coup attempts that have
been carried out in recent months in Africa - in
March, in the Central African Republic; in June, in
Mauritania; in July, in $50 Tome' and Principe; and on
14 September, in Guinea-Bissau.

When the Security Council mission visited
Guinea-Bissau in June 2003, we encountered a heart-
wrenching situation. Alienated from his people,
President Kumba Yala was living under an illusion
about the future of his country, which has been
experiencing a cruel systemic crisis since the civil war.
Our contacts with the political opposition, civil society
and women's organizations showed that the President
was living in a public vacuum. The parliamentary and
judicial branches of Government were not functioning.
With that "musical chairs" in the Government it was
evident that the executive authority was being held
together by the personal intrigues of the President and
the tolerance of the military. The military's tolerance of
this has ended.

Like many States, Russia, along with other
members of the Security Council, have condemned the
unconstitutional change of power in Guinea-Bissau.
However, that is the least of it. We need to understand
the reasons for what has happened, which are
characteristic of many States in Africa. Despite the
various circumstances in each country I mentioned,
there is also a characteristic that is common to many
African regimes - weakness of Government authority
and insufficiently developed democratic foundations.
Africans themselves have told us about this.

A Government that has assumed power
constitutionally but which then violates the
constitution, or simply replaces it, loses its legitimacy.
The absence of an operational democratic system of
checks and balances does not let society carry out a
constitutional change of Government. This problem has
remained an issue for more than one decade.

In order to correct this situation, we do not need a
great deal of donor assistance. We do not need many
years of socio-economic restructuring. We do need
political will to affirm the generally recognized
standards of democracy and to press for strict
compliance with them. References, including those
made by President Kumba Yala, to the peculiar
situation in which Africa finds itself in this regard,
have not yet been confirmed in the public sphere. On
the contrary, in the democratic countries - and there
are quite a few of them in Africa - threats to
constitutional authority do not exist. The international
community must provide appropriate assistance. Active
work in promoting democracy is being carried out by
the United Nations. The African Union can play a
special role in that regard, including within the
programme of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

One characteristic of coups in the Central African
Republic and Guinea-Bissau is that the perpetrators
immediately said that they were prepared to hold
elections. The Security Council must monitor that, in
order to make sure that those promises are not empty
words. The people of these countries, enduring the
hardships of post-conflict reconstruction, must not
become hostage to lawlessness.

I wanted to pose a question to the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kalomoh.

Mr. Kalomoh, what are the opportunities for the
United Nations right now in Guinea-Bissau to support
the democratic process and to make sure that the
scheduled elections take place on time?

