Climate change is an undeniable threat in the framework of international peace and security, particularly in contexts of fragility. It has a profound impact on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, as well as on societies and economies around the globe, with dire humanitarian consequences. It is also a driver of forced migration, displacement and food insecurity. By increasing the threat of humanitarian crises and conflict, climate change and environmental degradation act as risk multipliers. Acknowledging that, Portugal's Strategic Concept of National Defence recognizes natural disasters and climate change as potential threats to global security. It also highlights the need to improve national capabilities with regard to prevention, adaptation and quick response to climate threats. In certain contexts, climate change and environmental degradation can contribute to the outbreak of conflicts, which then further add to a vicious circle, as conflicts hinder the capacity of Governments to provide adequate responses to the disruptiveness brought about by climate change and environmental degradation. Conversely, conflict can be a driving factor for environmental degradation, fuelling once again a vicious circle that well illustrates the complexity of the interlinkages discussed today. Portugal advocates for the protection of the environment in armed conflict, as the environment is civilian in nature, and strongly condemns its degradation for military purposes, in accordance with international law. The situation in the Lake Chad basin provides a sobering depiction of the scale of the challenges brought about by those very interlinkages between environmental degradation and conflicts. Nevertheless, it is also a call for action and a cause for hope in the expressions of the resolve of the international community to come together and face those same challenges. Increased national and regional ownership is of the essence, as well as the fact that ownership must be complemented by the firm political will of the national and regional authorities and by the coherent, predictable and regular support of the international community. The current context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic makes such issues even more pressing than before. The indirect effects of COVID-19 and its socioeconomic consequences can contribute to increasing tensions and may exacerbate existing drivers of conflict and further undermine social and economic resilience. The reallocation of both financial and human resources to support prevention and containment measures during the pandemic may also have an impact on the ability of States to respond to the challenges brought about by climate change and environmental degradation. We therefore welcome the inclusion of the security-climate nexus in the discussions of the Security Council. In line with its responsibilities in the maintenance of international peace and security, we believe that the Security Council should pay close attention to climate-related security risks, taking on board the knowledge generated by entities such as the United Nations Climate Security Mechanism in order to better understand the interlinkages among climate change, conflict prevention and sustaining peace. The Security Council and the United Nations system as a whole also have a role to play in what concerns the operations on the ground. Most United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions currently deployed are located in countries particularly affected by climate fragility. As such, itis important to take into consideration the ways that climate degradation may affect the full implementation of mission mandates, namely, with regard to the protection of civilians. Our efforts in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the provision of humanitarian aid will benefit from having climate-sensitive approaches that are also context specific. Climate change affects us all, but its effects are felt more acutely in fragile countries, least developed countries and small island developing States, as well as by populations in vulnerable situations. Furthermore, better coordination among United Nations agencies on the ground, other international and regional organizations, host Governments and civil society is needed to respond pre-emptively to climate risks and to build resilience. Lastly, I would like to stress that all our efforts to address the impacts that climate change is already having on the livelihoods of many people around the world must go hand in hand with a strong commitment to the full implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Protecting the environment and tackling climate change are essential to fostering peace and sustainable development. Our continued and firm support to the countries most in need is fundamental. However, even that will not be enough if we do not provide an urgent collective response to the existential threat of climate change and decisively reduce carbon emissions.
