Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate and for the concept
note (S/2014/572, annex) that you have prepared. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for the
comments that they have shared with us.

As we all know, the Security Council has been
entrusted, since its inception, with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. To achieve that, there has been recognition
of the need for a set of mechanisms and tools that are
applicable depending on the situation or circumstances.
In most cases, they have been used to stop conflicts
rather than to prevent them, but in recent decades we
have seen a greater emphasis placed on prevention. We
agree with that trend, which at the same time raises
new questions. The first has to do with the role that
the Council has played in using the various tools at its
disposal. Secondly, we ask ourselves if those tools are
appropriately suited to the current complexities and,

perhaps more important, whether or not they enable us
to undertake the early consideration of situations that
can degenerate into armed conflicts.

As for the first aspect, we believe that any action
that is undertaken in the area of conflict prevention
must support and complement initiatives undertaken
by the national Governments directly involved and
their immediate neighbours. Nevertheless, in dealing
with the dilemma, mistrust, a lack of knowledge or
a lack of political will may be such that very often
Governments and other actors are reluctant to heed
warnings of potential conflicts. That explains, in part,
why those mechanisms often have not been mobilized
more frequently.

For that reason, we believe that the work of regional
offices and regional organizations can be invaluable,
since their early and timely involvement is crucial. All
preventive actions must begin as soon as possible so
as to reduce the likelihood that tense situations will
degenerate into violent conflict.

With respect to the second matter, if the existing
prevention mechanisms enable rapid responses, we
must bear in mind that every situation has unique
features, and that is why we cannot logically apply
the same prevention model to all cases. The past
experiences we have accumulated as well as the lessons
learned can also provide important clues, including
with regrd to the need to focus on the main causes of
tension and their mitigation, as well as the need to adopt
multidimensional approaches. In that way, the response
capacity of the mechanism will not depend exclusively
on how the mechanism was designed or conceived, but
rather on factors such as capability, experience and
the presence on the ground of those who apply it. Nor
is it appropriate to evaluate the different mechanisms
that could have an influence on the parties on the basis
of the speed with which they can bear fruit. What is
important is to find a formula that reduces mistrust,
keeps the channels of negotiation open and limits the
recourse to violence in each particular case.

In conclusion, strengthening and perfecting a
combination of mechanisms for preventive diplomacy
and the peaceful resolution of disputes should better
respond to the growing demands of Member States,
particularly in terms of flexibility, agility and
coherence. Ultimately, the effectiveness of those
commitments will depend on a variety of factors,
including the commitment of the parties, the existence
of political freedom to operate and the decisive support
of the international community.

