Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fall
very much for his helpful and detailed introduction. He
set out very clearly the challenges facing West Africa.

The representative of Belgium will be speaking
later on behalf of the European Union (EU), and I
endorse what he has to say. As Mr. Fall has noted, the
EU is becoming increasingly active in its support for
West Africa and the region's institutions, and that
support is going to continue.

I applaud your imagination, Mr. President, in
choosing a regional topic as the theme for today's
debate. This is the first time in recent memory that the
Council has chosen to debate the issue of a particular
region, and it is pertinent for a number of reasons.
First, under your presidency, during which we are
discussing almost all the African issues before the
Council, and then that of our colleague from Mauritius,
we have an important African focus in the Council for
this month and next. Secondly, West Africa is a region
whose problems may well be susceptible to treatment
by a sharper regional focus on the part of the Council.
Thirdly, we all see the value for the Council in bringing
a regional dimension to our approach to a number of
problems, particularly in Africa.

We are debating the specific issues related to
West Africa on a number of occasions this month, and I
shall not repeat our detailed views on them here. Sierra
Leone, on which the United Kingdom has taken a lead
in certain respects, has preoccupied the Council over
the last few years. At the moment the news is better,
but next year's elections are a challenge. We will have
an opportunity to debate later this week the
involvement of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) in those elections.

In neighbouring Liberia, the situation remains
dire, and the threat of further instability spilling back
into Sierra Leone is still very real, as Mr. Fall has
pointed out. The Council has imposed sanctions on
President Taylor's regime with the aim of pressuring
him into ending support for the Revolutionary United
Front. These sanctions are one of the first examples of
targeted sanctions imposed by the Council, and we
need to implement them sensibly but rigorously. The
targeted restrictions on the Liberian leadership are a
vast improvement over the scattergun effect of general
sanctions. The humanitarian situation in Liberia has
already been made appalling enough by President
Taylor's policies.

Other parts of West Africa also trouble us, not
least the huge number of refugees and internally
displaced persons still on the move in a number of
countries. The situation in Guinea-Bissau continues to
be preoccupying and the news from cote d'Ivoire
worrisome.

However, it will be a real pleasure, Mr. President,
to welcome Guinea to the Council next month, and we
are sure that it will make a contribution to our
deliberations as constructive as that made by your
delegation, Mali. In looking back on your two years on
the Council, we remember particularly the Millennium
Summit, under the chairmanship of President Konare,
and the sensitive picture you have given us of how the
policies of the United Nations can be made to work in
Africa.

The Council needs to deepen its concern about
the overall regional problems of West Africa. It is a
subregion where the intricate net of individual
conflicts, fed by poverty and feeding poverty, has
heightened the risk of West Africa becoming the
world's first failed region. The situation for women and
children is particularly appalling. It is vitally
important, both for the people of the region and for the
wider stability of Africa, that the United Nations not let
this happen.

In that context, the efforts of the subregional
organization, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), are absolutely critical. We
commend the work of ECOWAS to help solve the
region's problems. It is our View that the Council
should cooperate more closely with subregional
organizations such as ECOWAS and should give that
cooperation a very practical focus. ECOWAS needs to
increase its engagement in the Mano River Union
countries. Confidence-building measures and contacts
between the three countries of the Mano River Union,
including regular summits, are vital tools for dealing
with the conflicts in the subregion, as Mr. Fall has
made clear. Giving ECOWAS a greater capacity to lead
and organize this area should be our next task.

The issues affecting West Africa need to set in the
context of Africa as a whole. In that context, the United
Kingdom Government is particularly encouraged by
the progress being made towards a New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD). Previous efforts to
solve Africa's problems have foundered because they
have been seen either as a purely donor-driven exercise
or as an African exercise which attracted too little
support from the international community. NEPAD
aims to merge these two elements into a partnership. It
must represent a commitment by the countries of
Africa to tackling their problems, including
governance, leadership, education, health - including
AIDS - the environment and conflict prevention. But
this commitment, in turn, should attract a wider
commitment by the international community to
supporting the efforts of the Africans with resources,
expertise and political dynamism.

I am glad to report that the Group of Eight
industrialized countries has already planned a detailed
response to NEPAD in its Africa Action Plan.
Particular attention is going to be focused on four
areas: good governance, peace and security, education
and health, and economic growth and private
investment. Within those four areas, two cross-cutting
issues have been identified: regional cooperation and
integration, and agriculture and water. These core
themes will be further developed by the eight personal
representatives for Africa in several meetings over the
next six months, leading up to the Canadian G-8
summit in June. Africa needs an integrated strategy of
this kind, linking better terms on debt, trade,
development assistance and conflict resolution. Such
an investment will not arrive from outside without
confidence in the potential for results.

So, I come to a well-worn theme: cohesion. The
necessary cohesion has not yet been delivered. The
Council has to respond to the problems of West Africa
as a coherent whole and to interact effectively with the
other relevant parts of the United Nations. The
interface between conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peace-building is nowhere more
relevant than in Africa. The conflicts in Africa set it in
sharp focus.

We cannot, however, allow a concentration only
on conflict. The Security Council needs to work better
with its colleagues in the Economic and Social Council
and other parts of the system to take a more holistic
look at the economic, social and political problems that
create conflict and poverty. It is also important that the
United Nations efforts in the field be properly
integrated. Alan Doss's appointment in Sierra Leone as
both Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Resident Coordinator is a good model for
integrating the United Nations political efforts with its
work on the economic and social side in this kind of
cr1s1s.

Finally, my delegation applauds the engagement
that the Secretariat has shown in the problems of West
Africa. The inter-agency mission to the subregion
under Assistant Secretary-General Fall this spring was
one of the most ambitious undertaken by the United
Nations. Its recommendation to establish a regional
office in West Africa has been welcomed by my
delegation and others. We await detailed information
from the Secretariat about the regional office after the
current mission returns and about how it will fit into
existing United Nations structures. We welcome it as a
further indication of the United Nations commitment to
West Africa and we wish it well.

