Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement, Sir, by recognizing
your country's leadership in mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes on the African continent. I also
wish to join others in thanking you and your delegation
for convening this meeting, as well as for the concept
paper that you provided us with to guide our discussion
this afternoon. I wish to respectfully welcome the
presence among us today of Mr. Brahimi, whose work
and experience are a key part of this Organization.

Costa Rica's statement at this debate will address
the activities of the United Nations Organization in the
field of mediation and the settlement of disputes.
However, we feel compelled to bear in mind the role
played by the regional organizations that make valiant
efforts to prevent conflicts and resolve disputes on all
continents, as has been affirmed in recent weeks by the
interventions of the Southern African Development
Community in Zimbabwe, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations in Thailand and Cambodia, the
Organization of American States in Bolivia, and the
European Union in the conflict in Georgia.

Over seven years ago, the Secretary-General
submitted his first report (S/2001/574) on the
prevention of armed conflict, in which he urged us to
move from a culture of crisis response to one of crisis
prevention. That transition, however, is incomplete.
The States Members of the Organization have been
unable to reach agreement on allocating indispensable
resources for the Organization to work towards conflict
prevention, in terms of well-designed prevention that
would address the operational, structural and systemic
aspects that were identified by the Secretary-General in
his second report (A/60/891)on that subject, in 2006.

Clearly, the subject of conflict prevention
concerns all Members. Therefore, we should redouble
our efforts to strengthen the Organization's capacity for
preventive diplomacy, so as to overcome, once and for
all, the obstacles that to date have made that
impossible. As the saying goes, an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure. In that regard, the idea of
allocating 2 per cent of the annual peacekeeping budget
to strengthening the capacity for preventive diplomacy,
as the Secretary-General has suggested, merits urgent
consideration by Member States.

The exponential increase in the peacekeeping
budget is an unequivocal sign of the very limited
capacity of the United Nations to prevent the
burgeoning of conflicts that endanger international
peace and security. The $7 billion spent on
peacekeeping over the current biennium stand in
contrast to the scant resources that the Member States
have approved for conflict prevention endeavours.
Clearly, that situation must be remedied.

Costa Rica believes those who are opposed to
increasing the preventive capacity of the Organization
by claiming other priorities are wrong. There will
always be important issues, but none are as important
as preserving the possibility for every human being to
live in a peaceful environment. Nor can we accept
opposition by those who consider the necessary follow-
up to conflict prevention to be a mechanism of foreign
interference. Even more unacceptable is opposition
based purely on budgetary grounds. Not rectifying that
situation would be a mistake that we would all
continue to pay for.

This is also an opportunity to exchange ideas on
the context within which the actions of the Secretary-
General are couched. Greater proactivity is needed in
developing the institutional capacity to prevent
conflicts. The good offices of external actors to
neutralize sources of friction within a society or
between States have proved to be a necessary and
useful instrument. However, quite often that tool does
not deliver the expected dividends owing to the
constraints of its context. At times, poor coordination
with regional or subregional initiatives undermines the
effectiveness of good offices.

On other occasions, coordination with other
organs of the Organization weakens the effectiveness
of the good offices of the Secretariat, in particular in
the light of the obstruction that can derive from its
relationship with the Security Council.

Here, we believe it important to emphasize the
huge value of proximity and impartiality in ensuring
the successful outcome of good offices actions. For
that reason, we consider it important for the United
Nations to focus on strengthening regional
organizations, so that they can participate effectively in
the peaceful settlement of disputes before such disputes
become a threat to international peace and security to
be addressed by the Security Council.

The Secretary-General must have a margin to act
that is as broad as possible, so as to carry out his good
offices functions. That is stipulated in Article 100 of
the Charter, which guarantees the total independence of
the Secretariat from every State and obliges all States
to respect its international character and not to seek to
influence it in the discharge of its responsibilities.

In that regard, Costa Rica believes it important to
distinguish between those situations in which the
Secretary-General acts of his own accord or at the
request of the interested parties, and those situations in
which he acts at the request of the Security Council. In
the former, the main obligation is to the parties and,
therefore, discretion is a valued asset. From our
experience, we know that that can create tension with
the Council or with some of its members. However, we
also know that, in some cases, allowing the Secretariat
to stand back and act as an impartial and discreet
broker, untethered by the political dynamic of the
Security Council, is of great value in maintaining
international peace and security. Clearly, when good
offices are part of the mandate given by the Council,
the priority is the effectiveness of the mission as a
whole.

To sum up, Sir, your delegation's convening of
this important debate must provide the opportunity to
rectify the situation. Costa Rica welcomes the proposal
of the Secretary-General and will support any efforts to
develop greater institutional capacity that is geared
towards the prevention and peaceful solution of
conflicts. My country will also support the
strengthening of links with regional and subregional
organizations and any initiative geared towards
increasing their capacity to mediate and resolve the
disputes that arise within their geographic scope of
action.

In addition, we call on the Secretary-General to
keep up his efforts in terms of crisis anticipation and to
offer to mediate for the sake of maintaining
international peace and security, the irreplaceable
mainstay for the greater well-being of all.

