Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam President and Foreign Minister Bishop, for being
here to preside over this crucial meeting. I also thank
Special Envoy Nabarro and Special Representative
Banbury for their briefings. To Mr. Mauget, we express
our gratitude for his remarks - but even more for his
service, just as we are grateful for the service of all
the doctors, nurses, burial team members and others
on the front lines of this effort. We also thank the
representatives of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra
Leone for being here today and for the valiant efforts of
their people and their Governments to stand up to this
deadly virus. We stand with them.

I would like to take a moment to recognize the
passing of Marcel Rudasingwa, the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER)
Ebola Crisis Manager in Guinea. I met Marcel in
Conakry last month. He had just recently arrived, but
he brought great energy to a really tough assignment,
and his unexpected death this week from heart attack
is an enormous loss for his family and for the United
Nations family.

Two months ago, on 18 September, at its first
emergency meeting on Ebola, the Council was
addressed by a Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF)
worker, Mr. Jackson Niamah, from Liberia's capital,
Monrovia. He said people were dying outside the gates
of the clinic where he worked because there were no
beds to treat them. Jackson said, "I, along with my
colleagues, cannot fight Ebola alone. the international
community must help us." (S/PV. 7268, p. 6)

It was a reckoning. Up to that point, not nearly
enough had been done to curb Ebola's deadly spread.
In an unprecedented resolution (resolution 2177 (2014)),
the Council recognized that the outbreak constituted
a threat to international peace and security and
committed, right alongside the General Assembly, to
marshalling the resources to stop it.

Two months later, the outbreak continues to grow.
When we met in September, more than 2,500 had died;
today, more than 5,000 have died. In September, 5,500

people had been infected; today, more than 15,000
have been infected. The fight is not only ongoing, but
it is still tilting in Ebola's favour. Yet we are beginning
to see the impact of the international community's
collective response. The results so far prove what we
have said all along: we know how to win this fight. The
United Nations set a target, to be achieved within 60
days, of 70 per cent of burials being completed in a safe
and dignified manner in order to reduce new infections
from unsafe burials, and the international community
is working towards meeting that goal.
As part of my trip to the most affected countries,
at the end of October, I visited Sierra Leone's capital,
where I saw first-hand how the command and control
capacity of recently arrived British troops and civilians
in support of their Sierra Leonean counterparts, burial
teams and a robust public information campaign went
from safely burying 30 per cent of victims within 24
hours of being reported to 98 per cent. That was all in
less than a week.

We set out to improve the accuracy, accessibility
and efficiency of Ebola testing, knowing that prompt
and reliable results are critical to slowing the spread of
the virus. In Bong county, Liberia, I visited a United
States Navy-run Ebola testing laboratory, which had
cut the time Liberians in the area waited for test results
from up to five days down to three to five hours. On
4 November, only 33 out of 53 Ebola-affected districts
in the affected countries had the ability to transport
samples to a laboratory within 24 hours of collecting
them, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO). By 17 November, all 53 districts had that
capability.

We know this data is imperfect, and by no means
the full story. Underreporting is a huge issue in the
affected region. Not every victim's body is reported,
and some unsafe burials take place under the radar.
Even if every district could get samples to a laboratory
in 24 hours, that says nothing about how fast the results
come back. But, even accepting the limits of the data,
there is no question that our collective efforts are saving
lives. In the past month, the average number of reported
cases per week in Liberia fell by a third, thanks in large
part to the robust international effort in support of the
Liberian Government's leadership.

At the beginning of October, Sierra Leone's
Kenema district had the second-highest number of
infections in the country, with 429 cases. As oftwo days
ago, not a single new case had been reported in Kenema
in all of November, in large part due to the efforts of
non-governmental organizations working with local
authorities and communities. Were it not for the
dramatic increase in the global response, Ebola would
have continued to spread exponentially in the region,
infecting and killing many thousands more people and
placing our collective security at even greater risk.

But it would be a huge mistake to think that just
because we are seeing signs of progress we are on track
to stop this outbreak. It would be reckless to think that
just because we hit some of our benchmarks we have
contained the virus's deadly spread. Last week, 533
new cases were confirmed in Sierra Leone, the highest
weekly tally since the outbreak began in that country.
In Guinea, people in rural villages only kilometres
away from the outbreak began have still never even
heard of the virus. We are facing a new outbreak - of
course, in Mali.

Our response needs to be fluid, nimble and regional.
We need to move with the virus, swiftly adapting to
flare-ups and plugging gaps when they emerge. As
Guinea's Minister for Foreign Affairs so eloquently said
when we met in Conakry, "if there is one sick person
in Monrovia, then the epidemic is not over in Guinea".

I would like to highlight five key ingredients for
not just bending this exponential curve, but ultimately
ending it.

First, the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response must help coordinate and better
target the work of multiple United Nations agencies,
Member States and organizations to maximize the
effectiveness of our collective response. That entails
identifying the evolving gaps, determining what is
needed to fill them and communicating that information
to Governments, organizations and agencies involved
in the effort as quickly as possible. That will require
UNMEER to hire quality staff and scale up operations
faster and get teams out of the headquarters and into
the field, where they can better assess what is needed
and immediately plug those gaps at the local level. The
presidential statement that we as a Council agreed to
today (S/PRST/2014/24) reflects that imperative in its
request that the Secretary-General

"accelerate efforts to scale up UNMEER's presence
and activities at the district and prefecture level
outside of the capital cities".

Secondly, donors must tailor their contributions to
the needs of the moment rather than what best suits our
capitals. For example, as the trajectory of the epidemic
changes, we recognize that it is now more effective
to support community care centres and build smaller
10- to 20-bed Ebola treatment units (ETUs) across a
wider area than to build a single ETU with 100 beds.
We must constantly asks what the most effective way
is to focus a dollar, a euro, a yen, a mark or a pound on
stopping Ebola today. If the answer is something other
than what we are doing, we have to change course, and
even turn on a dime.

Thirdly, we need more international health-care
workers to support heroic national health responders.
ETUs are useless without doctors and nurses to staff
them sustainably. Approximately 1,000 international
health-care workers will be needed on an ongoing
basis. Yet in the face of unprecedented demand, groups
like MSF and the International Medical Corps have
highlighted the challenge of recruiting volunteers.
In that context, I must add that when one looks out
two months it is not at all clear that the supply of
international health-care workers, even the supply we
have today, can be sustained two months from now.
We commend the countries that have sent or pledged
foreign medical teams and the brave men and women
who serve in them - from Sweden and Norway to
China and the Republic of Korea. The list is long and it
is growing longer.

As part of the African Union's efforts, Nigeria,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which recently helped stop
an outbreak of Ebola within its own borders, have
promised to make more than a thousand health-care
workers available. More countries need to send teams,
and those that have already sent them must maintain a
pipeline of trained replacements so that the supply can
be replenished in the coming months.

The European Union's recent commitment to
provide medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) and treatment
in Europe for international health-care workers infected
with Ebola, an effort that the United States will
support with our MEDEVAC planes, has been crucial
to getting more countries to announce commitments.
Governments must also knock down the obstacles that
stand in the way of volunteers joining the effort. That
means making it easier, and not harder, for volunteers
to travel to the affected countries, and treating them
like heroes when they return, rather than stigmatizing
or isolating them.

Fourthly, we need to do a better job of protecting
health-care workers and other volunteers from the
affected countries, who should be able to serve their
countries without fearing for their lives. Last week,
Liberia reported that 28 health-care workers had been
infected in the previous 30 days. This week, Sierra
Leone lost its sixth and seventh doctors to Ebola. And
yesterday a doctor died of Ebola in Mali.

Approximately 330 health-care workers have died in
this outbreak. Health-care workers need better training
and better equipment to prevent more deaths. To help
meet that demand, the United States has opened a new
centre in Monrovia, which graduated its first class of
150 Liberian health-care workers, and has established a
mobile training unit that will move around the country
to train Liberians. The United States also opened a 25-
bed hospital to treat international and Liberian health-
care workers and Ebola responders - the Monrovia
Medical Unit - which is currently staffed by United
States Public Health Service officials.

While the needs of health-care workers who
bear the highest risk will come first, United Nations
peacekeepers serving in Liberia should also have access
to the United States-run facility in the very unlikely
event that they should need it. The peacekeepers in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia - civilians,
troops and police - will be remembered for rising to
the occasion andjoining this historic effort, rather than
pulling out at Liberia's time of greatest need.

Fifthly, and finally, we need to invest more in
preparing neighbouring countries to prevent new
outbreaks and contain outbreaks swiftly when they
occur. That is why the United States is working with
international organizations, including WHO, and
officials from more than 40 nations through the Global
Health Security Agenda, which is increasing the
preparedness of national health systems to respond to
infectious disease threats and making global health
security an international priority. As the recent events
in Mali make clear, if even a single link in the chain
of responsibility is broken, the welfare of an entire
country or region can be put at risk. Ebola punishes us
for every mistake.

When people survive Ebola in the affected
countries they are often given an official certificate
declaring them Ebola-free. I met several survivors
during my trip to West Africa. No matter what their
individual experience, not one seemed to feel fully free.
A 24-year-old former school teacher in Guinea, Fanta
Ulene Kamara, told me she had lived three lives: her life
before Ebola, her life in the hell of her infection and her
life as a survivor. She said the stigma she has suffered
since beating the virus had made her current life the
hardest. Friends stopped talking to her and avoided
her when they ran into her in public. When, at the end
of our meeting, I went to give her a hug goodbye, she
demurred and offered fist-bump - afraid, perhaps, that
she might infect me. Even she did not seem to fully
believe that she was free.

I tell Fanta's story because we can build all the
ETUs required, have access to fast, reliable laboratory
results, have plenty of contact teams and health-
care workers - we can check all those boxes and
more - and if we do not tackle the fear and the stigma
that still reigns in much of the affected region, we will
continue to fall behind. We will not shake ourselves
free of Ebola.

In Fanta's story, though, there is also reason for
hope. Besides being an Ebola survivor, Fanta is now
an Ebola caregiver. She works in a Medecins Sans
Frontieres clinic where her very presence shows
patients that the virus can be beaten. And for those who
do survive, Fanta provides counselling, preparing them
for the stigma that regrettably still awaits them outside.

We are a long way from being free of Ebola, but if
we choose to fight, if we do what we have seen works
to beat back this deadly virus, we will find the bravest,
most selfless partners in the world by our side, and
there is no fight more noble than that.

