Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to pay tribute
to Jordan for convening this important and timely
debate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. I will now make some remarks in my national
capacity.

Allow me to share with the Security Council words
of wisdom from young people we had the pleasure to
hear from last week in our capital, Zagreb. These words
were accompanied by a memorable performance when,
at 14:07, hours on 16 April, 147 students lay on the
ground in front of the Croatian National Theatre in the
centre of Zagreb and remained motionless for exactly
147 seconds. With this act, Croatian students wanted
to draw public attention to the tragedy that happened
in Kenya on 2 April, when 147 students were heinously
murdered on their university campus. Croatian students,
paying respect to their perished colleagues, sent the

message from which I will borrow several important
sentences:
"Without proper communication, differences
lead to misunderstanding, misunderstanding leads
to conflict, and conflict to tragedy What made
those 147 students different? Being Christians? We
believe that race, religion, ethnicity and orientation
are irrelevant when talking about human rights.
They are universal, but unfortunately vulnerable
The Kenyan tragedy reminds us that the safety that
we take for granted is a luxury to others."

Many important and wise words have been shared
with us here today. We are proud to add to today's
debate these several lines, the voice of our youth.
We are encouraged by their yearning for committed
actions against Violence, intolerance and all forms of
discrimination. Youth can be at the very core of the
solution for Violent extremism. Young people can serve
as positive role models and should embrace this role
without hesitation. They can influence and inspire their
peers, raise public awareness and encourage a broader
discussion within a society.

However, in order for the young generation to be
capable of doing that, we must enable them to develop
all their potential in that regard. Violence is often
rooted in fear, prejudice and, ultimately, ignorance.
That is why education is paramount and should be
inextricably coupled with guaranteeing safety and
security for our youth. Knowledge and education are
among the most powerful tools for fostering tolerance
and open-mindedness. They are powerful weapons for
fighting against hate speech and ignorance that are so
often leading to insecurity and Violence. It is insight
and information that foster common understanding and
lead to the development of confident and strong young
individuals, unsusceptible to the darkness of hate. By
doing this, we are strengthening the social fabric of
every society and of the global community.

What many present-day crisis areas have in
common, besides suffering and misery brought by
armed conflicts, is that they encompass some of the
youngest societies in the world. The average age in
some of these countries is below 18 years. We should
not treat this as just another statistical fact. Today,
when we are challenged with the escalating threats of
terrorism and radicalism, we must focus on providing
for the needs of the young generation and strengthen
their sense of feeling both safe and included. We must
enable them to be heard and allow them to acquire
intercultural competencies with which they can
understand and appreciate diversity both within their
societies and globally. And we must provide young
people with jobs - youth unemployment is a problem
that goes way beyond being just an economic category.
Unemployment takes away perspective for the future.
Lack of perspective is among the worst kinds of
poverty; it causes a society of peace and tolerance to
erode from within.

Today's topic cannot be addressed thoroughly
without taking into account the development component.
Only with a holistic, multidisciplinary approach,
which includes the implementation of the adequate
development policies and legislative frameworks,
education and inclusive work with a number of
stakeholders such as academia, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector, religious authorities
and media, can we achieve sustainable results in
countering terrorism and in promoting peace. Our
policies must therefore be exemplary and all-inclusive,
eliminating all inequalities, both social and economic,
in our societies.

By tackling issues such as political and social
discrimination, exclusion and marginalization, we are
doing our utmost to prevent the further recruitment of
new terrorists. By spreading and nurturing education,
knowledge, tolerance, interfaith and intercultural
understanding, we can give a significant blow to
the misleading narratives and ideologies of Violent
extremism and terrorism. In this regard, States
also have an obligation to stimulate and strengthen
cooperation with civil society and its capacity to tackle
the challenges of Violent extremism and any form of
radicalization.

Finally, let us be mindful of the fact that it is today
that we plant the seeds for a better future.

