Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General, among us,
and thank him for his statement. I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and, through you, the
group of five small countries, for choosing the timing

of this debate and its subject. At the outset, we would
like to align ourselves with the statement to be made
later by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

This is the first time since 1994 that we have held
an open debate on the reform of the working methods
of the Council. Such a reform would be carried out on
the basis of the concept paper before us, which has
accurately laid out the framework of the discussion.
The formal aspects of the note in document S/2006/507
do not undermine the importance of this debate, and,
has been said, format is a twin of freedom. The note
codifies practices that have been imposed since the
19905 to accommodate the changes that have taken
place in the international environment and the
increasing acceptance of the role of the United Nations
in dispute settlement. We have therefore left behind the
atmosphere of confidentiality of previous decades and
established rules for announcements, statements and
important briefings. There is no doubt that doing so
offers a response to some of the demands of the
international community, in particular after the holding
of the 2005 World Summit.

Despite all of that, ensuring continuous
improvement means, by definition, that such efforts
must be continued. The note is not the first attempt -
and will not the last - and, as stated in its
introduction, it is no more than a number of measures
that were previously agreed upon.

To summarize, complex texts that are difficult to
understand do not provide an adequate response to the
issues evoked, including those contained in the
Secretariat's document addressed to the Council dated
17 February 2007. That response highlights the fact
that progress must be made on other elements, and a
balance must be struck between the question of
whether to hold informal consultations or meetings on
the one hand and the type of meetings to be held on the
other. Informal consultations, which take up most of
our time must only be resorted to in exceptional
circumstances. How can we respond to demands for
reform and deal with matters that are important to all
those who work for the Council, under Articles 24 and
30 of the Charter, when we are dealing with a nearly
invisible body that is continuously in session behind
closed doors, without any need or any objective
justification for such an institution?
Concerning meetings, if the note considers public
meetings more important than private meetings, the
many types of open meetings and public meetings and
the reasons for selecting each one of them need more
objective checks and definitions. We believe that an
open debate, which is closer to a public debate, under
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure, must be
considered more important than debates in any other
format. That has not, regretfully, been the case. There is
still hesitation - albeit often selective - within the
Council in resorting to that format.

We have no doubt that more transparency would
enhance the legitimacy of our resolutions and promote
their wider acceptance. Such acceptance will be
achieved when the background and the different points
of View in our debates are known by all and our
commitment to the principles of the United Nations
and Article 24 of the Charter can be verified by all.
Some might say that an increase in transparency would
be at the expense of the efficiency that is so important
for a body responsible for international peace and
security. But in focusing on efficiency, we should look
beyond mere decision-making: an increase in
transparency will not affect efficiency if it is carried
out in the following manner.

First, we must expand open debates, particularly
on issues that have been under lengthy consideration
by the Council, so that open debates become the rule
and anything else the exception. The limitation of open
debates or their late announcement affects the right of
those interested in addressing the Council to do so and
makes their participation more rhetorical than actual or
effective.

Secondly, we must develop the other formats of
open debates, particularly press briefings, so that they
allow wider participation, which would respond to the
needs of smaller States for comprehensive briefings.
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, in particular, address
that matter.

Thirdly, we must develop and codify the
participation of States that are not members of the
Council in the work of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council.

Fourthly, we must deepen the Council's
relationship with regional organizations such as the
African Union, since many of the issues that are
considered before the Council have a direct impact on
their members.

There is no doubt that procedural matters evoke
differences among Member States, something that the
United Nations has known since its inception. The
adoption of the rules of procedure of the Council has
been frozen for a long time, and those rules remain
provisional. There are many demands, of course, from
within the Council and General Assembly as well as
from outside, that we take some sort of action
concerning this issue.

A working group has been established and
continues to undertake very important efforts under the
leadership of Ambassador Arias. We are committed,
under the terms of concept paper S/2006/507, to
continue to work for that purpose. The working group
has presented today a very important issue concerning
its work. We support its work and we would like to get
a briefing as soon as possible on that matter.

