Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): Speaking at
the tail end of a long day, one suffers from the possibility
of merely repeating what has already been said. I hope,
Mr. President, you will be patient with my repetition. But
first of all let me congratulate you and your delegation on
having organized this interactive debate.

This is not the first time in the last 18 months that
the Council has held such an open debate on Africa. Why
are we here? It is not because of a lack of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional bodies; not
because the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
mechanism has been ignored; not because there are not
sufficient meetings; not because there is a shortage of
special envoys to go and decipher the problems of Africa.
We are here because of the continuing crisis in Africa, a
crisis of conflicts. We are here because this important
body, in spite of the many debates we have held, has
failed to take adequate action. We are here because there
is an inadequacy of political will, and because of that
inadequacy there are not sufficient resources to address
the conflicts in Africa.

Meetings are very good, but what Africa needs now
is action. I am reminded of the great explorer and
missionary, David Livingstone, who is associated with the
end of the slave trade. When he reached that part of
Africa now called Malawi, he said that he was looking
for a healer of Africa's bleeding soul. Africa was
bleeding from the continued slave trade. Today, if
Livingstone were to come back, he would say that he is

 

looking for a healer of the African conflicts. That is why
we are here.

I should like to divide my remarks into three parts.
Africa needs immediate action. Immediate action means
preventing conflicts, stopping the current conflicts and
stopping them from spreading and escalating. Africa needs
what we call in United Nations language "rapid deployment
of peacekeepers". Without that, the various components of
peace - not only in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, not only the Lusaka process, not only in Sierra
Leone and elsewhere - still have the potential to
disintegrate.

Peacekeepers separate combatants. Their presence
prevents escalation; it enables fragile peace to take root. We
have seen two recent examples of rapid deployment and
their effects in Kosovo and in East Timor.

The Security Council did not say that the East
Timorese should stop fighting before intervention.
Similarly, in Kosovo the Council did not say that the
combatants should honour the peace agreement before there
could be United Nations intervention. We would like to see
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed in the same way.

The Ambassador of Canada was right on the ball. I, as
an African, would like to hear the sweet-sounding phrase
"African solutions to African problems". But the truth is
that many of our regional bodies do not have the capacity
to address the African problems. That is why we come
here; why we seek the partnership of the United Nations;
why we are calling for action.

I said that the immediate problem needs immediate
attention - that is, the stopping of conflicts. But we must
also have a slightly longer focus, and that longer focus
must, once again, be on prevention, but prevention of an
economic development nature. We must look upon
development as a conflict-prevention measure. Many
statements have been made here, with which I agree, that
poverty is a major cause.

Another aspect of prevention is a focus on democratic
governance, respect for human rights, respect for law and
the creation of inclusive political mechanisms or
governments. We have repeated conflicts because many
communities, perhaps ethnic communities, feel
discriminated against, excluded. We need partnership so
that Africa can build democratic structures, structures which
will make citizens of our continent feel that they have
ownership, not only in the economic system, but also in
the political system. We need partnership to strengthen
the existing States, because States play crucial roles in
preventing conflicts, while ineffective leadership is
exploited by those would like to disturb the peace.

We do not have to seek intricate solutions. We know
what Africa needs: what Africa needs from this Security
Council and from this meeting is action.

