Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" and its
supplement stressed the importance of peace-building and
proposed guidelines in that connection. The Security
Council responded by endorsing assessments of the report
in the statement made by the President of the Council on
30 April 1993, document S/25696. The Secretary-General's
reform process and his report on Africa (S/1998/318),
which the Council discussed on 24 September 1998,
provided an opportunity to resume the debate on peace-
building and to make a number of proposals.

Activities which can assist in peace-building are by
nature highly varied, but they all are aimed at strengthening
confidence and improving the living conditions in countries
afflicted by conflicts in order to prevent the resurgence of
violence and to create conditions for a lasting peace. Each
situation is unique, and it would thus be presumptuous -
even given this general debate in the Council - to try a
priori to define the content of such peace-building activities.
Nevertheless, on the basis of past and present experience,
three major categories have been singled out.

The first of these categories is the strengthening of
confidence and national reconciliation, which in many cases
covers the return and reintegration of refugees, the
demobilization and reintegration of combatants and the
development of dialogue between the former parties to the
conflict, as well as respect for human rights.

The second category is that of economic
reconstruction, which most often includes humanitarian
assistance to cope with emergency needs and also
rehabilitation or the establishment of economic and social
infrastructure, including in the educational system.
Demining is also a very important element of this aspect.

Finally, the third category, which is part of peace-
building, consists in the recreation of institutions -
political institutions - which in many cases have been
damaged or indeed destroyed by the conflict. The objective
is to achieve good governance. This includes assistance in
organizing free and democratic elections, the reconstruction
and strengthening of State structures, in particular, but not
only, in such sectors of sovereignty as justice and the
police. Finally, and above all, this often includes, or should
include, learning to share power.

Recent thinking has demonstrated that, aside from
these different guidelines, there also was a need to attach
specific importance to appropriate disarmament measures.
In many cases, parties to the conflict have built up major
weapons stocks which can contribute to a resumption of
hostilities or can be disseminated in an uncontrolled
fashion, thereby endangering the security of the region. In
this regard, France welcomes the decision of the
Secretary-General to emphasize the problem of light
weapons and small-calibre weapons and their illegal
trafficking, most particularly in Africa. We know that
Mali originally made proposals on this subject which are
now in the process of implementation. Peace-building in
regions of the African continent which have been
devastated by conflicts indeed hinges on decisive action
to cope with the dissemination of light weapons and
small-calibre weapons.

The prevention of the resumption of conflicts which
the Security Council deals with or has dealt with is
obviously a continuing concern. All too often,
international attention dwindles once the acute crisis
period has passed and once the media have focused
interest elsewhere. Then the parties to the conflict, the
United Nations, some countries which are more vigilant
than others or present in the field must cope with the
enormous task of peace-building, and this involves the
medium- and long-term mobilization of all necessary
means.

This is why it is important for the Security Council
to take into account in advance the aspects of peace-
building so that they might be integrated into a
comprehensive and sure strategy for the necessary
financing. Therefore, these aspects must be duly provided
for within the mandate which defines a peacekeeping
operation when that operation is decided upon. That
mandate forms the framework for action by the United
Nations and the international community.

When there is no peacekeeping operation, or after it
has been completed, peace-building activities which are
deemed necessary to launch or to continue should then be
the subject of the appropriate agreements between the
country or countries involved, on the one hand, and the
various protagonists who can contribute - that is, United
Nations programmes and agencies, regional organizations,
donor countries and non-governmental organizations -
on the other.

But all of this, I repeat, in no way eliminates the
importance and even the necessity of anticipating, at the

 

outset of thinking on a peacekeeping operation, the peace-
building activities which then must follow so that we can
have a general and understandable overview, and especially
so that we have an idea of the necessary financing. That
having been stated, the success of peace-building depends
on the will of the parties to the conflict to really put an end
to hostilities as much as on the mobilization of the
international community.

Experience has shown that three stumbling blocks
must be avoided.

First of all, there is the competition between the
protagonists and the temptation to go it alone. Close
coordination is indispensable to ensure that all of the
activities involved in fact are aimed at the stated objective.
Redundancies, duplications, even contradictions represent a
waste of very meagre resources. The special representative
of the Secretary-General, therefore, has a pivotal role to
play in ensuring coordination and avoiding overlapping and
wastage; moreover, promising experience has been acquired
in this area.

A second stumbling block, the lack of continuity
between the different stages of international action after a
conflict, can do major damage to the effectiveness of peace-
building actions, in particular following the completion of
an operation's mandate. An appropriate transition must be
planned in order to avoid an interruption of programmes or
the substitution in emergency situations of new partners
who have a different approach from that which had been
followed previously. I repeat, the Security Council must
have this element in mind when it decides on the ending of
an operation.

Finally - and this is the third stumbling block - the
temptation to impose artificial and predetermined models in
the various activity sectors for peace-building on the
countries or parties involved must be fought off. If we wish
these programmes to succeed and to achieve the established
objectives, then they should be developed in a spirit of
respect for diversity of the needs and characteristics of each
country, such as cultural characteristics, and linguistic
characteristics in particular. Otherwise, there are real risks
of rejection and ultimately failure.

The maintenance of peace and the solution of conflicts
hinge on an integrated approach to all aspects involved. It
would be erroneous to isolate the military dimension from
the other aspects, be they economic, social, cultural or
institutional. The numerous crises which the Security
Council has dealt with over the last few years are no longer
exclusively classic inter-State conflicts but are very often
- indeed most often - complex internal conflicts.
Therefore, there is a need for approaches to include, as
much as possible, all the dimensions. It is in this context
that the activities of peace-building must be taken into
account, planned for in advance by the Security Council.

This is the reason why we wish to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this debate. I think that we will be
more and more aware of this need to deal with the
fundamental aspects of peace-building from the very
outset of a crisis.

