Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank Egypt for organizing today's
discussion. We hope it will promote an understanding of
the subtleties of Security Council mandates in the areas
ofpeacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as defining
the boundaries between those two important focuses
of international support. We are grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed, to Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, and
to Mr. Youssef Mahmoud of the Independent High-level
Panel on Peace Operations for their detailed briefings,
which serve as an excellent basis for discussion.

Since the publication of the reports of those two
groups (see S/2015/490 and S/2015/446), Member States
have come a long way in developing specific, consensus
decisions that are embodied in the annual reports of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly and in resolution 2282 (2016).
While that resolution, on reform of the peacebuilding
architecture, did not change the fundamentals of the work
involved, it outlined the specifics of its various tasks. It
affirmed host Governments' primary responsibility for
identifying and implementing peacebuilding strategies
and clearly established that sustaining peace is a shared
task and responsibility that needs to be fulfilled by the
Government and all other national stakeholders.

The approach to sustaining peace today is often a
very broad one. First and foremost, it is inextricably
linked to post-conflict reconstruction and the prevention
of relapses into conflict. But before that can happen,
it is essential that existing conflicts be settled and a
robust peace assured. For that we need to understand a
conflict's root causes, each ofwhich has its own genesis
and individual specifics. We believe in establishing
clear tasks for missions aimed at eliminating the causes
that are particular to a conflict. Loading up mandates
with generic functions not only does not improve the
peacekeeping operations' effectiveness, it increases
their financial cost. As far as we are concerned, there
are specialized United Nations bodies and international
mechanisms for dealing with such issues.

We do not support the policy of expanding the right
of Blue Helmets to use force. While preventive action
is important, excessive interest in it is dangerous, as
is involving peacekeepers in offensive and counter-
terrorism operations. We do not want peacekeepers
themselves to be dragged into conflicts.

Sustaining peace is impossible without a political
process and national reconciliation, and should
unquestionably be seen as key to peacekeeping
operations. Today we were pleased to hear many
delegations, including the People's Republic of China,
the United States, France, Sweden and many others,
say that peacekeeping missions' main goal is helping
to achieve a political settlement. In some cases, there
may be reasons for directing peacekeepers to assist in
addressing issues such as disarmament, demobilization
and integration, security sector reform and so forth. We
cannot support tying tasks that belong to sustaining
peace, peacebuilding and peacekeeping directly to
issues of sustainable development and achievement of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. They
are connected, of course, but not always in a straight
line. Peace by itself does not guarantee development, or
vice versa. In general, we base our understanding of the
concept of sustaining peace, as enshrined in identical
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
the peacebuilding architecture, as a way to eradicate
the root causes of conflicts and bring about national
reconciliation and reconstruction.

