Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this important meeting. I also thank the Australian
Foreign Minister for her bold introductory statement.

Three months have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2170 (2014), which was
soon strengthened with the long-awaited adoption
of resolution 2178 (2014). In assessing the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to implement those
two resolutions since then, we note that the Organization
continues to turn a blind eye to Governments that
support terrorism, which have taken advantage of the
United Nations silence to compete repulsively with
one another in their pretence of combating terrorism.
The efforts of the relevant bodies of the United
Nations have been characterized by their slow-paced,
bureaucratic nature, rather than by a relentless and
effective endeavour to address the grave threat posed
to Member States and international peace and security
by terrorism.

Certain efforts have strikingly lacked the required
firmness. For example, the draft questionnaire on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, proposed by
the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism of the
Department of Political Affairs, is the result of three
years of work. According to United Nations officials,
it will take 18 months to implement and will require
terrorists returning from abroad to respond voluntarily
to the naive questions contained therein.

Another weakness of the United Nations response is
the ongoing opacity of certain subsidiary committees in
evaluating the information submitted by Member States.
For instance, I note that we have yet to receive a reply to
any of our official letters to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the most recent of
which, dated 22 October, has an annex of photographs
of victims of bombs containing skin-burning chemical
substances, used by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) against the inhabitants of the Ayn al-Arab
region in Syria. We also do not know if the Committee
is following or interested in ISIL's current attempts to
introduce and use VX toxic gas on Syrian soil, although
we alerted it to that danger two days ago.

For their part, high-ranking officials of the
Secretariat and even the Secretary-General's official
Spokesperson continue to use the expression "armed
opposition" in referring to terrorist organizations
included on the list of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. They
have persisted in this odd approach in spite of several
letters we have sent to the Secretary-General on this
issue, in which we have underscored the contradiction
between this description and the resolutions of the
Security Council.

At the international level, over the past three
months several States have taken measures to honour
their international commitments. Others, including
sponsors of international terrorism, have established
an alliance outside the framework of the United
Nations and without a Security Council mandate in
order to carry out air strikes against ISIL in Syria and
Iraq. In spite of appeals by the Syrian Government
for cooperation and coordination in order the achieve
the common objective of eliminating terrorism, some
States that support terrorism have undermined any
joint efforts on the matter. Today, nearly two months
after the beginning of air strikes against ISIL, we read
in American newspapers, such as The Washington Post,
statements by United States officials asserting that
more than 1,000 foreign terrorist fighters move across
the Turkish border into Syria and Iraq to join the ranks
of terrorist organizations, adding that the rate has not
changed in spite of the air strikes.
Therefore, while the monthly number of deaths
among ISIL fighters averages about 500, the
organization is taking in about 1,000 new terrorists per
month. That confirms what we have said repeatedly,
namely, that air strikes cannot achieve their established
goals if they are carried out in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and without cooperation and
coordination with the Governments concerned - and if
they are not accompanied by enjoining States that incite
and support terrorism to stop their practices that violate
the principles of international law and the provisions of
the Charter and pose a threat to international peace and
security.

In that regard, I should like to draw the Council's
attention to a story published in The New York Times
on 3 November. According to that paper, American
officials have suggested a possible action by the
coalition to expel ISIL from Iraq. That is a welcome
effort, to which we agree. However, after achieving that
objective and chasing ISIL out of Iraq, those terrorist
elements would be pushed into Syrian territory, rather
than eliminating them. The goal is probably to allow
the coalition to justifying continuing its operations for
three to four years.

Another dangerous element lies in the fact that
coalition aircraft have targeted oil and gas wells and
facilities that belong to the Syrian people, resulting
in a serious loss of gas and oil, damaging the Syrian
economy and sources of revenue that could help the
Syrian State and people to rebuild.

Buddhist wisdom has it that there are three things
that cannot be hidden for long: the sun, the moon and
the truth. My delegation expects the United Nations
to play an effective role in ending the practices of
States that support terrorism. Those terrorists who
are killing, raping and selling women in slave markets
are Saudi. The person who is massacring journalists
and foreign nationals is British. The kidnappers of
Christian and other clerics are Chechen. The head of
the Khorasan organization is a Kuwaiti. The kidnapper
of peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon is Jordanian, while the one who paid him
ranson is Qatari. Mehdi Nemmouche, who attacked
the Jewish synagogue in Brussels, is French. Some of
the beheaders are Australian. While the financiers,
the inciters and the arms providers are Saudis and
Qataris. The host, the smuggler and the trainer of
terrorist elements sent to Syrian territory is Turkish.
The supporter and ultimate beneficiary is Israeli.
Meanwhile, the suffering is being borne by Syrians,
Iraqis and Lebanese.
Paragraphs 14 and 31 of the latest report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2014/815) mentions the presence of thousands
of foreign terrorists linked to Al-Qaida in Syria and
Iraq, coming from more than 80 countries from all
regions of the world. In paragraph 71, the Monitoring
Team points to the existence of terrorist training camps
in Libya and neighbouring countries, namely, Jordan,
Turkey and Saudia Arabia. The Government of Syria
has been drawing attention to this development for
years, without getting any response to our appeals from
the so-called international community.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
welcomed resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
calling for their strict implementation. The Government
has also expressed its willingness to cooperate at the
regional and international levels to combat terrorism.
Syria will continue to combat the terrrorism posed by
ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups,
which some like to call moderate opposition and
which have been carrying out massacres and barbaric
acts against Syrians, some of which were timed
simultaneously with meetings of the Security Council
so as to accuse and criticize the Government of Syria.

I have in my possession the confession of one of
the terrorists who carried out the Houla massacre on
25 May 2012, one day before a Council meeting on
Syria. We will transmit that confession to the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). The confession has been translated and is
available to Council members.

Lastly, I should like to express my disagreement
with the unobjective opinion of the Permanent
Representative of France, namely, that ISIL has been
able to grow thanks to what he called the support of
the Syrian regime. This is a stunning contradiction
coming from the representative of a permanent Member
State of the Security Council. The French Permanent
Representative appears not to have heard or understood
what was said by his Australian colleague and Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) in his briefing. The Ambassador
of Australia said verbatim that ISIL as an organization
evolved from Al-Qaida in Iraq and its origins were in
terrorist networks in Afghanistan.

Obviously, Al-Qaida, its affiliates and its splinter
groups have been able to grow thanks to the support of
Saudi Arabia for terrorism in Afghanistan. We all know
that the perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks were Saudis,
and those who commit massacres in my country today
are supported by Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
Seventy-two Saudi clerics launched a call to all
Muslims to go to Syria for jihad. If Saudi Arabia is
serious about combating terrorism, how could it allow
those disreputable people, who claim to speak in the
name of Islam, issue calls for jihad in Syria? The
question is aimed at the Saudi Ambassador, who has
just left.

