The Deputy Secretary-General: Many of the
meetings that take place in this Chamber concern
conflict and tragedy. Today, we meet to celebrate a day
ofjoy for a country that has overcome the conflicts and
tragedies of the past.

Shortly after midnight in Dili, the United Nations
flag was lowered and the flag of an independent East
Timor was raised. History was made as the East
Timorese marked the birth of their country - the first
independent nation of the new millennium. This is a
cause for celebration for the people of that country,
who have shown such courage and determination in
pursuing their goal, but it is also an occasion to recall
the long and painful road that took them to nationhood
- a road which required many difficult decisions and
severe sacrifices. It is an occasion to remember those
East Timorese who dreamed of this day, but did not
live to see it happen. This is their day, too.

It is also a moment of inspiration for the entire
international community. The people of East Timor
have set an example to other nations in their steadfast
adherence to the core values of the Charter,
reconciliation and the creation of democratic
institutions that can safeguard human rights. Their
focus on the future, rather than on the past, augurs well
for the future.

And so today, we send our warmest
congratulations to the people of East Timor, including
President Gusmao, Prime Minister Alkatiri and Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta, all of whom have visited this
Council and who today assume the solemn
responsibility of leading their nation. We wish them
courage as they tackle the many difficult challenges
that lie before them. The United Nations will work
with them as they seek to strengthen the democratic
institutions that have been established and to promote
the social and economic development of their country.

Let me recall the role of the international
community in making this day possible. Let us
recognize the courageous contribution made three years
ago by Indonesia and Portugal in the signing of the 5
May agreement, which allowed the East Timorese to
express their will for self-determination. Indonesia's
forward-looking approach was illustrated yet again this
morning when President Megawati Soekarnoputri
attended the independence ceremonies in Dili. This
gracious gesture of statesmanship does, I hope, augur
close cooperation and friendship between East Timor
and all its nearest neighbours. Such relations will be
crucial to East Timor's long-term stability and
prosperity as a nation.

This Security Council can look back with pride
on its support for East Timor's quest for nationhood, in
which the Council has demonstrated unequalled
dedication and imagination. Through the creation of
the United Nations Mission in East Timor, the Council
helped establish a framework within which the people
of East Timor could express their will for self-
determination.

In the dark days of September 1999, the swift
action of the Council in dispatching a mission to the
region and in subsequently authorizing the deployment
of a multinational operation played a key part in ending
violence and paved the way for future progress. We
owe Australia a debt of gratitude for taking a decisive
lead in that operation, as we do all the countries that
took part.

In establishing the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the Security
Council took a bold and unprecedented step. Equipped
with a broad mandate, supported by adequate resources
and coordinated through a single chain of command,
UNTAET was able to help the people of East Timor
maintain internal and external security, while laying the
foundations for an administrative and political
infrastructure and promoting social and economic
development.

The international community's contribution of
financial and political support and the service of its
men and women on the ground has been essential. I am
sure the Council will join me in acknowledging with
gratitude and admiration the service of the military and
civilians of both missions. I am sure it will join me in
expressing heartfelt thanks to Sergio Vieira de Mello,
whose skill and dedication at the helm of UNTAET
over the past two and a half years have been essential
to the mission's success, and to Ian Martin, who
demonstrated exemplary leadership under pressure
during the crisis of September 1999.

I know the Council will also join me in paying
special tribute to the peacekeepers and United Nations
staff who died while trying to help East Timor in its
hour of need. We are forever in their debt.
Today is also an occasion to urge the international
community to remain generously committed to East
Timor in the future. The country faces enormous long-
term challenges, particularly in the reduction of
poverty and the building of a viable economy. Much
also remains to be done to consolidate the country's
fragile new institutions to ensure the stability and
viability of the new State. The Security Council's
decision to authorize a multidimensional follow-on
operation - the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor - testifies to its commitment to
completing the tasks that it has undertaken. It is a clear
demonstration of the Council's conviction that there
must be no exit without strategy.

The Security Council will soon be called upon to
support East Timor in still another way. Only a few
hours ago, the Secretary-General received from the
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of East Timor an
application for membership of the United Nations. This
request will be presented to the Security Council, in
accordance with the established procedure. We look
forward to its consideration by this body.

But today, the final word belongs to the people of
East Timor. As the Secretary-General said last night as
the flag of East Timor rose above Dili: "Viva Timor
Leste!"

