Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. We also welcome Serbian
Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic' and Mr. Hashim
Thaci.

We are concerned by the scant progress in the
negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade. Although
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union is
continuing, there have been only technical meetings
with regard to specific sectoral issues. It is essential for
the political leaders on both sides to continue to pursue
dialogue at the highest level.

Along those lines, we urge all the actors in Kosovo,
especially the political parties, to make every effort to
find compromise solutions that will end the stalemate
we have seen in recent months. In that regard, we
welcome the in-principle reached by the main political
parties on 18 November. We hope that their dialogue
will reach a successful conclusion.

It is also urgent to resume the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union in order to tackle contingent
issues that involve the municipal administration of the
region in order to ensure that the tense climate between
the Albanian and Serbian communities of Kosovo does
not persist. The lack of a political agreement following
the elections has direct repercussions on the stability
and governance of the north of Kosovo.

Turning now to security, we are concerned by
incidents on the administrative border of Kosovo,
a situation that requires close follow-up and the
continued implementation of effective measures to
prevent recurrences. It is essential to maintain a climate
of security while negotiations proceed.

On a related theme, with a view to the global
character that terrorism has recently acquired, Chile
welcomes the measures Kosovo has adopted to
address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
particularly in Syria and Iraq. We urge the political
and religious leaders of Kosovo to continue working to
combat violent extremism and terrorism with a view
to dissuading young people from those narratives and
from the danger ofjoining groups identified as terrorist
by the Security Council.
We wish to highlight the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
supporting decisive post-conflict actions. Specifically,
we mean the quest for truth andjustice. It is difficult to
speak of reconciliation policies without addressing the
need to search for the more than 1,600 people missing
as a result of the conflict. Such facts are fundamental
in order to begin healing the wounds left by the war.
We call on all authorities, political leaders and civil
society to continue to communicate any information
that could lead to the location of missing persons. The
forensic collaboration of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo is also helping to make this a
comprehensive rehabilitation process.

To conclude, as we have noted on other occasions
in the Security Council, we would like to call attention
to the work and central role that UNMIK continues to
play in promoting security, stability and respect for
human rights, which is a priority for progress towards
reconciliation among the communities. Only in the
context of respect for and appropriate protection of
fundamental human rights will it be possible to hope
for reconciliation and to imagine a peaceful future.

