Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First, please
allow me to join others in conveying our warmest
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica and to
the new Permanent Representative of Belgium.

My delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting his seventh report
to the Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Together with the latest reports of the Secretary-
General on the Sudan, in document S/2008/267, and on
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in document 2/2008/304,
the information brought to the attention of the Security
Council by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo today further
underlines the fact that the situation in Darfur, as well
as the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the Sudan, remain highly complicated.
My delegation shares the assessments in the Secretary-
General's reports and expresses its grave concern over
the reported attacks against civilians and humanitarian
forces in Darfur. We also fully acknowledge that
continued efforts are needed to create conditions
favourable to the peace process, including promoting
the trust and cooperation of all concerned parties in the
Sudan. We strongly support the United Nations
activities, including the missions mandated by the
Security Council to help bring about peace, security
and stability in the Sudan.

Fighting impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur is
part of the comprehensive endeavour for peace and
national reconciliation in the Sudan. We agree that
justice for the victims of such violations is a
component of a long-term and sustainable peace in the
Sudan. At the same time, we believe that the
application of justice must respect legal principles and
should be sensitive to the complex and volatile
situation in the country.

By resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the
ICC Prosecutor and requested the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate with the Court. The Council also encouraged
the Court, as appropriate and in accordance with the
Rome Statute, to support international cooperation with
domestic efforts to promote the rule of law, protect
human rights and combat impunity in Darfur. For this
judicial process to be successful, the international
community should try to find appropriate ways to help
promote further cooperation and participation by the
Sudan, as a sovereign State, with the ICC, as an
independent international judicial body which, in
accordance with its Statute, has a jurisdiction which is
complementary to national jurisdictions.
Confrontational attitudes and mistrust are not helpful
and should be avoided.

Viet Nam encourages the Government of the
Sudan to step up the efforts of judicial bodies in the
Sudan in exercising national criminal jurisdiction
relating to violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in Darfur, including through
cooperation with the ICC and with other countries. We
call on all parties to armed conflict in Darfur to abide
by national and international law and to participate in
the Darfur Peace Agreement and in the peace process
jointly led by the United Nations and the African
Union. The achievement and consolidation of peace
and stability in the Sudan will provide favourable
conditions for promoting the rule of law and combating
impunity.

