Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his detailed briefing. We have listened
to his remarks, which we endorse in full. We also thank
Ms. Aisha Khurram for her excellent presentation.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea regrets the low
turnout in the presidential elections on 28 September as
a result of the fear that the Taliban instilled in citizens
to dissuade them from going to the polls. Therefore, I
would like to take this opportunity to encourage the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission not to give up on conducting
a transparent, impartial and independent review that
safeguards the integrity of the electoral process and
to respond, in accordance with the law, to all electoral
complaints raised by candidates and others so that the
published results may be accepted by a majority of the
candidates and the Afghan people.

In addition, I would like to point out that Equatorial
Guinea, in its conviction that the peace process must be
inclusive and Afghan-led with a view to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict and a comprehensive political
solution, considers it particularly important that the talks
on a peace process continue. In that spirit, we welcome
all the efforts made to bring about a peace dialogue
between Afghans and the Taliban on 24 September
in Doha, as well as the meetings held with countries
in the region to strengthen the momentum of regional
cooperation through multilateral forums designed
to build regional consensus on peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the meetings held with other countries
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/935).

In the same vein, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue to include women in peace
processes and ensure that they take a leading role in
negotiations. We welcome the Afghan Government's
continuing efforts to improve legal safeguards to
eliminate violence against women and girls and the
launch by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the second
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) on
12 November.

With regard to the humanitarian and security
situations in Afghanistan, we share Mr. Yamamoto's
deep concern. Security incidents have increased by
13 per cent as compared to the same period last year.
Consequently, as stated in the report, between July
and September there was an alarming increase in
the number of civilian casualties recorded since the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) began systematically documenting them in
2009. Accordingly, we call on the parties to observe
international law and international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians.

Those incidents, coupled with drought, sudden
natural disasters, food insecurity and poverty, are
causing significant numbers of people to move and
confirm the considerable challenges facing Afghanistan,
which require the international community's ongoing
attention and the provision of substantial support to
the Afghan Government with the aim of improving its
security environment.

As this is our last intervention on this issue,
I would like to conclude by again commending
Mr. Yamamoto for UNAMA's continued commitment
and the important role it is playing in promoting peace
and lasting stability in Afghanistan. Furthermore,
we encourage the Afghan Government to continue to
work closely with UNAMA so that both, together with
the support of the international community, can meet
current challenges in Afghanistan.

