Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would first like to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this open debate on children and
armed conflict. I also commend you for your deft
stewardship of the Security Council this month.

We commend the role of the United Nations in
sparing children from suffering the horrors of armed
conflict. We are greatly pained at seeing millions of
children exposed to violence throughout the world
and becoming victims of wars for which they bear no
responsibility. The report submitted by the Secretary-
General (S/2017/821) refers to grave violations against
the rights of children perpetrated by terrorist groups
such as Da'esh, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others.
Children are murdered, recruited, exploited, subject to
sexual abuse and used as human bombs; while schools,
hospitals and civilian infrastructure are also targeted.
The report categorically condemns the forces of the
Syrian Government as well as the Myanmar border
guards and others for having perpetrated such heinous
and horrific crimes.

We unreservedly condemn the grave Violations
of international rules and regulations pertaining to
the protection of children perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation through its security apparatus, which uses
excessive and extrajudicial force against children.
Children are subject to summary executions, trials
before military tribunals before reaching the age
of legal responsibility, arbitrary arrest, physical
torture, psychological abuse and sexual exploitation.
We furthermore condemn other practices by Israeli
forces, including the demolition of homes, expulsions,
forced evictions, attacks against schools, creating an
environment of violence and terrorism, and attacks
against hospitals and health-care centres, which paralyse
medical services. We call for the Government of the
Israeli occupation to be held criminally responsible
for those grave Violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also call upon Israel to immediately
release all detainees and prisoners, including children,
and to put an end to the murders, maiming, abductions
and exploitation. We are surprised to note that the report
of the Secretary-General fails to mention relevant
recommendations to tackle such violations.

The report mentions the war taking place in Yemen
following the seizure of power by the Houthi rebels
and their allies in a coup 'detat, which the international
community rejected and the Security Council
condemned in resolution 2216 (2015). The rebels have
been identified as responsible for what is occurring in
Yemen. They were called upon to immediately withdraw
from the cities they have occupied, to turn over their
heavy weapons to the State and to engage in a peaceful
political transistion process under the auspices of the
Gulf Cooperation Council and with the participation of
the United Nations.

The report furthermore confirms the responsibility
of the Houthi rebels and their allies in the recruitment
of children, children who are being pushed into the
flames of the fighting, where hundreds leave their
lives, includingin in the wake of the arbitrary artillery
fire that occurs throughout Yemen. Rebel Houthi
militias have exploited children. They have recruited
thousands and used them as human shields. Millions
of children are deprived of education. They use
civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools,
to conceal military equipment. They have made them
staging grounds for bombing densely populated cities.
Thousands of landmines were laid, which cause a
high toll of civilian casualties, including significant
numbers of child casualties. The militias have also
attacked the borders and territoriy of Saudi Arabia,
with approxiamtely 30 ballistic missiles manufactured
in Iran launched against Saudi towns and villages.

Turning to the operations of the coalition to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, Saudi Arabia, like
other coalition forces, have respected the rules
and principles of international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The has coalition adopted clear rules of engagement
to protect civilians, including full respect for the two
principles of proportionality and distinction. The
coalition's operations take place in line with the notion
that all regions in Yemen are civilian unless there is
proof to the contrary. The coalition seeks to provide
protection for all civilians, particularly medical teams,
medical facilities and media teams. All operations of
the coalition forces in Yemen are consistently being
reviewed, particularly to determine military targets
and to take corrective measures as necessary.

Saudi Arabia takes very seriously all allegations
of civilian victims. Saudi Arabia, as well as the
coalition forces, in February 2016 set up a joint team
for the assessment of incidents and to investigate all
allegations of civilian victims. The team includes
officers, international humanitarian law rights experts,
weapons experts and other specialists. The committee
is an independent mechanism that comprehensively
reviews operations according to international law. It
has completed investigations into 37 incidents, adopted
the necessary recommendations and announced the
results of the investigations. Investigations are also
ongoing in 13 cases.

Saudi Arabia is persuaded that the natural place
for children is in school, behind desks, in gardens,
in parks and among their families. On that basis,
Saudi Arabia adopted an initiative, jointly with civil
society organizations in Yemen, to launch a project
for the rehabilitation of children who were recruited
by Houthi militias. The project consists of awareness-
raising programmes, educational and psychological
programmes, based on the local environment. I think
that everyone here is capable of comparing the two
images that I will now show the Council. This image
shows children who, according to Houthi militias, are
fighting alongside them - and, in fact, they say that
with pride. This other image is one of children who are
no longer fighters. Those children are now students,
thanks to a programme of the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance.

Our pain is tremendous. When a child suffers,
regardless of where in the world, one victim as a result
of armed conflict is a Victim too many. But it behooves
us to note that the report of the Secretary-General
mentions a decrease in the number of Victims among
children - 50 per cent lower as compared to the figure
for 2015 - thanks to the efforts of coalition forces. The
report further notes the measures that were adopted
by the coalition to limit child Victims, for example,
clear specific rules of engagement and measures to
avoid civilian targets, accountability in the event of
error, and, lastly, the establishment of a special unit
responsible for the protection of children at the level of
the military command of the coalition.

However, we categorically repudiate the figures
and statistics mentioned in the report with respect
to child Victims attributed to the coalition. The
mechanism that was recommended in resolution
1612 (2005) has not been respected. Members of the
coalition were unable to participate with regard to the
information that led to those figures. The sources for
these figures are in fact individuals and organizations
located in areas controlled by the rebels. There are
no effective measures to verify the credibility and
accuracy of the information. We expect that, given the
cooperation and collaboration by the coalition - and
that was mentioned in the report - such cooperation
will be reciprocated, and that the mechanism will be
respected so that independent observers, affiliated with
the United Nations, can take part so as to ensure that
the coalition will be informed about facts and incidents,
so as to safeguard the integrity and credibility of the
United Nations.

This report includes gaps with respect to details
as to coalition operations in Yemen. Just this month,
we hosted a United Nations technical team that visited
the coalition command centre, the unit responsible
for the protection of children, the joint team for the
evaluation of incidents and the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance. They were invited to discuss
the best ways to protect children. The technical team
also provided training assistance to those in charge of
the child protection unit so they can deliver on their
duties in a more effective and professional manner.

My country's delegation underscores that the
best solution to protect children is without a doubt
the establishment of an environment conducive to
lasting peace, preventing conflicts, ending all forms
of occupation and fully upholding international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, so
as to protect civilians and children and ensure that those
who Violate such principles can be held accountable.

We call upon the Secretary-General to work
towards achieving those goals, as well as to revisit the
report so as to guarantee its credibility, objectivity
and evenhandedness.

