Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to
extend its congratulations to you and your delegation on
your accession to the presidency of the Security Council

 
for the month of June. We are sure that your wisdom and
competence will allow the Council successfully to complete
its work during this month. My delegation's full support is
at your disposal should you require it.

I should also like to take advantage of this opportunity
to congratulate Ambassador Jean-Bernard Merime'e on his
effectiveness and the competence with which he guided the
work of the Council during the month of May.

My delegation would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the Permanent Representative of China. My
delegation also promises him its full cooperation.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his interim report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR). My delegation
would also like to thank in particular Mr. Shaharyar Khan,
his Special Representative, as well as the UNAMIR Force
Commander, General Guy Toussignant. Thanks to their
personal qualities and their competence, UNAMIR has been
able to complete its mandate. This is also thanks to the
good cooperation and regular consultations which they have
had with the Rwandan Government.

As the Council is aware, 10 months ago Rwanda was
a country in ruins, with one eighth of its population
decimated by blind genocide, advocated and planned by the
then Government.

My Government recognizes, with the Secretary-
General, the need to review UNAMIR'S mandate. The
situation has changed, and the current mandate had already
been overtaken by events. I should point out that my
Government, like any responsible Government, wishes to
exercise its sovereignty in the security field throughout
Rwanda.

The Government of Rwanda would also like to ensure
peace and build confidence between the Rwandese without
any go-betweens. So long as there is a go-between that
confidence can never be fully established. There is a need
to promote direct contacts between the people and its
Government.

My delegation is convinced that, now that UNAMIR
has a clear, realistic and feasible mandate, cooperation
between the Government and UNAMIR will be both total
and stronger.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
raise two points that deserve serious consideration. The first
is the insecurity arising from the refugee camps, which
are a danger to peace in Rwanda and its neighbouring
countries. My delegation would request the Secretary-
General to submit a report to the Security Council on the
situation in the camps rather than allowing the situation
to deteriorate and leaving it to the non-governmental
organizations and journalists to assess the situation. If the
countries that are affected by these refugee camps wish to
demonstrate transparency, we would ask them to form an
international commission to consider this question.

My second point concerns the arms embargo
imposed on the current Rwandese Government, which in
fact helps the criminals of the former Government who
planned last year's genocide in Rwanda. It is unfortunate
that the new Government of National Unity is now the
sole victim of this embargo, which is technically difficult
to implement in the refugee camps, since the group there
is not a political entity.

My delegation appeals urgently to the Security
Council to review its resolution 918 (1994), which was
designed to address a particular situation; that situation
and the government to which that resolution applied no
longer exist, and the resolution therefore penalizes a
government that is struggling to ensure security for its
people while the real criminals for whom it was designed
are arming themselves with impunity so that they can
finish off the crimes they started last year. We therefore
request a review of resolution 918 (1994), because the
Rwandese people not only need it, they have a right to it.

