Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his comprehensive briefing. We welcome
our brother, Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent
Representative of Iraq, and we thank him for his
valuable contribution to our discussion today.

In our view a recent political development in Iraq
is of great importance: the holding of provincial
elections in January in 14 out of Iraq's 18
governorates. This is reason for optimism, in particular
because of the high level of participation in the
elections, which is especially encouraging owing to the
participation of certain sectors and factions that had
boycotted the previous elections, held in 2005. We are
also gratified by the continued improvement in security
conditions, with a major decline in violence and the
absence of significant incidents on election day. This
further underscores the continuing improvement in the
capacity of Iraqi security forces and the decline in
sectarian sensitivities.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their efforts to support
the Independent High Electoral Commission during the
preparations for the elections held on 31 January, and
for their endeavours to resolve disputes with regard to
Iraq's internal borders. We urge UNAMI and the
Special Representative to continue to play their neutral
role in building confidence among the parties
concerned, in encouraging dialogue and consultation
and in working together with the Iraqi Government to
achieve consensus among all parties concerned.

We stress the importance of continued dialogue
among Iraqi actors concerning federalism and
hydrocarbon regulation, which are two important
issues that must be resolved in order to bring about
long-term stability in Iraq. We look forward to the
discussions to be held before the parliamentary recess,
which will continue to follow up the round table hosted
by UNAMI with a view to identifying specific,
concrete and feasible solutions.

We congratulate our Iraqi brethren on the Paris
Club's cancellation of Iraq's debt in December 2008.
This is recognition of Iraqi efforts to attain the
internationally agreed development goals and of Iraq's
ability to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
This augurs well for the country's economic and social
development. We welcome the fact that the United
Nations and the World Bank established an Iraq
Partners Forum in November 2008 in order to
coordinate the strategies of donors and of the United
Nations for Iraq and to ensure the greatest possible
transparency and effectiveness.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, we are
most satisfied with the continued return and
repatriation of Iraqi internally displaced persons and
refugees. Nearly 40,000 returnee families had been
registered in Iraq as of the end of 2008, which is a
great achievement, and one of Iraq's largest camps for
internally displaced persons, in Najaf, was closed. But
we are still gravely concerned at the continued
presence of millions of Iraqi refugees outside the
country, in particular in neighbouring countries. We
hope that the Iraqi Government will attach priority to
their return and will bring about the appropriate
circumstances for that to take place. Moreover, we
would like to express our satisfaction at the decline in
the rate of cholera infection and we welcome the
deployment of an international field mission under the
leadership of the World Health Organization in the
affected provinces.

Despite the progress achieved in the humanitarian
field throughout 2008, the circumstances of the
vulnerable sectors of the Iraqi people and the internally
displaced persons are still a source of concern. Even
relief programmes have been delayed because of the
lack of funding and, as the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/102) notes, 1 million Iraqis still face
food insecurity and a further 6 million would be
exposed to food insecurity were it not for the social
security network, primarily the public distribution of
food rations.

We note the rise in the illiteracy level to 24 per
cent in southern Iraq and that the school drop-out rate
has reached 10 per cent, while the level of chronic
child malnutrition in the South has reached nearly 22
per cent. With regard to northern Iraq, it is still
suffering unstable and fluctuating power supplies,
which is a very important element in the living
conditions of the people. We support the United
Nations call for investment to be concentrated in those
areas where the weakest humanitarian and development
indicators have been registered, as well as those
affected by conflict-related violence and population
movements.
There has been concrete progress towards
ensuring the human rights of Iraqi citizens through the
enactment of a law establishing an Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, but we are still
concerned by the killings of some political candidates
and electoral workers and the displacement of nearly
2,400 families from their homeland in Mosul at the end
of 2008, as well as by killings of and other attacks on
journalists, teachers, parliamentarians, humanitarian
workers, judges and lawyers.

We are gravely concerned by the occupying
forces' continued detention of more than 15,000
people, including 58 children, without arrest warrants
issued by Iraqi judges. I would like to underscore our
concern with regard to the general conditions of the
detainees under Iraqi custody, as noted in paragraph 47
of the Secretary-General's report. Some have been
deprived of their freedom for months and years in
substandard conditions, without access to defence
counsel and without being formally charged with a
crime or brought before a judge.

We welcome the end of the mandate of the
multinational force in Iraq and the Iraqi Government's
assumption of responsibility for security in the country.
We look forward to the full withdrawal of all
occupying forces from Iraq as soon as possible and the
reunification of the Iraqi people, and welcome the
emphasis on its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
would like to emphasize that the continued presence of
the occupying forces in any form could be a factor for
disunity and instability and would not contribute to
national reconciliation, which is considered to be an
indispensable condition for the stability, reconstruction
and economic growth of Iraq.

The situation in Iraq has changed since the
Security Council adopted resolution 661 (1990). It is
time for the Council to review that resolution and for
Iraq to recover the legal and international status that
prevailed before the adoption of that resolution and the
sanctions imposed on it in accordance with Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter. Here, we would like to
recall the request to the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on this matter in consultation with the Iraqi
Government in accordance with resolution 1859
(2008). We look forward to the issuance of that report
and to the Council's subsequent adoption of measures
in that regard.

In conclusion, we would like to express our great
appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the various
United Nations agencies working on Iraq's
reconstruction. We call upon all States to support Iraq
in order to help its brotherly people.

