Mr. Berger (Germany): First of all, let me join
my colleagues and extend my special thanks to the
Secretary-General for the report on the situation of
Afghanistan (S/2010/630), to Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive briefing and to Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks. We commend Mr. De Mistura for his able
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and would like to extend our
sincere thanks to the entire UNAMA team for their
tireless efforts. At the same time, we would like to
commend Turkey for its constructive contributions as
lead nation for Afghanistan in 2010.

On the occasion of the tragic passing of
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, I would like to offer
once again my sincere condolences to the United
States. I would like to pay tribute to Richard
Holbrooke, who, as special envoy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan, forcefully and tirelessly pleaded for a
political solution.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later in the debate.

I would like to add some remarks from our
national perspective. Germany is a major contributor to
the International Security Assistance Force and a major
international donor of development aid and assistance
to Afghanistan. In 2010, in the perspective of preparing
the process of handing over responsibility for security
to the Afghan Government, we have substantially
increased our civilian engagement to $580 million.
I would like to focus in my statement on the
following three aspects: first, the political dialogue and
reintegration; secondly, the evolution of international
engagement in Afghanistan; and thirdly, the future role
of UNAMA during the process of transition and
beyond.

The German Federal Government has presented a
comprehensive report to the Bundestag, our
Parliament, regarding the situation in Afghanistan and
the progress made since the beginning of the
international community's engagement in 2001. The
report does not hide certain setbacks, but also stresses
some encouraging positive trends, such as the facts that
the training of Afghan security forces is progressing at
a greater speed than expected; access to medical
services across the country has significantly improved;
and infrastructure development projects in border areas
in northern Afghanistan are starting to make a positive
difference in the lives of the local population.

When presenting the report to the Bundestag,
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle
underscored Germany's continued strong support for the
Kabul process and the concept of the transition of
responsibilities. He reaffirmed Germany's unaltered
commitment to assist the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in their endeavour to rebuild their country.
We remain strongly convinced that military means alone
cannot and will never lead to a sustainable resolution of
the conflict. In the end, only a comprehensive political
process can lead the way to sustainable peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region.

Based on the mandate of last summer's Peace
Jirga, the Afghan Government initiated the Afghan
peace and reintegration programme. We all know that
that process will need skilful diplomatic handling and
patience, and we should provide the time necessary for
it. The international community must also continue to
financially support the Afghan Government in offering
options for the reintegration of those who have
renounced violence.

In 2010, Germany provided approximately $13
million in assistance to the reintegration programme,
and we have earmarked more than $50 million for the
same purpose within the next four years.

In the year 2010, at the international Conferences
in Kabul and London and at the NATO summit in
Lisbon, the principle of Afghan ownership and the
framework for transition were put into place. A lot has
been achieved in favour of security and political
stability. The High Peace Council, representing key
groups of Afghan society, has become operational. The
Afghan peace and reintegration programme has been set
up, and the Government is working on implementing
the substantial commitments made. Democratic
elections have been held, and we join others in urging
all parties involved in outstanding issues concerning the
elections to address them in a way consistent with
Afghan institutions' responsibilities as defined by law
and the Afghan Constitution.

The year 2011 will be crucial. The first steps of
the transition will have to be made. And although
transition does not mean immediate withdrawal, as the
Lisbon NATO summit put it very clearly, the
international community, together with the Afghan
Government, will have to define the terms of reference
for the transformation of its own engagement after
2014, namely, an international engagement in
Afghanistan beyond combat troops.

At the NATO summit in Lisbon, Afghan President
Karzai officially suggested that Germany should
consider hosting an international conference on
Afghanistan at the end of 2011 - 10 years after the
Petersburg Conference - again in the former capital of
the Federal Republic of Germany, the city of Bonn.
The German Government responded positively to the
Afghan President's request.

In the light of developments in 2011, that
conference could provide a useful platform for
evaluating the progress achieved in the process of
transition of responsibilities. The international
community might wish to use the conference to discuss
the next steps to take on the road that remains to
transition and the parameters of the long-term
engagement beyond 2014. Finally, the conference
could also provide an additional positive momentum to
the political process in Afghanistan and the region.

With the transition of security responsibility
progressing, the international community and the
Afghan Government need to constantly reconsider their
priorities and adjust them accordingly. That includes
UNAMA. With the environment in Afghanistan
changing, and the set-up of the international presences
gradually evolving towards transition, the Security
Council will need to reconsider UNAMA's priorities,
competences and resources. The discussion process
needs to start in 2011. The members of the Council will
have to develop a common understanding of the future
role of UNAMA in a changing environment in
Afghanistan. The Council will need to provide clear
guidance and appropriate financial means for
UNAMA's role within the international network of
mutually reinforcing civilian institutions for assistance
in Afghanistan.

As an incoming member of the Council, Germany
is prepared and willing to live up to its new
responsibility and contribute constructively to this
process. We are ready to further strengthen the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and to
contribute to a peaceful, strong and prosperous
Afghanistan.

