Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I thank you and your colleagues for so
quickly responding to our call for the convening of this
meeting.

It is my honour, on behalf of the State of Qatar and
the States members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, to speak at this meeting on a city that is dear
to over a billion Muslims throughout the world.

Since the current Israeli Government took power, the
peace process in the Middle East has been subjected to
continuous suffocation. It would seem that whatever
breath remains in the process will finally be stifled by
Mr. Netanyahu and his Government if the international
community remains unable to assert the international
legitimacy of a State that it established legitimately, under
the auspices of the United Nations, more than 50 years
ago. That birth led to the infliction of a grave injustice on
a people that had not participated in any war, large or
small, national or racial, in a foreign continent. It is
indeed a historical paradox that the victims of racism and
extremism have now descended to depriving another
people of their political, religious and human rights. This
has turned inside-out the very principles on which the
United Nations and its Charter were established.

Since taking power, the current Israeli Government
has tried to impose a fait accompli on the occupied
Palestinian people by attempting to alter the legal,
demographic and geographic status of the Arab lands in
Palestine, particularly the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. That
city is holy to all Arabs and Muslims; no Power on Earth
can impose a fait accompli on over one billion Muslims
for whom Jerusalem is of the utmost sanctity. Since

 

taking power, the current Israeli Government has attempted
to drain all content from the peace process in order to serve
its political objectives, which run counter to that process. It
has prevaricated in implementing Israel's agreements with
the Palestinian National Authority; rejected any settlement
on Al-Quds Al-Sharif and any withdrawal from occupied
Palestinian territories; and turned its back on the Oslo
Declaration of Principles of 1993 and the Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and Gaza Strip of 1995.
These agreements were signed under the sponsorship of
States Members of this Organization and of this very
Council.

The current Israeli Government has tried more than
once to kill the peace process, opening a tunnel under the
Western Wall of the holy Al-Aqsa mosque, building the
Jebel Abu Ghneim settlement, and besieging the Palestinian
people and its national leadership. In attempting to flout the
peace process and to evade international law, the Israeli
Government, on 21 June, announced its plan to expand the
boundaries of the municipality of Jerusalem by creating a
so-called "municipal umbrella" that would include a number
of illegal settlements on the West Bank. This plan aims at
intensifying Israel's isolation of the city of Jerusalem and
at pre-empting the result of any negotiation to be held
between the Israeli and the Palestinian sides.

The peace process initiated in Madrid in 1991, and the
Declaration of Principles of 1993 and the Interim
Agreement of 1995 that resulted from it, were based on the
principle of land for peace. The Israeli Government is
attempting to stand the fundamental principles of the peace
process on their heads. In this way, it hopes to occupy
more land and obtain peace without relinquishing territory.
It is attempting to hold the Palestinian people and the entire
Arab nation hostage to its intransigence and the Israeli
sense of exclusivity. It seems that Israelis believe
themselves subject to no international law or legislation and
that international public opinion is of no importance
whatsoever to them.

The Israeli Government's settlement policy and its
attempts to alter the demographic and legal status of the
Holy City of Jerusalem are grave violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and of the Hague Rules of
1907. They are a flagrant gauntlet thrown down before the
resolutions of the United Nations and international
legitimacy, particularly the resolutions of this Council -
resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 672 (1990) - all of which
affirm that any administrative and legislative action or

 

measure taken by Israel to alter the legal status and
demographic position of the city of Jerusalem is null and
void. These Council resolutions deem the Israeli
Government's settlement policy in the occupied territories,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to be legally null and void
and an obstacle to lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

As we stand on the threshold of a new century, with
all its challenges, the international community, as
represented by the Security Council, must not accept
Israel's justifications for the injustices it continuously
metes out to the Palestinian people, in violation of
international law. In this specific situation, the Security
Council is called upon to uphold its previous resolutions
and must compel the Israeli Government to stop flouting
the will of the international community, violating
international law and threatening the peace process in the
Middle East with a slow death, which would be followed
by conflagration.

The State of Qatar calls on the international
community to compel Israel, the occupying Power in the
occupied Arab territories, to abandon forthwith its
irresponsible policies in order to spare the peoples of the
region the repercussions of the certain death of the peace
process, which would in turn unleash further violence.

