Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Chambas for his very comprehensive
briefing. Belgium salutes his daily work on behalf
of prevention, reconciliation, lasting peace and the
promotion of the rule oflaw in West Africa.

The precarious security situation continues to worry
us. I am thinking in particular of the intensification
of intercommunal violence in several countries in the
region, such as the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali. In
Burkina Faso, the increasing and spreading terrorist
attacks on the people and the Government of Burkina
Faso in the north, east and even south of the country are
a particularly alarming development. In that regard, we
note President Kabore's declaration on 31 December of
a state of emergency in the 14 provinces affected. These
terrorist attacks jeopardize development and threaten
regional stability. In Nigeria, the resurgence of Violent
attacks by Boko Haram is also very worrisome.

Belgium commends the courage and sacrifices of
the security forces in their fight against terrorists. At
the same time, we will not be able to end this conflict
by ignoring human rights. If we do, the successes of
the security forces will be merely ephemeral and will
jeopardize reconciliation and a lasting end to the crisis.
Moreover, as the report emphasizes, the response
to the challenges facing West Africa cannot focus
exclusively on security. A holistic approach is needed
to deal with Violent extremism, with an emphasis on
good governance, dialogue and mediation, as well as
sustainable and inclusive development.

Finally, the proliferation of conflicts between
pastoralists and farmers, which Mr. Chambas has
reported on to the Council in the past, deserves special
attention because these tensions are currently a major
factor for insecurity in the subregion and even beyond. I
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) for its recent launch of a study of
the causes of these conflicts. I encourage UNOWAS to
ensure the implementation of its recommendations and
thank it in advance for continuing to keep the Council
informed in the future.

The efforts of the Gambia, Liberia and Sierra
Leone deserve our support. National reconciliation,
post-conflict reconstruction and security-sector reform
are major challenges for those States, which are in the
process of strengthening their democratic institutions.
The political will to entrench good governance,
democracy and human rights will be decisive ifthey are
to make their gains last and participate in sustainable
development. I want to underline the important role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
these countries by maintaining a dialogue among all
partiesconcerned.AndtheactivitiesofthePeacebuilding
Fund remain crucial to addressing specific needs.
Belgium welcomes its prevention-focused approach.
These efforts should build on the new structure of
Resident Coordinators in a delivering-as-one approach.

UNOWAS also has another pioneering role to play.
While everyone agrees that a changing climate is one
of the causes of conflicts in the Sahel, UNOWAS is
implementing the will of the Council by studying the
impact of climate change in the context of a conflict-
prevention approach. That is critical work and I
encourage the Special Representative to continue it.
In conclusion, I would also like to stress the
primary role played by regional and subregional
organizations. I encourage them to maintain their close
coordination with UNOWAS. Experience and history
show us that it is by joining forces that we obtain the
most convincing results.

