Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I, too, would like first of all to associate myself
with the words of gratitude addressed to Ambassador
Chowdhury, who so skilfully and steadfastly guided our
mission. Like all our colleagues participating in that
mission, we concur with the findings in the report and, on
the whole, we consider that the report reflects in a
balanced and open way the current situation regarding the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). The only exception to that is paragraph 36, the
last paragraph of the report, which was agreed by us in
Pristina in another form. I will now read out the wording
that was agreed:

"The Mission wishes to express deep gratitude to
Mr. Kouchner, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK, to General
Ortufio, Commander of KFOR, and to their staffs for
their assistance and support."

That is the entire text of paragraph 36 as it was
agreed by all members of the mission in Pristina.
Apparently, the editors here in New York have tried to
improve it in some way, but the text that we now find in
the official document does not reflect the agreed position
of the mission. We greatly appreciate the efforts being
made by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and their entire staffs, under the most difficult
conditions, to promote a full and comprehensive
implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
mission report indicates the positive results that have been
reached in some areas.

However, the purpose of our mission was to see how
resolution 1244 (1999) was being implemented, and,
clearly, in so doing, while recognizing the positive
elements, we did identify the problems that persist.
Therefore, as we consider the report today and we think
about how the Security Council might activate the process
of implementing resolution 1244 (1999), I find it
absolutely necessary to focus first and foremost on the
problems and shortcomings. In that regard, I would like,
as Ambassador Duval has done, immediately to address
the security problem. All the minority representatives with
whom we met in Kosovo said with one voice that they do
not feel safe, that they do not have freedom of movement,
and that they experience discrimination in employment,
access to health care and in a number of other areas.

 

Those minorities also noted that they can carry out a
dialogue among themselves but that as soon as it comes to
a dialogue with representatives of the majority, then serious
difficulties crop up immediately. That finding is reflected
in the mission's report.

Terrorist acts continue. Churches are bombed, and
there are instances of killing. In this connection we must of
course be very cautious vis-a-vis the statistics that the
UNMIK command provides regarding the stark drop in the
level of crime in Kosovo. The United Nations Police
Commissioner, Mr. Sven Frederickson, recognized that the
drop in the level of crime can to a large extent be explained
by the reduction in the number of representatives of
minorities in the main areas of settlement.

Of course, we could all become convinced that
Pristina is beginning to look like a living city, and efforts
are being made there to return to normalcy, establish an
infrastructure, and so on. But the question is: who can live
normally in that city? There are practically no Serbs left
there, just as there are practically no Serbs in Prizren,
anilane and Pee. For all intents and purposes, those towns
were subjected to ethnic cleansing, and now they are in
essence ethnically cleansed.

Of great significance for that situation is the problem
around Mitrovica. We are wholly in favour of Mitrovica
becoming an integrated and multi-ethnic city. However, I
myself did not hear an answer to the question of whether
there will be a repetition in Mitrovica of the sad experience
that occurred in Pristina, Pec', anilane and Prizren when,
under the slogan of a "multi-ethnic city", the minorities
were in fact expelled.

I also wish to point out that in assessing the statistics
in terms of the drop in crime we must bear in mind that the
number of such crimes as arson and abduction is not going
down. Since the deployment of the international presence
in Kosovo, 900 persons have been abducted and, as we
have been told, the results of the investigations of those
crimes are still not known. Instances of arson, which
number 10 per day, also attest to the fact that this is not a
simple crime, but one aimed at intimidating, with a clear
political overtone. It is therefore clear to our delegation that
UNMIK and KFOR cannot, for the time being, guarantee
security for all in Kosovo, as provided for in resolution
1244 (1999).

Of particular concern is the fact that representatives of
the international presence are subjected to attack. For the
time being, we find no way of punishing those who are
guilty of that. I can recall that the murderer of a Russian
staff member of UNMIK escaped from jail four times. At
the moment, we do not know whether or not he has been
arrested for a fifth time. The international presence also
does not enjoy full freedom of movement in Kosovo. At
any rate, this applies to the Russian contingent, which has
not been able to deploy in the area of Orahovac. This is
a serious infringement of the international presence.

We also noted the importance of the problem of
controlling the activities of the Kosovo Protection Corps.
Unfortunately, in spite of our requests, when we were in
Kosovo we were not shown the report that was prepared
by the UNMIK human rights group on the activities of
the Kosovo Protection Corps. We hope that is not a secret
report and that the Secretariat will be presenting it to us
for consideration.

We continue to be convinced that the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) has not been fully disarmed.
There is an enormous amount of weaponry in Kosovo. In
that connection, monitoring the borders in accordance
with resolution 1160 (1998), for the purpose of
compliance with the arms embargo, is a priority task. We
hope that the request that the mission members made
regarding the need for more detailed information to the
Security Council on compliance with the arms embargo
will be met.

Given the lack of proper security, the problem of the
return of internally displaced persons is not being
resolved. According to various assessments there are
many such people - between 200,000 and 300,000.
Unfortunately, our question about when UNMIK will be
prepared to implement that provision of resolution 1244
(1999) is one to which we did not receive a satisfactory
reply. It was explained to us that conditions are not yet
ripe for such a return, but we did not see that there was
even a general concept of a return of displaced persons to
Kosovo. I think this is a serious omission on the part of
the UNMIK command.

While the return of Serbs and other minorities to
Kosovo may be slowed by the lack of measures on the
part of UNMIK to prepare the necessary conditions for
that return, the return of Albanians from Western Europe
is taking place on a regular basis. In our talks a concern
was expressed that among those Kosovo Albanian
returnees there are many people who had been arrested in
Western European countries for the commission of crimes
who were then actually sent back to Kosovo. That process
has to be followed very, very closely.

 

Nor did we receive a reply to our question regarding
how many people who had not resided in Kosovo in the
past came to Kosovo after the deployment of the
international presence. It is essential to give greater
attention to that question. It is no coincidence that the
Security Council mission's report calls for a very thorough
approach to the beginning of registration so as to prevent
any further artificial disruption of the demographic balance,
which has already been disrupted very seriously.

We also did not receive a reply to the question about
the situation regarding the use of the territory of Kosovo
for drug trafficking. The UNMIK leadership told us that
that problem did not exist. However, we, and I am sure
many other colleagues, are familiar with the information
provided by non-governmental organizations according to
which about 40 per cent of all heroin used in Western
Europe travels through Kosovo.

In addressing the situation in Kosovo and the problem
of the return of internally displaced persons and refugees
there, we must bear in mind also that, on the basis of our
observation, a pessimistic frame of mind prevails among the
minorities in Kosovo. If the situation in the security sphere
does not improve radically by the summer, many members
of minorities intend to leave Kosovo in order to find some
normal and tranquil place to live before the beginning of
the school year. Therefore, the task of bringing about a
radical change in the security situation is a priority, both for
KFOR and the international police, which must be beefed
up to the authorized level. That is also a task for the
Kosovo Police Service, which is now being trained, and I
am sure that here as well we must urgently resolve the
question of the return of the Yugoslav police to Kosovo in
the numbers agreed earlier.

Another problem that causes us concern is the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999)
that are connected with respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Paragraph 10 of that resolution states that the international
civil presence in Kosovo is established with a View to
provide an interim administration for Kosovo under which
the people of Kosovo may enjoy substantial autonomy
within the framework of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

In other words, everything that UNMIK is now doing
must correspond to that provision of the resolution and
must ensure the functioning of Kosovo with substantial
autonomy within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. At
present, that is not happening. We hope that the situation
will change after the creation of the joint committee, and
we think that this proposal, put forward by the UNMIK
leadership and supported by the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, is very useful.

The mission noted this in the report, and we expect
that in a very short time the joint committee will be set
up and will begin its real work on resolving specific
tasks. In that work, doubtless, we must take account of
the negative experience of the past, when all of UNMIK's
activities in administering Kosovo were not agreed with
the official representatives of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We have referred to these facts on numerous
occasions: taxation, licence plates for automobiles and the
release of identity documents. We reiterate that, in the
past, UNMIK issued birth certificates in which citizenship
was indicated as Kosovar. We have been raising this
question for a long time in the Security Council, and so
far no one has been able to deny that fact. We note that
since that time UNMIK has stopped issuing such birth
certificates, but we would call upon the UNMIK and
Secretariat leadership not to allow such violations of the
sovereignty of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
future and to resolve all issues related to the functioning
of this province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
consultation with the Belgrade authorities.
This is of particular significance for a problem such
as that of property ownership in Kosovo. We have heard
that UNMIK is preparing some kind of book on
privatization and, again, is doing so without consultation
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities.
Matters of property ownership are very dangerous and
may have an adverse impact on the situation in Kosovo,
including the efforts for a political settlement, as is noted
in the Mission's report.

Therefore, we would strongly request that all the
plans that are being made in UNMIK regarding
privatization should not be kept secret from the Security
Council. We also note the problem, directly connected
with the sovereignty of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, of establishing foreign offices or missions in
Kosovo. We would like to obtain information about the
basis on which such offices are established. At any rate,
as far as we know, no one has seen any regulations on
that matter. We hope that the Secretariat will be providing
us with that information in our future work.

I referred earlier to the problem of the return of the
agreed contingents of the Yugoslav Army and police,
which has not been resolved. The political process to

 

determine the future political status of Kosovo is being
delayed.

We are mentioning this for one simple reason: all of
these matters are mentioned in resolution 1244 (1999). It is
clear that this resolution is far from being implemented. It
is equally clear that we need to pay these problems
particular attention in our further efforts to implement this
resolution.

Today a great deal of attention has been paid to the
question of missing persons. As Ambassador Chowdhury
and Ambassador Duval pointed out, representatives of the
Kosovo Albanians and of the Kosovo Serbs and the official
representative of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia brought this problem to the attention of the
mission. It goes without saying that this is a serious, painful
and sensitive problem. However, we are convinced that the
key to solving this problem, as well as to resolving many
other issues regarding Kosovo, is finally establishing
normal working relations with Belgrade.

We all know that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have not rejected cooperation as a
means of resolving these problems. At the same time, they
want the fate of many thousands of Serbs who are among
the missing in Kosovo to be clarified. As regards the
readiness of the Belgrade authorities to cooperate, we know
that they have received representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights, Mr. Jiri Dienstbier, and
they are ready for further contacts. We also know that the
representative of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Pristina regularly visits
Belgrade, and we think that if UNMIK is seriously
interested in resolving this missing-persons problem, it
should work more actively on it in its contacts with
representatives of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Two last questions, one of which concerns the lack of
an agreement regarding the status of the international
presence in Kosovo. We have raised this question before.
We also touched upon it in the course of our talks with
representatives of UNMIK and KFOR in Pristina, and they
tell us that this question will be resolved without involving
Belgrade; it will be resolved by UNMIK and KFOR
finalizing a joint declaration. We find such an approach
inappropriate. We call once again for the establishment of
a normal agreement on the status of KFOR and UNMIK
with the leaders of the host country.

In the course of the briefing given by the
representatives of the humanitarian component in Kosovo
we also heard that the problem of the return of displaced
persons and refugees and the overall problem of returning
to normalcy is being impeded by the large number of
landmines in Kosovo. As of this date there are 3,000 anti-
personnel landmines and 3,400 anti-tank mines in
Kosovo, as well as a great deal of unexploded ordnance,
including 3,000 cluster bombs. This is a very serious
problem, which, it goes without saying, must be
addressed.

There is also a problem connected to the use in
Kosovo, in the course of the military actions by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), of weapons
containing depleted uranium. We know that the United
Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (HABITAT) set up a
special panel that dealt with the environmental impacts of
NATO's military action in Kosovo, and we know that its
findings are very alarming. We would like that panel to
continue its work so that the Security Council could be
apprised of its findings. If we want to fully implement
resolution 1244 (1999), we must know what the
environmental situation is in those regions to which
displaced persons are to return. Of course, we also need
to know the situation in those regions where people are
already living and are engaged in farming and other
activities.

On the whole, the Security Council of course needs
more and more detailed information about what is going
on in Kosovo. In this connection, I must mention the
recent media stories - in particular coming out of
Germany - about the fact that, for some reason, a report
of Finnish forensic experts who were working in Racak
is being kept secret. We would like such things to be
brought to the Security Council's attention, and we will be
taking steps to learn about the findings of that report.

In conclusion, I would like once again to underscore
that the Mission was extremely useful. It made it possible
to learn about the situation in the field. It made it possible
to agree upon important findings. We hope that the
members of the Security Council will support those
findings in their entirety, because it is important to ensure
a comprehensive approach to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Our delegation will do its utmost
to that end.

