Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Venezuela, on the way in which you have conducted the
work of the Council in February. It has been a very busy
and productive month. You have already discussed the
Council's activities this month in detail, Mr. President,
so my statement will be short and focused.

We commend the coherence of Venezuela's
programme of work through its promotion of debates
on crucial issues of fundamental relevance to the
Security Council's work, such as general issues
related to sanctions and the working methods of the
Council's subsidiary bodies; respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
and the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. I intend to highlight those thematic issues,
considering their importance within both the general
and the specific areas of work of the Council.

The debate (see S/PV.7620) on working methods
and general issues related to sanctions was an important
contribution to efforts to further clarify that very
sensitive issue. We commend the determination and
perseverance of the Venezuelan delegation in issuing
its concept note (S/2016/102, annex) on the subject, to
which you referred at length, Mr. President, and which
included pertinent and useful provisions regarding
improvements on, among other things, transparency;
selecting and preparing the Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies; and the interaction and coordination between
those bodies and the Council itself. Considering that
the Security Council makes extensive use of sanctions
regimes as an important tool in its attempts to restrict,
impose specific changesinbehaviourordeterindividuals
or entities in certain States who are regarded as threats
to international peace and security, the sanctions
committees will continue to play a substantive role
as a strong political tool for the Council. Such powers
involve the ability to enforce sanctions regimes and a
constant need to ensure their improvement, particularly
in their decision-making processes, adoption, targeting
and enforcement and also in their lifting.

Another important moment in this month's
programme was the debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect
for the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, which represented an opportunity for the
entire membership of the United Nations to reiterate
its attachment to them. In expressing the principled
commitment of the Organization to maintaining
international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, achieving international
cooperation in solving international problems and
becoming a centre for harmonizing the actions taken
by countries, the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter have become pillars of international
law, establishing a system of collective security that,
despite setbacks, has made the United Nations the main
front in the struggle over the past 70 years to achieve a
more peaceful world, based on respect for international
law, human rights and cooperation among all peoples
and nations, with the ultimate aim of strengthening
universal peace.
The founding of the United Nations and the adoption
of its Charter were remarkable achievements for the
international community. The Charter's principles
on the sovereign equality of all States and their duty
to fulfil their obligations in good faith; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; non-interference in other
countries' internal affairs; refraining from the use or
threat of use of force; and solidarity with preventive or
enforcement action directed at any State by the United
Nations have become pillars of international relations
and common wisdom. However, the reality is far from
rosy, and we continue to witness violations of those
principles that constitute a major threat to international
peace and security.

The third debate (see S/PV.7629) held this
month discussed the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way. It gave
Member States an opportunity to express their views
on this crucial issue at a time when negotiations are
being conducted on a draft resolution on the subject, its
links to conflict prevention and the need for the United
Nations to strengthen its capacity in the area.

The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture points out that, on the peace agenda,
peacebuilding is seen as a logical follow-up to
peacekeeping and peacemaking, with the main
objective of preventing relapses into conflict once
peace settlements have been secured. Based on that
assumption, two aspects mentioned in the report are
particularly relevant - the need for a change in the
mindset on the role of peacebuilding in the United
Nations system, based on the concept of sustaining
peace, and the Vision that peacebuilding must aim to
prevent the outbreak, recurrence or continuation of
armed conflict, and must therefore encompass a wide
range of political, development, humanitarian and
human-rights programmes and mechanisms. Sustaining
peace, according to the report, is a permanent task,
before, during and after conflict, and requires that we
adjust our approaches to peacebuilding.

With regard to the responsibilities of the United
Nations system, and based on the objectives I have just
outlined, peacebuilding covers the Organization's three
pillars and main organs, Whose activity must be better
coordinated and harmonized, and more fully devoted
to the prevention of armed conflict and maintenance of
peace through the promotion of the values and principles
enshrined in the Charter. Since, as such, peacebuilding
cuts across all United Nations activities, it must be
understood as an evolving concept based on the need
to constantly adapt to the realities on the ground and to
the time frames needed for political transitions in the
wake of violent conflict.

We would like to underscore that what is at stake
in the current review of the peacebuilding architecture
is the entire strategy of the United Nations system
for addressing conflict prevention, the root causes
of conflict and the creation of sustainably peaceful
societies in a context of diversity, challenges and
continuing threats to international peace and security.

Finally we would like to once again congratulate
Venezuela on its excellent presidency.

