Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council and to express Mexico's opinion
on this issue, which has the highest attention of my
Government. I am also grateful for the information that
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo has provided to the membership
on the situation on the ground and the vision of
the Organization.

Mexico is a country that is deeply respectful of
international law and the rules governing coexistence
among States and is also a firm promoter of peace and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is why we have
noted with concern the events that have taken place in
recent days in Venezuela. We urge the parties to the
conflict and the international community to maintain
a position of caution and avoid actions that could
unleash a further escalation of violence. We deeply
regret the loss of human life and respectfully call on
the Venezuelan authorities to avoid the excessive use
of force and to protect and respect the human rights of
the population.

We are aware of the serious difficulties faced by
the Venezuelan people. That is why we believe that the
delivery of humanitarian aid is necessary. But if it is
to reach those most in need expeditiously, it must be
channelled under the coordination and supervision of
neutral and competent international entities such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross or agencies
that form part of the United Nations system and
operate under the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.

Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has reiterated
his rejection of any type of violence in Venezuela
and has called for a peaceful and negotiated solution.
Mexico fully agrees with the Secretary-General. It
is precisely in these moments of high tension when
it is most timely to favour diplomacy, dialogue and
negotiation, in accordance with international law and
respect for human rights. In our view, that is the best
way to achieve a legitimate and sustainable solution
to the crisis Venezuela is living through, in strict
compliance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

That is why the Montevideo Mechanism, which
was endorsed by 16 countries of our region, remains a
viable and inclusive option for dialogue as an alternative
to achieve a peaceful, negotiated solution and has
become all the more relevant given the most recent
developments. If the two parties agree to participate
in a dialogue, Mexico stands ready to fully support
it and to immediately deploy the effective diplomatic
mechanisms that we know have been helpful in the past
with the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

The Government of Mexico renews its commitment
and readiness to work with all parties in the pursuit ofa
peaceful solution in Venezuela for the peace and well-
being of its people.

