Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to welcome you,
Your Excellency, Prime Minister Hariri, and to thank
you for organizing and presiding over this important
debate on intercultural dialogue for peace and security.
We thank the Secretary-General for his statement. We
also welcome the participation of The Honourable
Alistair Burt, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
Government of the United Kingdom.

This debate provides an opportunity to focus on
an important issue, particularly in View of General
Assembly resolution 62/90, which declared 2010 the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures.
We are convinced that promotion of intercultural
dialogue is one of the ways to foster peace and
security.

Some of the current conflicts in some parts of the
world could be attributed to a misperception and
misinterpretation of diverse cultures and beliefs. Such
misperception can also adversely affect or even fuel
hatred, stereotypes and discrimination. In this context,
therefore, dialogue and a deeper understanding
between cultures play a significant role in addressing
misconceptions and also help in fostering mutual
respect and peaceful coexistence.

We commend the work of the Alliance of
Civilizations, which has made important progress in
bringing cultures closer together and strengthening
intercultural understanding. Promoting intercultural
dialogue is also essential in building a multilateral
system based on mutual respect and in reinforcing
common interests. Discussions such as this on
intercultural dialogue create awareness and promote
international solidarity, tolerance, stability and peace.

In this increasingly globalizing world, respect for
cultural and religious diversity not only enriches
national identity but also promotes dialogue among
civilizations. That helps in creating an environment
conducive to exchange of information, building mutual
trust and understanding. Intercultural dialogue,
cooperation and harmonious coexistence contribute
significantly to the maintenance of international peace
and security. They also help in clarifying the values of
various cultures and faiths, thereby avoiding
generalizations and misconceptions.

We are convinced that as the international
community seeks to prevent and resolve conflicts and
to deal with new threats, intercultural dialogue can
play a useful role in tackling those issues. We therefore
salute UNESCO'S continued commitment to promoting
intercultural understanding, as well as the outcome of
the 2008 World Conference on Dialogue, held in
Madrid, and the Second Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations, held in Istanbul in 2009.

It is critical to expand and strengthen cross-
cultural contacts among various groups, including
youth, civil society, the media and academia. It is
important to continue promoting intercultural dialogue
for peace, for security and for development.

