Mr. Arnault (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like to thank the Council even
more warmly for its decision in March to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) (resolution 1589 (2005)). That
news was very positively received in Afghanistan,
which I believe was partly an indication of the positive
view that Afghans have of the United Nations, but also
an indication of Afghan public opinion's clear
understanding of the need for an ongoing international
presence if lasting normalcy in the country is to be
achieved.

I should like to summarize the main
developments since my last briefing to the Council in
March (see S/PV.5145). Unfortunately, I have to begin
by describing negative developments on the security
front. In March, I said that despite some improvement
in security since the presidential election, complacency
would not be appropriate, particularly for the United
Nations, whose operations had been attacked several
times. That warning has become increasingly urgent
over the last three months, because the country is
facing an increase in both the number and the gravity
of incidents in several provinces in the country. By
way of example, I can mention that in Kandahar a
moderate religious leader was murdered; this was
followed by a massacre in the mosque where his
funeral was being held, leaving more that 40 dead and
dozens wounded. I could also mention the murder of ll
Afghan employees of the Chemonics company and
relatives of those employees in Zabul and Helmand
provinces. Moreover, five deminers employed by the
United Nations were killed in Farah province; a
moderate religious leader was decapitated in his
madrasa in Paktika province; and, following a sham
trial, at least four Afghan police officers were executed
by the Taliban in Kandahar province. The situation is
particularly disturbing in provinces in the southern part
of the country, but it is also extremely serious in
provinces on the border with Pakistan. In Paktika,
members of traditional councils - sharas - a
religious leader and a teacher were assassinated by
extremist elements. Further north, in Kunar and
Nuristan provinces and in several districts of
Nangrahar, insecurity has also become worse.

The violence causes unpardonable suffering in a
country that is emerging from some 30 years of
ongoing conflict. It also jeopardizes efforts at
rebuilding in the most seriously affected regions. After
planning an increase in their presence in the southern
and eastern provinces, United Nations agencies, like
many other international and national bodies, have
been once again obliged to keep a very low profile; this
of course has an impact on the quantity and quality of
rebuilding projects in these regions. For its part, the
Chemonics company suspended economic projects on
1 June, and a Japanese road-building company
operating in Kandahar withdrew its staff two months
ago, thereby de facto stopping work.

Moreover, worsening insecurity has an impact on
preparations for the electoral process that should not be
underestimated. An electoral employee was killed on
2 June in Uruzgan, and there was an attack against an
electoral convoy three days ago, leaving one dead and
one wounded. Most of those who are standing for
office in Zabul have taken refuge in the provincial
capital and some have even gone to the neighbouring
province of Kandahar.

Of course, the violence is not only to be blamed
on attacks by extremist elements. Drugs, local rivalry,
corruption and ordinary criminal acts are problems that
must be tackled by strengthening the police and the
justice system and by improving local administration,
which itself is often a factor in the instability. But the
current offensive by extremist groups, including the
Taliban, is decisive in the current escalation of
violence. They have more money, they have more
effective weaponry, they have more powerful means of
disseminating radio propaganda, and they are most
definitely more aggressive vis-a-vis civilians and
demonstrate greater cruelty and indiscriminate
violence.

That violence is nothing new, even though its
resurgence this year is a blow to the hopes that
emerged after the presidential election. We experienced
a similar increase in violence at the same time last
year. The Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan
and the international forces responded effectively to
last year's extremist violence - so effectively, in fact,
that on 9 October millions of Afghans were able to
vote in relative safety, thereby making the presidential
election one of the most memorable moments in
Afghanistan's recent history. Today we need another
special effort by those two Governments and by the
international forces. Judging by the level of violence in
the most recent incidents, the new effort must be even
more intensive than the one made last year.

Without wishing to be alarmist, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to the consequences of
this climate of violence for the political transition in
Afghanistan, which is to be completed with
September's parliamentary elections. The legitimacy of
the institutions elected will not be called into question.
Their political grounding is demonstrated by the
unprecedentedly high level of popular participation in
the electoral process. However, their authority will be
short-lived if the problem of insecurity is not resolved.
From 1992 to 1994, insecurity made things easy for the
Taliban. The current heads of the Taliban and those
who support them seem to have made the calculation
that, since the same causes lead to the same effects,
insecurity and its impact on reconstruction will,
regardless of the progress made in the political arena,
be sufficient to keep the country in a situation of
instability where all options remain open.

I would add that the international response to
thwart that policy of destabilization cannot be limited
to combat operations on the ground. We must
resolutely attack the financing for fundamentalist
elements, the safe havens where they train and the
networks that support them, which have obviously
decided to invest considerable resources to block the
efforts made by Afghan authorities and the
international community in the course of the past three
years to stabilize the situation.

We welcome the recent high-level contacts
between the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
As guarantor of international security, the Security
Council has a duty to follow the situation closely and
to use its authority to support greater cooperation
against terrorism, something which Afghanistan needs
today.

(spoke in English)

It is against that difficult background that I am
able to report some encouraging developments with
regard to preparations for the elections. Since my last
briefing, some important steps have been taken.

The electoral administration has now been
deployed countrywide. Offices are fully operational in
Kabul and in the eight regional centres, as well as in all
34 provincial capitals. The secretariat of the electoral
authority currently employs 350 international and
8,000 national staff. That staffing component will
gradually rise, and will reach 500 international and
200,000 national staff on election day, the bulk of
whom will man the polling stations. The secretariat of
the electoral authority also includes a dedicated
electoral security component consisting of 36
personnel, assigned to Kabul and the eight regional
offices. Like last year, physical security will be
provided by the Afghan National Police and the
Afghan National Army, with support from the
international military forces and with the coordination
of the electoral authority.

In addition, an independent Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) has been created, which is
responsible for handling and adjudicating all electoral
complaints and challenges, including those against
candidates and against the electoral authority and its
secretariat. Its five members, three of whom are
appointed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and one each by the Supreme
Court and the Afghan Human Rights Commission, are
currently supported by 15 staff.

Candidate nominations started on 4 May and
ended on 26 May. With the exception of notable but
isolated incidents of violence, the candidate-
nomination process was generally calm. All in all,
more than 6,000 candidates submitted their
applications for the 249 seats in the lower house and
the 420 seats in the 34 provincial councils. Roughly 12
per cent of those candidates are women, which
guarantees that the quota of women in Parliament will
be fulfilled. In three provinces, however, the number of
female candidates is less that the prescribed quota for
the provincial councils. Those seats will therefore
remain vacant during this term of office.

Candidate-to-seat ratios varied widely across the
country, indicating that some elections will be much
more competitive than others, in particular in the
eastern and south-eastern provinces. Interestingly, and
somewhat surprisingly, only 12 per cent of the
candidates who registered indicated an affiliation to a
political party; whereas the number of parties officially
registered has reached 72. While that may be because
of the electoral system chosen, most consultations
indicate that the overwhelming perception with respect
to political parties remains negative and that candidates
prefer to run as independents, even when they have the
support of a political party.

One of our key concerns about the nomination
process was that, given the amount of power still
wielded at the local level by commanders, the latter
could have highjacked the electoral process from the
very beginning by preventing others from nominating
themselves. However, of the total number of
candidates, only approximately 4 per cent are
considered to have actual links to armed groups. In
addition, only 212 Government officials have
nominated themselves. That suggests that officials and
commanders have not dominated the nomination
process and that ordinary Afghans were not
discouraged from nominating themselves as
candidates. Subject to further analysis, that also
suggests that Afghans will be presented with a genuine
political choice on polling day.

At the same time, a countrywide assessment
carried out by UNAMA and the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission indicates that, while only a
handful of cases of intimidation, violence and other
infringements of political rights actually occurred,
there is a broad perception that people linked to armed
groups are determined to prevail and will use violence
and intimidation to succeed in getting elected. That
perception could still undermine the fairness of the
election, particularly if electoral competition should
become more acute and more violence-prone in the last
stages of the process. Many measures are therefore yet
to be taken in order to neutralize those inclined to use
intimidation and to reassure the majority of candidates
and the population at large that they can vote in
September without the risk of reprisals.

One such measure is the strict implementation of
the electoral law that disqualifies candidates who
command or belong to armed groups. The process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which
is nearing completion, has reduced the ability of a
number of senior commanders to use large military
formations to control the political process. At the same
time, many smaller commanders are still linked to local
militias that can exercise undue influence in the
context of provincial elections. Once all nominations
were received, the Electoral Complaints Commission
requested that - on an ex officio basis - the
Ministries of the Interior and Defence, the National
Directorate for Security, the international military
forces, UNAMA and the United Nations disarmament
body indicate whether any of the nominees maintained
such links with armed groups. As a result, 254
nominees suspected of having such links have been
identified and have been informed by the ECC that, in
order to prevent their disqualification, they have until
7 July to disarm or to provide evidence that any links
with armed groups have been severed.

The exercise is not without risk, as some
commanders are keen to run for office and retain their
military influence at the same time. The security team
of the Electoral Authority is working with the national
security agencies and international military forces to
plan for possible security implications resulting from
candidate disqualifications.

On the basis of that and other measures, we hope
that the Afghan Government - supported by the
United Nations and the international forces - can
improve further the environment in which the electoral
campaign and polling will take place and ensure that
the outcome of the elections is as representative as
possible of the national will, as prescribed in the Bonn
agreement.

The next step in the electoral calendar will be the
update of the voter registry that will start tomorrow
and last one month until 21 July. This is not a
comprehensive voter re-registration, but rather an
opportunity for those who were unable to take part in
last year's registration drive to register, and for
registered voters to change their polling place to reflect
the province in which they actually reside and wish to
vote. Additional efforts will be made to accommodate
returning refugees through the provision of voter
registration in Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees encashment centres until
close to election day.

I should make a special mention of funding.
Indeed, funding for the elections project remains a
concern. The election project is still $78.8 million
short. The United Nations Development Programme
expects that major pledges totalling $34 million will be
disbursed shortly, bringing the gap to $44 million. As I
mentioned in my last briefing, there is very little
breathing space in the electoral calendar and any delay
in funding will result in the inevitable postponement of
election day.

In my last briefing, I mentioned that, while the
delay of the election until September was not our
preferred option, it was not without some advantages.
One of those advantages was the opportunity to make
progress on disarmament. Indeed, on 30 June, the
disarmament of the former army units should end, in
keeping with the timeline endorsed at the Berlin
conference last year. At this point, over 60,000 officers
and soldiers have been demobilized and over 49,000
have entered - and in some cases completed -
reintegration into agriculture, vocational training and
small business programmes. Over 90,000 personnel
from the Afghanistan militia forces have been taken off
the Ministry of Defense payroll, resulting in over $100
million in savings for the national budget. Over 9,000
heavy weapons have been cantoned and millions of
tons of ammunition surveyed, and efforts are being
made for their safe disposal. That is a significant
achievement for the Afghan authorities and a first step
in the larger effort of demilitarizing the country and
paving the way for the Afghan national army and
police.

In the coming months, the focus will shift to the
next step: the disbandment of illegal armed groups,
which I already mentioned in the context of the
elections. Illegal armed groups - which may include
as many as 180,000 men across the country - may not
pose a direct threat to the State of Afghanistan, but
they are a serious obstacle to the restoration of State
institutions - police, judiciary and civilian
administration - at the provincial and district levels.
The Government is currently conducting two pilot
projects, with the support of UNAMA and international
military forces; negotiations with local commanders
are underway; and the provincial reconstruction teams
of the International Security Assistance Force and the
coalition are defining the type of support that they will
be required to provide.

(spoke in French)

Allow me briefly to raise three additional points
that I believe are of interest to the Council.

The first relates to the so-called peacebuilding
programme to reintegrate members of the Taliban and
the Hezb-i-Islami who have renounced violence,
pledged allegiance to the Constitution and agreed to
cooperate with the authorities. The members of the
multiethnic national commission chaired by
Mr. Mujaddedi have been chosen and will be
announced soon. The commission's regional offices
have not yet been set up, but procedures are under way
to check the backgrounds of candidates for
reconciliation and to monitor them once they return to
their communities. About 150 individuals, including
approximately 50 former Hezb-i-Islami and 100 former
Taliban members, have benefited from the programme
to date.

Like all nascent endeavours, the programme is
not perfect, but some have wrongly distinguished
between the openness in our approach to former Hezb-
i-Islami and Taliban members and the programme for
disarming local commanders. In fact, however, the two
approaches are not different - the Government is
reaching out to all those willing to forsake violence,
without renouncing the possibility of prosecution that
their past activities may call for.

My second point relates to the needs of the
conflict's many victims. In resolution 1589 (2005) of
24 March, the Council welcomed the report of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission on
transitional justice and called for international support
for that endeavour. Since then, the Government of
Afghanistan, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and UNAMA have worked together to
draft a plan consisting of a series of short- and long-
term measures to ensure dignity and respect for victims
and their right to truth, compensation and justice. At a
recent conference in The Hague, several Member
States offered support for such a plan and we trust that
the first actual steps will be taken as soon as possible.

I should like to say a few words on the post-
electoral agenda for peacebuilding in Afghanistan. In
his last report to the Council on Afghanistan, the
Secretary-General offered some ideas on that topic.
Since then, the Afghan Government has reiterated its
hope that international cooperation will continue after
the installation of the National Assembly and that it
will be carried out within a framework and with
specific objectives reflecting future national priorities.
Those priorities would include institutional reform -
which is particularly weak at the local level - the
application of a coherent strategy for economic
development, and combating drugs. Moreover, the
Afghan Government hopes, as we do, that the new
cooperation framework will offer the opportunity to
improve the effectiveness of international assistance,
especially in strengthening local capacity, ensuring that
the State is endowed with sustainable institutions, and
the closer involvement of regional countries in the next
phase of Afghanistan's reconstruction. Along with the
Afghan authorities and representatives of the
international community, we hope on the basis of those
principles to develop a platform on which the internal
political forces and Afghanistan's neighbouring and
distant partners can agree.

The completion of the Bonn process is in sight.
Certainly, the political transition is too far ahead of the
building of the State, which remains very fragile, and
of economic reconstruction, which remains fragmented
and distorted by the drug situation. The Government
and the new Parliament must redouble their efforts to
catch up on the political transition before they
themselves are overtaken by the disenchantment of the
people with their democratic experience. However
difficult the circumstances, with the support of the
international community the difficulties are not
insurmountable.

The prerequisite for success in that difficult
endeavour is the restoration of minimum security
conditions. Without that, there is no hope. We must
acknowledge that, after three years of striving, the
extremists' capacity to cause harm and to stonewall in
certain regions has not been diminished. There are
urgent lessons to be learned without delay.

