Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting. I
also appreciate the Secretary-General's insightful and
comprehensive report (S/2009/304) and his briefing on
the five key points this morning.

The immediate aftermath of conflict presents a
unique set of challenges and opportunities. That period
is a most delicate and fragile time. Early action taken
at that stage is critical because it will shape and
determine the overall future of the peace process. It
may not be an exaggeration to say that the window of
opportunity for establishing sustainable peace depends
mostly on how the immediate aftermath of the conflict
is managed. My delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's report as an answer to this challenge and
fully endorses the recommendations contained in the
report. Looking forward to rapid and full
implementation of those recommendations, I would
like to highlight the following points.

First, our efforts in early recovery stages should
be focused on having a quick impact on the ground.
Immediately after the conflict, immense demands tend
to arise in virtually every sector of the political, social
and economic arenas, while the national capacity to
accommodate these demands, virtually destroyed
during the conflict, has yet to be restored. Thus, our
efforts at this stage should be focused on meeting those
most urgent and immediate demands and responding to
peacebuilding priorities.

Among other tools, quick-impact projects have
proven to be instrumental in this area. The United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire is one of the United
Nations missions that are actively employing this tool
with successful results. My delegation hopes that
quick-impact projects will be more fully integrated into
our peacebuilding strategies at their early stages.

Secondly, integrated leadership and expertise
from the United Nations needs to be present on the
ground at the earliest possible stage. In this vein, my
delegation welcomes the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to establish senior-level leadership
mechanisms and support teams that would be present
on the ground at the earliest critical juncture. I also
appreciate the recommendation to broaden the rapidly
deployable civilian expert groups.

While peacebuilding efforts should be country-
specific, in many cases involving post-conflict
countries certain priorities are observed recurring at the
early stages. With the experience and lessons learned
so far, my delegation believes that we will be able to
develop ready-made toolkits to address those recurring
priorities.

Thirdly, the role and capacity of non-State actors
and civil society need to be recognized and integrated
into the peacebuilding process. As the report points
out, we look forward to United Nations Volunteers
playing a catalytic role in mobilizing civil capacity to
re-establish the fabric of society. In addition, the role
and participation of women in the process should be
particularly ensured, as many of my colleagues have
emphasized during today's debate.

Fourthly, while the strategic partnerships of the
United Nations with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions are imperative, more
coherent partnerships with development agencies, most
notably the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), should be reinforced. The early engagement
of these agencies will ensure a smoother transition
from early post-conflict stages to peacebuilding and
ultimately to longer-term sustainable economic
development. The expertise of UNDP in assisting
national capacity will also be instrumental in early
national capacity restoration. Additionally, how we can
secure the synergy effect between the integrated
peacebuilding offices and United Nations country
teams is another area that deserves our close attention.

Fifthly, as Ambassador Munoz properly pointed
out this morning, we recommend that the Security
Council consider the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission in a more proactive manner. There has
been an increasing number of observations that
peacekeepers are early peacebuilders. Moreover, the
mandates of the current peacekeeping missions clearly
overlap with peacebuilding activities, as is illustrated
in the case of the United Nation Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Considering this fact, our discussion on
peacekeeping missions should closely incorporate the
peacebuilding aspect, especially in the early stages.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that national
ownership is an indispensable principle in the
peacebuilding process. National authorities should take
the primary responsibility for rapidly re-establishing
national institutions, restoring the rule of law and
revitalizing economies. National ownership should also
be respected in the consideration of the peacebuilding
process in cases where advice is requested. When a
post-conflict country requests to be advised by the
Peacebuilding Commission, its request should be
considered in a most prompt manner, focusing on the
interests of the people on the ground.

