Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): May we first take
this opportunity to welcome you, Minister Azad, and to
congratulate your country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
congratulate you and your delegation on the excellent
manner in which you have conducted the large volume
of work in the Council thus far. We also wish to thank
you for convening this meeting on a subject that we
believe is central to the very existence of the United
Nations. My delegation would also like to express our
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
excellent and comprehensive report, which guides our
debate today.

It was through our determination to save
humankind from the scourge of war and violent
conflict that we founded this Organization. However,
more than 50 years after the founding of the United
Nations, peace among and within nations remains
elusive. This is demonstrated by the multitude of crisis
situations under consideration by this organ. These
realities are a stark reminder of how far the United
Nations has to move to realize its original principles,
contained in Article 1 of the Charter, in which we
accept a duty "to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace".

Indeed, South Africa not only subscribes to the
ideals of the United Nations Charter, but also, through
its own history, knows very well the importance of
searching for ways to avoid armed conflict and
establish durable peace.

Our own experience has convinced us that the
prevention of armed conflict requires the establishment
of institutions of democratic governance, the rule of
law and the protection of fundamental human rights,
including the right to development. These values have
also found greater acceptance among the leaders and
the people of the African continent, as demonstrated by
the adoption of a number of declarations that aim to
highlight the interdependence of peace, democracy and
development. However, our efforts to promote and
institutionalize these values and principles will not be
fully realized without an enabling international
environment in which we can deal with the challenges
of poverty and underdevelopment.

It is from that vantage point that my delegation
would like to commend the Secretary-General on his
efforts to create greater awareness of the need to
develop a culture of prevention, not only among
Member States but also among other important actors
in the international arena. The report before the
Council today is an important step in those ongoing
efforts. Since the Secretary-General's report was issued
only a few days ago, my delegation wishes to limit its
intervention to a few preliminary remarks on those
aspects that deal with the work of the Security Council.

In addition to Article 1, Chapter VI of the Charter
places a moral and legal responsibility on the Security
Council to play a key role in the prevention of armed
conflict. Until recently, its approach had been to wait
for conflicts to develop into violence and even war.
The Security Council would then intervene through
costly peacekeeping operations, which at times served
only to freeze the conflict and which failed to address
its root causes. My delegation therefore welcomes the
recent trend for the Security Council to dispatch fact-
fmding missions to areas of conflict, such as the recent
missions to Kosovo and to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the broader Great Lakes region. Those
missions provide valuable impetus to local and regional
peacemaking efforts and also provide the Council with
valuable first-hand insight into the dynamics of a
particular situation.

Recently the Secretary-General has also used an
innovative mechanism, that of the inter-agency task
forces, to create greater international awareness of the
challenges confronting particular countries or regions
in crisis. These task forces could play a valuable role
complementary to that of the fact-finding missions of
the Security Council, and consideration should
therefore be given to the harmonization of the two
approaches.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the Security Council should consider
establishing innovative mechanisms such as an
informal working group to discuss prevention cases on
a continuing basis. Early warning inputs, including
periodic regional or subregional reports from the
Secretary-General, would be invaluable to such a
working group. The Council could also, through the
Arria formula, engage interested parties that might be
able to provide valuable information and support with
respect to preventing conflict. The Security Council
could thus shift its activities much more into a
proactive, preventive mode by enhancing its early
warning capacity.

Undoubtedly, regional organizations have a
crucial role to play in the prevention of armed conflict
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
efforts of the Organization of African Unity in the
conflicts in the Comoros and between Ethiopia and
Eritrea are a concrete demonstration of that role. We
concur with the Secretary-General's assessment that
the coordination of prevention efforts between the
United Nations and regional organizations could
benefit from a more targeted and substantive
interaction. One area that comes to mind in that regard
is the sharing of information and analysis on a
particular situation. It is our view that there is a need
for greater inclusion of regional perspectives in United
Nations analysis ofa particular conflict situation.

The Security Council should urgently focus on
the practical steps that can be taken to become more
proactive. The Council must demonstrate the political
will to carry out its mandate in an equitable and
consistent manner, and with greater determination. In
that regard, it is also imperative that the Council's
structure and working methods be reformed to be more
equitably representative and to take account of the new
realities of complex conflict situations. A credible and
effective Security Council is an important step in our
collective search for sustainable peace.

The reality in many countries is that war and
poverty feed on each other. My delegation therefore
concurs with the assessment that meeting the challenge
of sustainable peace and security in that context
requires a multifaceted and comprehensive approach
which addresses the root causes of conflict. As noted in
the report of the Secretary-General, these challenges
cannot be met by a single actor or entity but require the
involvement of a wide range of actors, each with its
own comparative advantage. The Security Council can
certainly do its part by taking practical steps to ensure
that we fully realize the vision we embraced in the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations and in
the purposes and principles set out in its Chapter I.

