Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As the text of my statement will be distributed, I will
deliver a summary of it, highlighting the most salient
points.

First, I would like to express Spain's gratitude for
the organization of this debate.

Secondly, I would like to say that Spain fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union and that we thank the Secretary-
General for his annual report (S/2014/339) and the
Special Representative for the magnificent job she has
done.

I believe we all know that Spain attaches
great importance to the efforts of the international
community to put an end to the scourge of the violations
of children's rights in armed conflicts. We therefore
wholeheartedly support the incredibly important and
interesting Children, Not Soldiers campaign initiated
by the representative of Luxembourg. We are supporting
it with a substantial financial contribution. Without
neglecting the importance that should be placed on
the work done with armed groups, it is crucial that we
not forget the growing prominence of non-State armed
groups, and the campaign's objective therefore seems
accurate and realistic.

There are positive and negative elements to the
current situation. In terms of positive elements, we note
with satisfaction that public statements have been made
by the leaders of certain armed groups, who have issued
orders prohibiting the recruitment of children. We
believe that shows that the approach we have adopted
is the right one.

Spain agrees with and supports all the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. In particular, we share the view that the
protection of the children must be mainstreamed from
the beginning in every action undertaken by the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is crucial that that be duly reflected in the
mandates and that we take the necessary measures
to provide appropriate training to peacekeeping
operations for the protection of children. Among the
positive elements, we would also welcome the actions
undertaken by regional and subregional organizations
in this area. We believe it is important to highlight the
work that such organizations do on the ground.

However, we must not deceive ourselves. There
are still negative elements. Recent armed conflicts
have demonstrated the devastating effect of conflict
on children. The attacks on schools and hospitals,
the images of children killed or maimed as a result
of attacks against civilian targets and the continued
use of explosive devices in populated areas are tragic
events that we must put a stop to. Accordingly, Spain
calls on all parties to conflict to fully comply with the
provisions ofresolution 2143 (2014) and to cease attacks
on schools and desist from their indiscriminate use for
military purposes. Out of the 3 million refugees from
the crisis in Syria, over 1 million are children. I believe
that proves a point.
Spain is currently active in two crises that have
particularly relevant implications for children in armed
conflict: the Central African Republic and Mali. As a
signatory to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict of 2000 and to the Paris
Commitments, Spain has always ensured that its troops
deployed in both countries receive appropriate training
on the matter.

To conclude, the fight against impunity continues
to be a key and crucial element. I would like to reiterate
that the primary guarantors of children's safety and
well-being in conflict are Member States themselves,
who have the obligation and responsibility to protect
their own citizens, prosecute perpetrators and care for
victims.

