Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa, for his detailed briefing. We have also
noted the statement of Mr. Raymond Bale, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo and Chair
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.

We concur with the views of colleagues that
the Framework Agreement on Peace, Security and
Cooperation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region is the cornerstone for ensuring stability
in the Great Lakes region. We advocate full compliance
with all obligations by all the signatories of this still
relevant document, including respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in other countries' internal affairs
and the strengthening of confidence-building measures
among the countries of the subregion.

In that regard, we support an early start to
the operations of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
established by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda to counter the Allied
Democratic Forces. The fact that the Regional Oversight
Mechanism among the countries of the region is
holding regular meetings is a positive development and
a testament to the fact that the structure is robust and
can act independently and without external guidance.

We should note that, five full years after its signing,
the Framework Agreement's military provisions are
still far from being implemented. We commend the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which remains committed to combating
gangs and stabilizing the situation. We support full
cooperation between Kinshasa and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in that area. However, the armed
groups continue to be active in the country and in the
region as a whole. Their activities prolong inter-ethnic
conflicts, fuel illegal trafficking in weapons and
worsen the humanitarian situation. It is clear that a
military solution alone cannot resolve the conflict.
Comprehensive measures are needed to address its root
causes, including the strengthening of State authority
and the restoration of social institutions in territories
liberated by the rebels.

We are concerned about the situation with respect
to the repatriation of several hundred ex-combatants
from the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Uganda
and Rwanda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Of course, the ongoing contacts between the Congolese
authorities with the leadership of the M-23 are welcome
news, but the lack of progress in this area has already
led to recidivism on the part of ex-M-23 combatants
WHO have infiltrated the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from Uganda. In that regard, we cannot
help being concerned about the continuing mutual
accusations, including about with regard to support
for combatants and their recruitment of refugees into
their ranks. We think that the countries involved
should show maximum restraint and take steps to
avoid any escalation, including by using the expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, as provided for in the
Framework Agreement.

Another challenge for the Framework Agreement
is the issue of the presence of allies of Rick Machar,
former Vice-President of South Sudan, on the territory
of Democratic Republic of the Congo. We note the
progress that has been made in addressing that situation,
and we call on Mr. Djinnit, in cooperation with Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui to do everything
they can to make sure that the relevant provisions of
resolution 2348 (2017) are implemented. We note the
role of the Special Envoy in support of engagement
in the region, in particular with private investors,
with a view to generating momentum for economic
cooperation among the countries of the region and
building peace and trust among them.

Many countries of the region are at the stage
of actively building or reforming their democratic
institutions. Some have entered the crucial pre-elections
period. We believe that any domestic political solution
in those countries should lead to long-term stability if
it is arrived at and accepted by the participants in the
political process themselves. In our view, the imposition
of solutions, much less attempts to subjectively interpret
agreements reached, are unacceptable.

We believe that the responsibility for the
normalization of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is borne by the Congolese
people themselves. In that regard, constructive external
assistance can play a positive role. Above all, what is
necessary is the energetic and robust mediation efforts,
coordinated with the united nations of such regional
organizations as the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

