Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
taken the initiative of organizing today in the Security
Council a debate on the threats that can be posed by
climate change to stability and security. The meeting of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that
has just completed its work in Brussels reaffirms the
scope of this phenomenon and its potential
consequences.

Designing and implementing an effective,
sustainable response to the threats resulting from
climate change requires a threefold effort on our part.
First of all, we need to become aware of and recognize
together the dilemma caused by two legitimate
concerns - on the one hand, the need to promote
economic growth and to combat poverty, because
serious inequalities themselves are sources of tension
and conflict, and, on the other hand, the need to reduce
fossil fuel consumption because by increasing the
impact of climate change such consumption could
exacerbate a series of already existing factors giving
rise to tensions.

It is increasingly clear that climate change
exacerbates a multitude of non-military threats.
Examples are already well known - increasing
competition for access to water and arable land; the
increase in infectious diseases; natural disasters, such
as drought and flooding; the loss of agricultural land;
drop in agricultural production; increase in poverty; the
increase in social inequalities; displacement of
populations to cities; and acceleration of domestic and
international migratory flows.

Moreover, facts tend to show that the negative
effects of climate change are felt primarily by regions
and populations that are most vulnerable. According to
projections, this trend will continue. The prime targets
are also the least equipped to respond to this negative
impact and to adapt to it.

Additional pressures caused by climate change
increase the risk of having fragile States lapse or
relapse into civil war and chaos.

Secondly, we must abandon the idea that the
future will look like the past. Our conventional security
policies are all still often based on obsolete threat
assessments and are more geared to managing crises
than to preventing them. Security policies exclusively
based on national sovereignty appear less and less
appropriate in this context. To resolve the climate-
energy-security dilemma means that we need to rethink
thoroughly the scope of our policies using a broader
concept of security. By establishing greater trust
amongst us, we will be able to create more
interdependence among our countries.

The third aspect is to design and collectively
implement systemic innovative responses to complex
challenges caused by climate changes. As this
preliminary stage, Belgium would like to make the
following points.

First, climate change must gradually become one
of the factors to be taken into consideration in
discussing conflict prevention. It would be useful to
have a more in-depth analysis, in particular on the
basis of the recent reports of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) of the security
implications of climate change, accompanied by policy
recommendations to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations to respond to them.

Secondly, the Secretary-General must be
encouraged to bring to bear his institutional authority
to catalyse political will for concerted, decisive action
in the face of climate challenged, particularly with
regard to the security dimension.

Thirdly, the United Nations should, furthermore,
intensify its early warning efforts as well as its efforts
to prevent and manage crises caused by climate change
in the most vulnerable areas. It could assist countries
concerned to elaborate risk reduction strategies.

Fourthly, the strengthening of capacity to prevent
and manage climate risks should also be envisaged at
national and regional levels.

Fifthly, environmental cooperation should be
used and sustained more as an instrument for conflict
prevention and as a confidence-building measure. It is
particularly important in the case of river basins shared
among several States where the water flow is
threatened because of climate change.

Finally, States have everything to gain from a
close dialogue with civil society, which, today, is a
crucial driving force for global awareness of climate
challenges in all of their dimensions.

The picture drawn by our experts is definitely a
disquieting one, even an alarming one. Nevertheless,
there is still a window of opportunity open, even
though there is not much time.

Belgium is determined to actively contribute to
finding and implementing collectively political and
technical solutions for the consequences of climate
change, with particular attention to the regions that are
most vulnerable.

Only a leap forward in political courage and a
change of mindset that invites us to replace our short-
term reasoning with long-term reasoning will allow us
to live up to our responsibilities as custodians of
collective security.

