Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Jordan notes the
recommendations contained in the High Representative's
forty-sixth report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/777, annex).

We deplore the ongoing deterioration of the
situation, especially regarding crucial major reforms
on many issues vital to Bosnia's future. The reforms
will take place only when the political actors decide to
overcome their differences, and we call on them to do
so.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2183
(2014), renewing the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea for another year.
Its continued presence will enable the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, strengthen capacities and
assist Bosnia and Herzegovina according to its specific
needs. We note the recent efforts of those forces, for
example in ensuring stability during the latest elections.
That is why their presence is of the greatest importance
for lasting peace and reassures the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Serious efforts on the part ofall members ofBosnian
society to rebuild political and social coexistence and
to pursue the path towards peace demonstrate civil
society's ability to achieve stability and to raise their
country through combined efforts, despite the tragic
conflict experienced in the region. Furthermore, such
efforts sound a warning to all who would seek illegal
secession, which is a continuing source of concern to
my country. We therefore affirm the need to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The elections held in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
October were a major step forward for the country.
However, it will continue only if the winners in the
elections demonstrate political resolve and unity to
realize the hopes and aspirations of the voters who went
to the polls following the protests earlier in the year in
order to ensure a better future for themselves and the
generations to come. The reaffirmation of political will

by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the polls
represented a ray of hope. The elections reinforced
Bosnians' nationalist orientations, but the results
called for unity in creating a society that recognizes
all nationalities and where they can recognize each
other, without exclusion, in the common interest of full
citizenship for all.

The socioeconomic problems of the country after
the war are growing following many major shocks
to the economy, in particular the recent floods, all
of which call for international assistance to help the
country restore its economic fortunes. Indeed, the
major problem is the failure to attract investment. The
precarious situation and political inertia in Bosnia and
Herzegovina represent both a threat and a danger. We
call on the authorities to continue to promote broad
participation in political life, taking into account the
concerns of all minorities. We appreciate the efforts of
the neighbouring countries and countries of the region.

