Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to
hear joint briefings on the activities of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee. We
commend the three Committees for providing us with
updates every three months in a coordinated manner.
This approach enables us to keep pace with the
changing nature of the threat of terrorism while
promoting transparency in the work of the Security
Council.

As stated earlier by the Chairman of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Committee, Ambassador Cesar Mayoral,
the Security Council adopted a new resolution - 1617
(2005) - in which the due process concerns of
Member States have been addressed. In our View, the
Council has introduced very pertinent elements in the
resolution, such as the checklist, which to a great
extent will assist Member States in the preparations of
their reports to the Committee.

It was gratifying to receive the Chairman's report
on his recent visit to Nigeria and Chad - two
strategically significant States in the subregion of West
Africa. Contacts with Member States are crucial for the
Committee to understand the operational field
constraints in the implementation of resolutions by
States, rather than perceiving and interpreting delays as
reporting fatigue.

We recognize the commendable work by the
Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Madam Ellen Margrethe Loj, during the past three
months. We thank her for her leadership in facilitating
the full staffing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). This will enhance the
Committee's capacity to review and respond
expeditiously to reports received from Member States.

With the adoption of resolution 1624 (2005), the
Security Council has placed additional responsibilities
on the Committee. Some Member States are still
struggling to fulfil their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001). It is nonetheless an important undertaking
that should be implemented with appropriate assistance
for those States requiring such assistance. In View of
that, the ongoing efforts by the Committee and CTED
to facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States should be stepped up and augmented
through increased cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations.

Mr. President, I wish to commend your
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee and your report,
which touched on the Committee's task of examining
national reports and the steps taken to address the
problem of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. Tanzania commends
the Committee's achievements during the past three
months, particularly in successfully implementing the
examination of first reports submitted by Member
States; we hope that the remaining 67 Member States
will submit their reports in due course.

Tanzania attaches great importance to the
activities of the Committee and finds merit in its
outreach efforts, including encouraging Member States,
both individually and through regional seminars, to
prepare and submit their reports on time.

Tanzania also commends the Committee for
facilitating extensive cooperation with international
organizations that are ready to offer relevant technical
assistance to Member States. We wish to congratulate
Argentina and the United Kingdom for organizing the
first regional outreach seminar for countries of Latin
America, and we look forward to a seminar of a similar
nature next year in China for Asian countries.

Before I conclude, let me make one general
remark. Persistent terrorist attacks worldwide and the
changing nature of terrorist threats make it imperative
for the three Committees to increase cooperation
among themselves in information-sharing and dialogue
with Member States, in particular concerning late
submission or non-submission of reports and
implementation of all Security Council resolutions.

It is also important to situate our coordinated
counter-terrorism strategies in the wider context of our
respective national, regional and overall international
efforts to combat terrorism, led by the Security
Council. The seminal Madrid statement made by the
Secretary-General last year on combating international
terrorism is, and should be, a useful reference in this
endeavour.

