The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/272, which contains the first semi-
annual report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004).

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls all its
previous resolutions on Lebanon, in particular
resolutions 1559 (2004), 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), resolution 520 (1982) and resolution 1583
(2005) of 28 January 2005 as well as the
statements of its President on the situation in
Lebanon, in particular the statement of 18 June
2000 (S/PRST/2000/21) and that of 19 October
2004 (S/PRST/2004/36).

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized borders and under the
sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon.

"The Security Council welcomes the first
semi-annual report of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council of 26 April 2005
(S/2005/272) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004).

"The Security Council welcomes also that
the parties concerned have made significant and
noticeable progress towards implementing some

of the provisions contained in resolution 1559
(2004), while expressing concern at the
determination of the Secretary-General that there
has been no progress on the implementation of
other provisions of the resolution, in particular
the disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militia and the extension of the control of the
Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese
territory, and that the requirements of the
resolution have not yet been met.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the full implementation of all requirements of
resolution 1559 (2004), and calls upon all
concerned parties to cooperate fully with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to
achieve this goal.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
letter of 26 April 2005 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the Secretary-General stating that Syria has
completed the full withdrawal of its forces,
military assets and the intelligence apparatus
from Lebanon.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Syria and the Government of
Lebanon to extend their full cooperation to the
United Nations verification team dispatched by
the Secretary-General with their agreement to
verify whether there has been full and complete
withdrawal, and looks forward to his report.

"The Security Council acknowledges that
the full and complete Syrian withdrawal would
represent a significant and important step towards
Lebanon's full political independence and full
exercise of its sovereignty that is the ultimate
goal of resolution 1559 (2004), thus opening a
new chapter in Lebanese history.

"The Security Council welcomes the
deployment of Lebanese armed forces to
positions vacated by Syrian forces and the
assumption by the Government of Lebanon of
responsibility for these areas, and calls for the
deployment of additional Lebanese armed forces
throughout the south of the country.

"The Security Council urges all concerned
parties to do their utmost to safeguard Lebanon's
stability and national unity and underlines the

importance of national dialogue among
Lebanese political forces in this regard.

"The Security Council commends
Lebanese people for the dignified manner

all

the
in
which they have expressed their views and for
their commitment to a peaceful and democratic
process, and stresses that the Lebanese people
must be allowed to decide the future of their
country free of Violence and intimidation. It
condemns in this context the recent terrorist acts
in Lebanon that have resulted in several deaths
and injuries, and calls for their perpetrators to be
brought to justice.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the Lebanese Government to conduct
elections beginning on 29 May 2005, and
underlines the importance that such elections be
held according to schedule. The Council shares
the opinion of the Secretary-General that a delay
in holding the parliamentary elections would
contribute to exacerbating further the political
divisions in Lebanon and threaten the security,
stability and prosperity of the country. The
Council underlines that free and credible
elections held without foreign interference or
influence would be another central indication of
the political independence and sovereignty of
Lebanon.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General and the Lebanese Government
to reach arrangements for international
assistance, including United Nations assistance,
to ensure that such elections are conducted in a
free and credible manner, in particular through
inviting international governmental and/or non-
governmental electoral observers to monitor the
electoral process. The Council urges Member
States to extend assistance accordingly.

"The Security Council commends the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for their
relentless efforts and dedication to facilitate and
assist the parties in the implementation of all
provisions of resolution 1559 (2004), and
requests that they continue their work in this
regard.

"The Security Council shares the view that
the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
would contribute positively to the situation in the
Middle-East in general."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/ 17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
