Mr. Sallah (Gambia): My delegation wishes to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his report on
Africa. My delegation would also like to pay tribute to the
United States delegation, under whose presidency the
ministerial meeting on Africa was held in September, as a
result of which the Secretary-General was mandated to
prepare the report under consideration.

The report provides a clear and candid analysis of the
sources of conflicts in Africa and the reasons why they
persist. Most importantly, the report provides a catalogue of
remedial measures necessary to alleviate the suffering of
the African people and bring about lasting peace, progress
and prosperity for the African people. The report, in our
estimation, is very practical, thought-provoking and
challenging to us all. My delegation would once again
congratulate the Secretary-General on his concern,
frankness and thoughtfulness, so ably demonstrated in the
report under consideration.

As human beings and as Africans, my delegation is
deeply saddened by the developments in the African
continent in the recent past. Africa is a very big continent,
rich in resources and culture. Yet, paradoxically, the
continent continues to suffer greatly. From slavery to
colonization, from independence to untold economic
hardship and now civil wars in many parts of its States,
the African people still continue to suffer. Today, quite a
number of African States are Victims of armed conflicts,
while the great majority of the African people languish in
abject poverty.

It is very discouraging to note that more than 30
wars have been fought in the continent since 1970, 14 of
them in 1996 alone, as highlighted in the report. In some
of these war-tom countries, the humanitarian situation is
appalling. Over 8 million African people are refugees,
returnees and internally displaced persons. The present
state of the African people is pathetic.

My delegation agrees entirely with the Secretary-
General's diagnosis of the causes of conflicts in Africa.
While we, the African people, should not look beyond
ourselves for responsibility for our present situation,
several external factors have contributed significantly to
our present situation. Now that we are taking stock of the
past with a View to finding a way forward, those States,
institutions and individuals who have committed
disservice to Africa and with whom we share
responsibility for the present plight of the African people
should acknowledge their responsibility and join us in our
search for a stable and prosperous society for the African
people.

My delegation is encouraged that, today, large-scale
internal conflicts in Africa are declining. Governmental
institutions and civil society alike continue to develop
capacities to prevent, resolve and manage conflicts.
Conflict prevention, resolution and management in Africa
are increasingly being African-led. I have to mention here
the admirable achievements of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Liberia and Sierra Leone. My delegation
would also acknowledge the role played by the United
Nations and the Security Council, for example in creating
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and, recently, the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic

 

(MINURCA). I would not forget to mention, also, the
special representatives of the Secretary-General in the Great
Lakes, Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Subregional entities and actors are assuming greater
responsibility in collaboration with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations. The
emphasis is now on moving civil conflict from the
battlefield to the negotiating table. Due to the decline of
internal conflicts in Africa, reports have revealed that sub-
Saharan countries have joined the worldwide reduction in
military expenditures. We hope that this trend will continue
to permeate the whole of Africa.

While we look forward anxiously to peace in all of
Africa, we must emphasize that peace dividends are not
always immediately available, due to the exorbitant costs of
demobilization and military restructuring. The problem of
separating combatants from refugees and the ever-
increasing problem of the cross-border flow of arms retard
the process. In this context, my delegation welcomes the
ongoing efforts to establish an African crisis response force.
My delegation would wish to take this opportunity to
encourage the OAU to study the proposals for the early
establishment of this force. We must remember that we
Africans should take greater responsibility for solving
Africa's problems.

At present, there is a movement in the African
continent away from moribund single-party political
systems. There is now a growing understanding of the close
and inevitable links between political liberalization, good
and effective governance and a stable and sound
environment for economic growth. In quite a number of
African countries today, political activity and thinking are
getting more focused on consolidating democracy. In the
Gambia, for example, the Government of President Jammeh
is preoccupied with further deepening and consolidating
reforms in the context of growing globalization. In this
atmosphere of rapid change and fragile structures, we
expect that the journey will be long and arduous. We do
not, however, hope to be on it alone. Those with
considerable experience may serve as sources of inspiration
for us.

On the economic plane, the African continent has in
recent times registered significant economic growth. In
1995, Africa registered a gross domestic product growth of
3.9 per cent. In 1996, gross domestic product grew by 4.4
per cent, the highest rate in 20 years. This growth rate in
Africa was possible only due to better and more refined
macroeconomic policies and increased competitiveness.

With this growing trend, there is hope for the
African continent. The trend is, however, very fragile.
The fragility of recent economic success stories in some
African States, coupled with the present economic
stagnation and the ongoing internal conflicts in others,
poses the greatest challenge to the African continent.
While my delegation wishes to agree with the Secretary-
General on the remedial measures suggested in his report,
it wishes to emphasize some of the fundamental remedies.

Economic stagnation and inequitable development
have contributed greatly to much of the internal conflict
and instability in Africa. Today, Africa's greatest
problems include its unsustainable debt burden, economic
marginalization, unfavourable and unconscionable terms
of trade and painful conditionalities that are antithetical
not only to a peace process but also to recovering and
fragile economies.

In September 1996, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, later joined by the African
Development Bank, agreed to provide debt relief for
heavily indebted poor countries undertaking serious
economic reforms. Whereas my delegation regards the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt (HIPC) Initiative
as a benevolent gesture, the fact remains that the
conditions for qualification are too stringent. It is
therefore not surprising that only four African States are
able to meet the requirements. If the HIPC Initiative is to
be meaningful, its requirements should be such that
African States should be able, with reasonable effort, to
meet them.

Africa's present debt crisis is not solely an African
creation. Since the international community contributed to
creating this undesirable situation, we believe that it
should not only acknowledge it but also share the
responsibility. This fact renders the case put forward by
the OAU and the Secretary-General in his report more
compelling. My delegation hopes that the Secretary-
General's call for conversion into grants of all remaining
official bilateral debts of the poorest African countries
will be heeded.

On our part, we will not tire in our efforts to search
for genuine and lasting peace for Africa and economic
and social justice for its people. The problems of Africa
are numerous and very complex, and concerted
international efforts are required to solve them. My
delegation believes that African Governments, now more
than ever before, have the political will to remove Africa
from its present plight. The task is enormous but not

 

insurmountable. With the support of the international
community, we can do it together. We are ready and we are
committed. The question remains - are you?

