Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by expressing my Government's deep
appreciation for the essential work being undertaken
under extremely difficult and dangerous circumstances by
all the men and women of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET), as well as by national and
international aid agencies, which have sought to assist and
protect the beleaguered people of East Timor.

Canadians are appalled by the actions of the
pro-integration militias in East Timor since the holding of
the popular consultation on 30 August. The militias, with
the evident collusion of the Indonesian military and
police, have terrorized the civilian population, engaging
in summary executions, targeting religious sanctuaries and
precipitating large-scale displacement of the population.
Such gross violations of human rights are clearly of grave
concern. We are also deeply concerned for the safety of
UNAMET personnel, in particular the locally engaged
staff, who have effectively remained under siege in their
compound in Dili for several days, as well as the
internally displaced persons who have found refuge with
them. The safety of those who have sought United
Nations protection must be assured. We commend the
courage and steadfastness of the UNAMET staff.

(spoke in English)

The Council has taken the opportunity to examine
the protection of civilians in armed conflict during several
recent debates. In these discussions the Council has
condemned the deliberate targeting of civilians and the
obstruction of assistance to them. It has affirmed the
importance of bringing to justice individuals who incite or
cause violence against civilians in armed conflict or
otherwise Violate international humanitarian and human
rights law. It has also, in this regard, expressed its
willingness to respond, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, to situations in which civilians have
been targeted or humanitarian assistance to civilians has
been deliberately obstructed.

 

The presidential statement which the Council issued in
February following our open debate is clearly relevant to
the current situation in East Timor, and I am particularly
pleased, Mr. President, that you have decide to pursue our
examination of this issue next week when we consider the
Secretary-General's report - issued only yesterday - on
the plight of civilians caught up in armed conflict.

The current situation is obscene in its dimensions. The
numbers of dead and displaced are growing steadily, as is
the wanton destruction of property. The Government of
Indonesia must immediately assume its responsibility for
security in East Timor, as stipulated in the 5 May
Agreement, or, if incapable or unwilling to do so, allow the
international community to assist it in providing a safe
environment for the people of East Timor. If Indonesia
continues to refuse to uphold its commitments, it will face
the opprobrium of the international community.

Indonesia has agreed to ensure that the killings and
terror cease, but those killings and that terror persist
unabated. The Government of Indonesia has imposed
martial law with a View to restoring peace and order in East
Timor, yet its soldiers and police stand idly by or, indeed,
partake in the violent rampages of looting and burning
which are the stuff of every media report and eyewitness
account. Indonesia must come to grips with the reality of
what is actually happening in East Timor and stop it. In
addition, Indonesia must take immediate measures to ensure
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian personnel so
that all affected Timorese can be assisted.

Canada stands ready to consider favourably
international appeals to help alleviate East Timor' s pain, but
for that to happen Indonesia must make credible guarantees
of security for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
translate these guarantees into reality.

On 5 May, the Indonesian Government committed
itself to respecting the right of the people of East Timor to
determine their future in a direct democratic ballot. On 30
August, the vast majority of East Timorese went to the
polls and four out of five chose to begin the transition to
independence. That clear choice must now be respected and
the process that began with the historic 5 May Agreement
carried to completion.
