Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all,
let me join previous speakers in expressing Viet Nam's
most profound sympathy and condolences to the
peoples and the Governments of China and Myanmar
over their recent sufferings and losses.

Mr. President, the Vietnamese delegation wishes
to congratulate you and the United Kingdom on your
effective leadership of the work of the Council this
month. We also warmly welcome your initiative to
hold this important open debate and highly appreciate
your substantive and succinct concept paper to that end
(S/2008/291, annex). The Vietnamese delegation
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Jamaica on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

In an interdependent world, where the durable
peace and sustainable development of a country and a
region cannot be isolated from those of others,
peacebuilding continues to emerge as an essential part

of the collective efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to ensure the transition from
conflict to peace, development and reconstruction, and
to prevent the recurrence of conflicts. Past experiences
in Angola, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Burundi and
Timor-Leste remain vivid examples of how the long-
term process of peacebuilding can help to address
various political, security, socio-economic,
humanitarian and development challenges in the post-
conflict environment.

Experience in many other countries also reflects
the fact that, even when agreements are signed and
ceasefires are in place, countries may relapse into
conflict or civil violence if post-conflict peacebuilding
lags behind. The growing complexity of contemporary
conflicts, which often have serious regional spillover
and carry unpredictable socio-economic consequences,
has led to tremendous constraints on post-conflict
peacebuilding and has exposed its limitations in
maximizing its efficiency, resources and impact on the
ground. It also requires a multidimensional and
multisectoral approach to peacebuilding in close
correlation with other areas of equal importance, such
as early warning, conflict prevention and resolution,
pacific settlement of disputes, preventive diplomacy
and peacekeeping operations.

At this juncture, my delegation believes that, in
view of the specific characteristics of each post-
conflict environment and with due respect for the
fundamental principles of independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the international community
should establish a more comprehensive and effective
peacebuilding strategy that addresses the period
extending from immediately after the cessation of
conflict to the conduct of an exit strategy and that
responds to the specific needs of the country concerned
in each particular phase of development. The focus of
such a strategy should first be tailored to complement
nationally owned efforts of building full ownership and
capacity. On the implementation front, the strategy
might range from the reinforcement of the judicial
system and the early commencement of disarmament to
the demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants;
from the promotion of institution-building and
capacity-building to national reconciliation and
rehabilitation; and from the enhancement of socio-
economic reform to the fulfilment of the Millennium
Development Goals.

Secondly, given its unique experience and
advantages in human resources and institutional
mechanisms, the United Nations should play the
leading role in coordination and collaboration among
local governments, specialized agencies, international
financial institutions, troop contributors and the
international donor community in order to ensure the
optimal impact of international assistance in post-
conflict situations, especially in addressing the root
causes of conflicts, such as hunger, poverty, disease
and the inequitable distribution of social welfare. It is
equally important that coordination among the United
Nations principal organs, as well as between United
Nations Headquarters and field missions, be enhanced
and better focused, thereby helping to maximize the
use of available resources and capabilities and avoiding
possible overlap and duplication. In this connection,
my delegation reaffirms and supports the central role
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Peacebuilding Commission as the appropriate
dedicated institutional mechanisms to discuss the
question of peacekeeping and peacebuilding in all its
multiple dimensions.

Thirdly, it is also essential to enhance the
effective cooperation and partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the areas
of conflict prevention, management and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and to strengthen the
capacity of those organizations in these areas. While
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security falls within the
purview of the Security Council, the mix of
complementary resources and comparative advantages
that regional and subregional organizations possess,
including targeted expertise, local knowledge and
geographical proximity, can be further exploited, in
conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter and, where
appropriate, can contribute to helping countries recover
from conflicts in all related fields.
