The Secretary-General: I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the very important
responsibility of the presidency of the Security Council.

Late last month, I returned from my eleventh visit
to Israel and Palestine as the Secretary-General. As it
happened, it was also as Israel's occupation entered into
its fiftieth year. I carried a clear and consistent message
to leaders on both sides, namely, that time was running
out. That fact is also at the heart of the report of the
Middle East Quartet. I know that the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, has fully briefed the Security
Council. Some on both sides have criticized the report's
contents and sought to dismiss its conclusions and
recommendations. The report's overriding message,
however, is irrefutable: as negative trends grow more
frequent, the prospects for a two-State solution grow
more distant. The report's 10 recommendations provide
a practical approach to end the political stalemate,
resume the transition to greater Palestinian Authority in
the West Bank and chart a course towards negotiations
to resolve all final status issues. I urge both sides
to immediately begin discussions with the Quartet
on implementing those recommendations as we all
continue to work in coordination with key stakeholders,
including regional countries and the Security Council,
to restore hope in a political solution. The Quartet
Envoys are now taking steps in that direction.

The parties will have to make the necessary
compromises for peace. At the same time, the region
and the wider international community must exercise
their influence to encourage both sides. French efforts
to pursue peace complement those efforts. I welcome
their coordination with the Quartet. I also welcome
Egyptian efforts, including the recent visit by the
Egyptian Foreign Minister to Palestine and Israel.

The failure of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
advance peace has created a vacuum. Extremist voices
have filled that space. Recent incidents reinforce the
mounting risks. Those responsible for recent terror
attacks must be held accountable. However, closures,
such as those in Hebron, as well as punitive demolitions
and blanket revocations of permits, penalize
thousands of innocent Palestinians and amount to
collective punishment.

I am also deeply troubled by shrinking space for
civil society in the region and around the world. I am
concerned by Israel's passage of the so-called "NGO
Transparency Law", which contributes to a climate
in which the activities of human rights organizations
are increasingly delegitimized. All the while, Israel's
settlement enterprise marches on. Days after the Quartet
called on Israel to cease settlement construction and
expansion, Israel announced plans to advance building
approximately 560 housing units in the West Bank and
240 more in occupied East Jerusalem. That is in flagrant
disregard of international law. Those actions constitute
an undeniable contradiction of Israel's official support
for a negotiated two-State solution. I urge Israel to
immediately cease and reverse those plans.

We must ask: How can the systematic expansion of
settlements - the taking of land for exclusive Israeli
use - and the denial of Palestinian development be a
response to Violence? Such policies will not bring the
two-State solution closer to reality. Such policies will
not make Israelis safer or more secure. As many former
Israeli military and intelligence officers have clearly
stated, those policies will do precisely the opposite.
Indeed, every brick added to the edifice of occupation
is another taken from Israel's foundation as a majority
Jewish and democratic State. At the same time, those
Palestinians who celebrate and encourage attacks
against innocents must know that they are not serving
the interests of their people or of peace. Such acts must
be universally condemned and more must be done to
counter the incitement that fuels and justifies terror.

During my visit I also made my fourth trip to
Gaza. Militant activity continues, undermining the
fragile ceasefire and threatening to provoke another
devastating escalation. Despite significant progress,
tens of thousands ofpeople are still displaced following
the 2014 conflict. Families are forced to live without
electricity for 12 to 18 hours per day. Unemployment
remains staggering. Funds to rebuild Gaza remain
elusive. I once again urge donors to fulfil their
pledges made in Cairo. But long-term stability and
sustainability for Gaza depends on the lifting of the
crippling closures and a re-establishment of a single,
legitimate Palestinian governing authority based on
Palestine Liberation Organization principles.

Turning very briefly to the Golan, I would add that
the situation remains volatile and continues to undermine
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement between
Israel and Syria, thereby jeopardizing the ceasefire
between the two countries.

As we focus on Israeli-Palestinian peace, we must
take a hard look at where the conflict stands. How much
longer can the parties and the international conirnunity
accept political paralysis, and at what grave price? I
encourage the Security Council to support the efforts
of the Quartet to work with the parties, the region
and interested stakeholders in advancing peace. The
children of Israel and Palestine deserve nothing less.
I will never forget my moving meeting with student
leaders at a school in Gaza of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East on my final day in the region. One 15-year-old boy
concluded by saying,

"Harsh restrictions drain away the ambitions of
any young person. And this is how we see our
future * to be killed by the conflict, to be killed
by the closure or to be killed by despair."

Surely, we can do better for all the children of Palestine
and Israel. Surely, they deserve a horizon of hope.

It is time for the parties to take action to build
that future. The international community, including
through the recommendations outlined in the Quartet's
report, remains resolute in its commitment to support
the goal of a peaceful future for both Palestinians and
Israelis. That is why I encourage the Security Council
to support the efforts of the Quartet - of the United
States, the Russian Federation, the European Union
and the United Nations - to work with the parties, the
region and interested stakeholders in advancing peace.

