Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his quarterly briefing
and to commend the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts for their
important and dedicated work.

Lithuania remains concerned about the nature of
Iran's nuclear programme and its failure to comply
with numerous resolutions of the Security Council and
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) obliging Iran to suspend all
reprocessing, heavy water and enrichment-related
activities. In his latest report, the Director General of
the IAEA has once again noted that the Agency was
not in a position to conclude that all nuclear material
in Iran was used for peaceful activities and that it
remained concerned about the possible undisclosed
military dimension of Iran's nuclear programmes.

At the same time, we welcome the 24 November
2013 plan of action agreed by the E3+3 and Iran as the
first confidence-building step. We further call on Iran
to engage constructively with the E3+3 in reaching a
comprehensive agreement on all outstanding issues
and welcome another round of talks that took place
on 18 and 19 March in Vienna. We are encouraged by
the fact that the six initial practical measures foreseen
in the framework for cooperation between the IAEA
and Iran have been implemented. We also welcome
the agreement on the next seven practical measures.
The overarching goal of the ongoing negotiations is to
build mutual trust and confidence that Iran will not be
able to build nuclear weapons, in return for which the
economic and financial sanctions be lifted.

Pending the comprehensive solution of the
Iranian nuclear issue, all Security Council sanctions
imposed on Iran remain in effect. Iran is required to
cooperate fully with the international community on all
outstanding issues before the measures imposed by the
Security Council can be lifted. Member States, in their
turn, are obliged to rigorously implement the sanctions
regime. Their Government and private entities, as well
as their nationals, must strictly adhere to restrictions
related to engagement with their partners and Iran. The
work of both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
in verifying compliance with relevant Security Council
measures should therefore remain unaffected.

As the next annual report of the Committee's Panel
of Experts is due in May, we need to make sure that
all relevant recommendations contained in the 2014
report are duly addressed. In that regard, we welcome
discussions on the implementation assistance notice
related to a catch-all clause, and hope for speedier
progress following the adoption of a notice related to
an equivalent provision of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).

Iran's repeated violations of the conventional arms
embargo are a matter of great concern. Despite the
complete ban on the export of any arms from Iran and
the ban on the supply of major conventional weapons
to Iran, there have been reports of weapons transfers
to Syria, to non-State actors in Gaza, and to a number
of States. The Committee's letter regarding the seizure
by Yemeni authorities of arms and related material
has gone unanswered by Iran since May 2013. Recent
official reports on the interception of a vessel allegedly
carrying weapons to Gaza are also worrying and need
to be investigated by the Committee and its Panel of
Experts without delay.

Lithuania supports all efforts geared to finding
a comprehensive negotiated solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue that would fully reassure the international
community of the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. It is the hope of my delegation
that Iran's recent engagement in E3+3 talks will also
translate into its meaningful cooperation with the
Committee.

