Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China offers its deepest condolences to Oman for the untimely passing of Sultan Qaboos. China condemns the recent terrorist attacks in the Niger. We thank the Council presidency for the two minutes of silence observed in the wake of the terrorist attack in the Niger and on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Haitian earthquake. China welcomes the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, to today's meeting of the Security Council and wishes to thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. In the three years since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, thanks to the efforts of the Colombian Government and all parties involved, the reintegration of former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants, institution-building and reforms in various areas, as well as the judicial mechanism, have been strengthenedand the peace and reconciliation process has continued to move forward. In October last year, elections were held at the local and departmental levels for the first time since the signing of the peace agreement, which was an indication of continued progress in the Colombian political process. A new chapter is being written for peace, reconciliation and hope through the efforts of the Colombian people. Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, under his leadership, have made important contributions to the peace process in Colombia as they pursue their efforts to assist former FARC-EP combatants with their social, political and economic reintegration, as well as to take measures to guarantee their safety and safeguard the rights and interests of the people of Colombia, especially those of women, children and minority groups. China expresses its appreciation for all those efforts and hopes that the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, while respecting its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity, will continue to play a greater role in maintaining peace and stability in the country. The peace agreement reflects the aspiration of the parties in Colombia for peace, development and prosperity and represents the broadest consensus in the country. There has been great progress in the peace process to date but much remains to be done in order to fully implement the peace agreement. The security situation in some areas is still fragile and the safety of former combatants and social leaders is still threatened. Given all these challenges, we hope that the Government of Colombia and all the parties concerned will cherish the hard-won peace process, shoulder their respective responsibilities and obligations and take the fundamental interests of the country into account by pursuing dialogue with the necessary patience to resolve differences. They should work together with the United Nations Verification Mission in its mediation efforts to promote the peace process in Columbia so as to achieve greater and more concrete and meaningful progress. China stands ready to work with other Council members in supporting the efforts of the Columbian Government, dialogue among the parties, the work of the Verification Mission and the peace process in Colombia so as to contribute positively towards achieving comprehensive peace, stability and development in the country.
