Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for your decision, Mr. President, to
convene this open meeting of the Security Council to
consider the question of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building. Your initiative
is a step in the right direction of promoting transparency
and the participation of all Member States in the work of
the Security Council. It is also significant encouragement
for this principal body of our Organization to have a
wide-ranging and democratic discussion of a topic that
has become essential to its principal function of
maintaining international peace and security.

Since the end of the cold war the international
community has simultaneously taken part in and
witnessed an accelerated process of broadening the
concepts, contents and interpretation of the multilateral
peace and security agenda. In less than 10 years our
Organization has gone beyond the limited and limiting
interpretation that prevailed in the previous stage of
hegemonic confrontation as regards the scope of that
terminology and its operational consequences.

For 45 years after the establishment of the United
Nations, a restrictive interpretation of the scope of the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, given by Member States to the Security Council
and set forth in paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the Charter,
restricted multilateral action to monitoring and verifying
compliance with agreements on the cessation of hostilities
between two or more States. The internal logic of the
super-Power rivalry justified the adoption in both the
work and the practice of the Security Council of this self-
limitation, which was removed from reality and, as some
have said, reduced the Council's principal function to the
bare minimum, to the detriment of, and ignoring, the will
of the founding fathers of 1945.

 

Since 1989, as I have stated we seen the traditional
concept replaced or enlarged, depending on one's point of
view; a slow process has begun of devising and assimilating
a broadened interpretation of the content and scope of "the
maintenance of international peace and security".

It was in the context of this new vision of international
relations that the Secretary-General, at the Council's
request, outlined in the Agenda for Peace, published in
1992, the five major action areas where he thought the
United Nations should be able to use the powers given it by
the Charter on these fundamental matters in the new and
changing international arena. The Secretary-General
included in that innovative agenda the concept of post-
conflict peace-building as a specific area of action for the
United Nations, designed to put together and regulate all
the measures to consolidate cooperation between parties,
national or international, that previously had been pitted
against one another, and to develop the social, economic,
juridical and political infrastructure needed to prevent a
return to violence and to lay down bases for sustainable and
lasting peace.

As a result, we could and should say that peace-
building is not a whimsical invention or an unfounded
political proposal; rather, it is a deep-rooted concept with
sufficient juridical and political legitimacy to become a
subject to which the United Nations, and particularly the
Security Council, must give attention.

Today, the great majority of Members of the United
Nations agree that the restricted concept I have mentioned
has been superseded and that we have now evolved into the
second stage outlined at the beginning of the decade. In
truth, what six years ago seemed a mere intellectual
discussion has now become a reality and is gradually being
included in the new doctrine being implemented by the
United Nations and, more concretely, the Security Council
with regard to international peace and security.

This evolution, which has brought us to a "second
generation" in the maintenance of peace and security, has
not occurred in a vacuum, and, as always happens, is a
response to reality itself.

Thus, the new vision, which is both wide-ranging and
integral, corresponds to a set of needs which, although they
have existed for some time, received attention and were
included in the new concept of the maintenance of
international peace and security with the end of the cold
war. But it also corresponds to what could be described as
a new set of potentials and possibilities that emerged after
1989.

In that connection, the majority of conflicts that pose
a threat to international peace and security indisputably
involve political, economic and social situations that, once
the strictly military aspects are resolved, require responses
and solutions that are in keeping with their specific
characteristics. In the light of this broad vision, therefore,
the response of the international community to these new
crises must incorporate the various aspects of the specific
situations in a complete and multidisciplinary manner. In
our view, it must address and resolve a number of
particular factors.

First of all, we must note that the concept of peace-
building is part of a set of realities and a link in the long
chain of the maintenance of international peace and
security. Peace-building presupposes that in every case
the military dimension of an armed conflict has already
been resolved through a cessation of hostilities and the
adoption of agreements on the demobilization of
combatants. It is true that although the underlying causes
of a conflict go beyond the question of the war itself, the
truth is that it is nearly impossible to move on to
addressing those underlying causes if the armed struggle
has not ceased and if the fate of combatants has not been
determined. In other words, it is hard to imagine peace-
building in isolation without the prior stages of
negotiations - political or diplomatic, depending on the
case - and of agreement on a ceasefire.

Secondly, Costa Rica has learned from its own
regional experience that truly effective peace-building
requires agreements and consensus among the parties to
the conflict, and, although a ceasefire and demobilization
are needed as a first step, must also include specific
arrangements tailored to the various structural matters as
well as to other issues - such as the existence of a State
based on the rule of law, legal security and the enjoyment
of human rights - which were at the root of the conflict.
Here, we cannot fail to mention the experiences of El
Salvador, Haiti and Guatemala, which have shown how
fundamental the concept of an integral approach is to the
achievement of a solid, lasting peace.

The third element is closely linked to the first two:
the existence of genuine commitment by the parties to the
conflict is a sine qua non. It may seem self-evident, but
let me add that it is indispensable, once a ceasefire has
been put in place, to ensure that agreements on structural
matters are sustainable.

 

Fourthly, the facts have shown that agreements
comprising an integral response to today's international or
national conflicts must include effective efforts at political
and diplomatic negotiations. Peace does not emerge from
nothing. Those same tough and valuable facts also point to
the potential of resources for peaceful solutions as the ideal
tools for conflict resolution. In that sphere, regional and
multilateral organizations, since the end of the cold war,
have proven to be the ideal forums for addressing and
overcoming these crises.

The cases of Central America, Namibia, Cambodia,
Mozambique and, most recently, the Central African
Republic show how facilitation, good offices and mediation
by international organizations and regional bodies have
become effective tools for resolving conflicts and achieving
solid, lasting peace agreements.

Fifthly, the acknowledged need for comprehensive
agreements containing specific solutions to the various
problems that lie at the root of conflicts has given rise to a
comprehensive and multidisciplinary involvement by the
various elements of international organizations, notably the
United Nations, and by non-governmental organizations,
both in defining these responses and in participating
actively in their implementation. Here, the experience in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a benchmark.

That is one very important aspect of this new vision
of peace-building. It is, in fact, a question that elicits
varying opinions not only on basic matters but also on the
operational implications for the United Nations. Some have
expressed reasonable doubts in this connection, feeling that
the peace-building stage, by its very nature and by
transcending and overcoming purely military matters, has
become something that has more to do with other areas of
international action, such as development cooperation. From
the traditional viewpoint in keeping with the old logic of
the days before 1989, this is, strictly speaking, true. But a
new vision of the concepts of international peace and
security, such as that which we share, should enable us to
agree to incorporate the post-conflict stage in this broader
View of the question.

Clearly, discussion of many of these matters is
ongoing and continues to reflect divergent views on matters
such as the role of the Security Council in this process and
its links with other organs and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system - although the differences in these
views are narrowing. But my delegation considers that these
very facts show that in the present circumstances it is
illogical to insist on retaining limited and separate areas of
competence for the various parts of the Organization and,
above all, that there is no political sense in trying to
circumscribe the concepts of international peace and
security or to strip them of their meaning.

Costa Rica wishes to put forward a few points as
food for thought:

Peace-building is a political concept within the
broader perspective of the maintenance of international
peace and security, although it can have specialized
technical implications.

Peace-building must be viewed from an integral
perspective. In other words, it is illogical to make it
unilateral or to reduce its content to one or several of its
elements.

Peace-building, as an integral and integrating
concept, requires broad, multidisciplinary involvement by
the international community.

Peace-building requires the acceptance and inclusion
of specific areas for action by multilateral organizations
on questions that were once reserved for domestic
jurisdiction with respect to bolstering the State based on
the rule of law. These include political watchfulness, the
preparation and monitoring of elections, training and
modernization in the judiciary and, most important, the
promotion of and respect for all human rights.

Peace-building also requires the acceptance of
special treatment for societies that have recently overcome
armed conflicts and that must reconstruct their basic
infrastructure. This has special implications in terms of
the participation of the international financial institutions
and of their relationship with such countries.

Let me conclude Costa Rica's contribution to this
meeting by reaffirming our firm belief that it is vitally
necessary to accept these concepts and to incorporate
them in the agenda and practice of the United Nations,
and of the Security Council in particular. If we want to
guarantee the effectiveness of our work in keeping with
our Charter obligations, and if we are truly committed to
meeting today's great challenges in order to ensure a
peaceful and secure world for all, we must be able to find
correct, appropriate and effective answers.

