Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for facilitating the
emerging practice of the Security Council to conduct open
debates on important issues before it. The sheer number
of countries which have decided to participate in today's
debate is testimony to the usefulness of open debate.

The civil war and its devastating humanitarian
consequences in Somalia have been with us for some time
now.

The United Nations peace-keeping operations in
Somalia have often come under criticism as a case of
dismal failure. My delegation does not share this negative
view. While the United Nations operation has not
succeeded in resolving the internal conflict and rebuilding
Somalia, its contribution in averting massive starvation
should not be underestimated. As a troop-contributing
country to the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II), the Republic of Korea has been following
the situation in Somalia with the utmost concern and
attention. We express our solidarity and sympathy with
the Somali people.

The continued United Nations involvement in
Somalia after the withdrawal of UNOSOM. II has also
proved essential in helping to alleviate the severity of the
suffering to which the Somali people have been subjected.
We commend United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations concerned for the
commitment and dedication with which they are carrying
out their humanitarian assistance efforts for the people of
Somalia under trying conditions. The experience of the
United Nations involvement in Somalia has nevertheless
revealed the inherent limits of the international
community's capability to contain the humanitarian
consequences of a failed State, which has neither the
capability of self-government nor the willingness to act
upon international assistance.

It is saddening to note that the end of the Somali
tragedy is nowhere in sight as yet. One year after the
withdrawal of UNOSOM. II, the political stalemate
persists. Instability, inter-clan conflict, banditry and
general lawlessness remain the order of the day. Despite

 

the strenuous efforts of the international community,
including Member States and various regional
organizations, to bring the Somali factions together, national
reconciliation remains elusive. The country still remains
carved up by rival clans and factions.

On the humanitarian front, the situation is also getting
worse. We are alarmed at reports that the delivery of food
and medical supplies is being hindered by insecurity and
logistical problems caused by the closure of Mogadishu
seaport and airport at a time when a growing number of
children suffer from malnutrition and the epidemic of
cholera is spreading. The prospects for improvement of the
situation are grim.

A prerequisite for the international community in
playing any meaningful role for the Somali people is the
security and safety of international personnel operating on
the ground. In this regard, my delegation is deeply
concerned over accounts of mistreatment directed at the
humanitarian personnel, including harassment, beatings,
abduction and killings. We strongly condemn these acts of
violence and urge the Somali factions to cooperate fully
with the international humanitarian organizations.
While the persistence of the dismal situation in
Somalia is of the Somali leaders' own making, the
international community cannot simply abandon the hapless
Somali people to the vagaries of life brought about by the
factional strife of their leaders. The United Nations must
continue to be actively engaged in Somalia. It is in this
perspective that my delegation wishes to offer its
observations on what role the United Nations can play with
regard to Somalia.

First, the United Nations has to monitor more closely
the situation on the ground and political developments in
the country. In this regard, while appreciating the role of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
operating out of Nairobi, we encourage the Secretary-
General to transfer that office to Mogadishu as soon as the
circumstances allow, as has already been proposed by the
Ambassador of Chile. This will not only facilitate the basic
tasks of information-gathering and contacts with the Somali
factions, but is also a sensible way of demonstrating the
firm commitment of the United Nations to the solution of
the Somali problem.

Secondly, the United Nations must play a central role
in facilitating and coordinating international humanitarian
assistance to Somalia. Ensuring unimpeded access to areas
in urgent and acute need of relief efforts by international
personnel is a matter of the highest priority. This includes
the reopening of Mogadishu seaport and airport, at least
for humanitarian cargo.

The Security Council should warn General Aidid in
unambiguous terms that the visa requirements that he
decided to impose for entry into the country are
unacceptable. The Council should also remind all leaders
of Somali factions that they will be made individually
accountable for the safety and security of all international
humanitarian personnel operating in their respective areas
of control.

Thirdly, the United Nations should play a more
active role in coordinating international efforts and
initiatives to promote a political settlement of the conflict
through national reconciliation among warring factions in
Somalia. In this respect, it is encouraging to note the
constructive initiatives taken by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the European
Union to this end. We encourage the Secretary-General to
build upon these initiatives and to consider the possibility
of convening an international peace conference on
Somalia, under the auspices of the United Nations, in
close coordination with the regional organizations
concerned.
Fourthly, the international community has the
responsibility to ensure the implementation of the arms
embargo established by resolution 733 (1992). In this
connection, I wish to underline the need for the Council
to remind all States, especially those neighbouring
Somalia, of their legal obligations to observe a general
and complete embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Somalia, in full compliance with
the resolution.

In concluding, let me reiterate my conviction that the
ultimate responsibility for bringing about lasting peace
and stability rests with the Somali leaders themselves.
The international community's role can succeed only
when the Somali leaders have the political will and
commitment to achieve a political settlement. We urge all
Somali factions to rise above their parochial factional
interests and move towards national reconciliation so that
the Somali people may live in peace and prosperity.

My delegation hopes that the conclusions of this
open debate will be duly acted upon and followed up by
the Secretariat and the Security Council.

 

