Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to thank
Secretary of State Michael Pompeo for his briefing
on the efforts to denuclearize the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Poland greatly appreciates today's
timely debate, as well as the transparent and open
approach to this important subject.

A few months ago, we were all pleased to hear
that one of the most complicated problems of nuclear
proliferation affecting regional and international
security might be resolved peacefully, thanks to
goodwill, a spirit of cooperation and common interests.
We all agree that long-lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula can be achieved only through peaceful
means. We therefore welcome the continued progress
in the inter-Korean dialogue. We are pleased to note
that the third summit organized this year between the
leaders of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea, which took place a few days
ago, was another important step in invigorating and
maintaining the dialogue on the peninsula.

We also welcome the diplomatic process related to
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, marked
by the historic summit in Singapore earlier this year.
We hope that further steps in that regard can be made
following the intensive contacts between the United
States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
In that context, we all welcomed the announcement
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the
suspension of its nuclear and intercontinental-ballistic-
missile tests. Another step in the right direction was the
destruction of a nuclear-weapon-test site in Punggye-ri.
Nonetheless, it remains to be seen if that threat will
continue in the future. It will be crucial to maintain the
momentum, keep the window of opportunity open and
move forward on a path to de-escalation.

The denuclearization of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea must remain a top priority for the
entire international community. Despite the positive
developments, Pyongyang's nuclear and missile
programmes are still a threat to international security
and stability in the region. We are also deeply concerned
about the risk posed by the potential proliferation of
sensitive goods and technology to other States or
non-State actors. Pyongyang continues to defy Security
Council resolutions in an increasingly sophisticated
manner. We reiterate our position that despite the
political and legal difficulties that may be involved,
it is mandatory for all States, without exception, to
comply with their obligations arising from the relevant
Council resolutions. We are well aware that lasting
peace cannot be achieved without the complete and
irreversible denuclearization of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in compliance with Security Council
resolutions. Despite the encouraging developments
and declarations, the process has not yet started. We
must therefore remain united in maintaining consistent
pressure on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

We call on other Security Council members to show
their collective intention to fully implement sanctions,
end the efforts of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to circumvent United Nations sanctions and
prevent other Member States from undermining them.
Council members should recommit to implementing
all existing and future sanctions so as to put maximum
pressure on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to take immediate and meaningful steps towards
denuclearization. The progress made so far has been
possible thanks to the common and concerted action of all
States. We hope that that same spirit of cooperation and
unanimity will characterize future activities in this area.
Positive developments will have profound implications
and beneficial consequences for international relations,
including enhancing the credibility and reliability of the
international non-proliferation regimes for weapons of
mass destruction. In that regard, as the sole sponsor of
General Assembly resolutions on the implementation of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, we would like to express our
hope that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
will soon adhere to the Convention, filling a gap and
bringing it close to universalization.

Another crucial step for Pyongyang towards
de-escalation and confidence-building would be signing
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I would
like to remind the Council of the Treaty's effectiveness
in helping us to deal with the nuclear tests conducted
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, even
though it has not yet entered into force.

As a member of the Neutral Nations Supervisory
Commission, Poland has been actively supporting
international efforts to promote peace and stability in
the region. We will continue to engage in all activities
that can lead to the permanent denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula. That also means supporting
further initiatives and actions aimed at reducing
tension and facilitating dialogue. Poland will continue
its engagement in international bodies, as well as
in other global and regional initiatives. Examples
of our engagement in that regard include our recent
chairmanship of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic
Missile Proliferation, as well as ongoing international
partnerships for nuclear-disarmament verification.

In conclusion, let me express our deep conviction
that the current momentum will not be wasted. The
list of activities is long: denuclearizing North Korea,
strengthening the universalization of non-proliferation
regimes, securing verification mechanisms, implementing
good practices and tightening international cooperation
in the field. If we want to be successful, we must
stand united.
