Mr. Shri Anand Sharma (India): I would like to
commence by thanking the Gabonese presidency for
having organized this meeting on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. I would also like
to thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing.

Transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking do not exist in isolation. They belong to a
malignant complex that includes terrorism, money
laundering, illegal arms trafficking and the illegal
movement of nuclear, chemical, biological and other
potentially deadly materials. This wider malignancy is
destroying and destabilizing societies and nations.

Weak and fragile States, such as those on the
agenda of the Council, are particularly vulnerable.
Even as many parts of the world enjoy unprecedented
peace, prosperity and technological advancement, they
remain mired in unending conflict and misery. Some of
these conflicts have lasted for decades, imposing a
human cost that is difficult to comprehend. Economies
have been wrecked, and human and material resources
that could have fuelled progress have been diverted.
Non-State actors and criminal organizations are
among the principal delinquents responsible for this
state of affairs. They thrive in areas of conflict and in
post-conflict situations. Their activities exploit the
weaknesses of the nations they operate in and are
designed to perpetuate those weaknesses.

Their success is evident from the fact that their
organizational capacities and firepower match or even
better those of many States. They have much in
common with terrorists, with whom they ally, because
they have the same objectives and use the same
methods. Their motivations are also the same, even as
they attempt to mask those motivations with great
sophistication.

One of the great tragedies of our time has been
the inability of some States to see through the
machinations of this criminal-terrorist nexus. Their
short-sightedness has imposed a cost that the whole
international community is bearing.

The threat posed by drug trafficking deserves
special mention. More than 90 per cent of the world's
production of opium takes place in India's
neighbourhood. We are situated between the two large
drug-trafficking zones - the Golden Crescent, centred
around the Afghanistan area, and the Golden Triangle,
in the Myanmar-Laos area. The illicit production and
trafficking of drugs has spawned a huge network of
criminal groups in our neighbourhood with close links
to various international terrorist networks. The money
and resources generated from those activities are
fuelling the growth of terrorism and funding extremist
groups.

It is evident that the threat posed by transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, terrorism, money
laundering, illegal arms trafficking and the illegal
movement of nuclear, chemical, biological and other
potentially deadly materials requires a coordinated
global response on the part of the international
community. We believe that the United Nations is the
best mechanism for developing such a coherent
transnational response. India is committed to
strengthening the international normative and
legislative mechanisms that are required to create a
framework for countering this threat.

In this connection, I am happy to inform the
Council that India ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its three Protocols last month. We are also
strengthening this international framework by entering
into several bilateral and plurilateral agreements and
memorandums of understanding in this area.

The UNODC also deals with corruption, and I am
glad to inform the Council that that the Government of
India ratified the United Nations Convention against
Corruption last month. At the operational level, we are
committed to strengthening the international structures
that respond to these threats. We are committed to the
sharing and exchange of information, and we would
also like to exchange best practices. We believe that
assisting Member States in the training of law
enforcement officials on a regular basis should receive
priority in the international cooperation agenda.

We support the efforts of UNODC to assist in
developing capacities, training and in creating the
administrative, legal and institutional frameworks for
fighting transnational organized crime. Indian agencies
are working in those fields with UNODC in some
South Asian countries. We have contributed $200,000
to the Paris Pact initiative of UNODC and will host the
Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement
Agencies this year.

The late Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi,
once said that "A nation's strength ultimately consists
in what it can do on its own". We believe that
determined national efforts are required. The
cornerstones of this fight are still supply-reduction
strategies involving sustained alternative development
programmes for the cultivators of drug-yielding crops,
as well as the overall economic development of the
concerned regions.

India chairs the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We have found that terrorists
and criminals nourish each other. Terrorists, like
criminals and drug traffickers, recruit in one country,
raise funds in another and operate in still others. An
effective international counter-terrorism strategy must
complement and supplement an effective international
strategy to combat transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, money laundering, illegal arms trafficking
and the illegal movement of nuclear, chemical,
biological and other potentially deadly materials. There
is a need for a new global compact to tackle terrorism
and transnational crime. We need to remove the moral
and legal ambiguities that allow terrorists and
criminals to gain succour and even legitimacy.

We need an international mechanism to ensure
accountability and justice. We need concerted
international efforts to expose and destroy the linkages
that exist between terrorists and criminals and their
State and non-State supporters. We need to expand the
scope of legal instruments and expand enforcement
efforts to destroy their safe havens, their financial
flows and their support networks. We would also argue
that the need to squarely face the complicity of States
is a central requirement if we were to proceed.

He who does not prevent a crime when he can
encourages it. India has been a targeted victim of crime
and terrorism and has paid an enormous price over the
years. Thousands of innocent victims have lost their
lives. As we prepare to mark the tenth anniversary of
11 September 2001, we should collectively resolve to
confront and vanquish terror and the terror-crime
nexus. We owe it to future generations to give them a
safe and secure world.

