Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
Mr. Jack Lang, for his briefing and his comprehensive
report (S/201l/30). We also want to express our thanks
to Assistant Secretary-General Stephen Mathias for his
briefing. We welcome the Special Adviser's
recognition that the legal response to piracy must be
located within the framework of a comprehensive
multidimensional approach. My Government continues
to study and review the legal aspects of the report.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
multiple challenges facing Somalia, including piracy
off the coast. As we have stated on many occasions,
piracy in Somali waters should be addressed Within the
broader context of addressing peace and security and
the economic and humanitarian challenges facing the
country.

In his report to the Secretary-General, the Special
Adviser notes that the counter-piracy effort will be
successful only when a series of measures are put in
place. We will go further, however, and suggest that the
piracy issue will be truly resolved only when the
conflict and political challenges in Somalia have been
fully addressed.

We are pleased that the proposals presented in the
report of the Special Adviser go beyond the legal
imperatives and also incorporate the economic and
preventive dimensions of piracy. In that regard, my
delegation underscores the sentiment expressed in
paragraph 81 of the report, in which the Special
Adviser states that

"eradicating piracy requires the development of
economic alternatives so that the 'economy of
piracy' does not corrupt the whole of the Somali
economic system and to give hope to the young
people who too often believe themselves to have
no future".

South Africa firmly supports the view that
addressing the scourge of piracy will require a
comprehensive approach that addresses two of the
underlying causes of the problem: the illegal dumping
of toxic waste and the illegal exploitation of Somali
maritime resources. In that regard, we support proposal
17 of the report, in which the Special Adviser calls for
the establishment of a committee to investigate illegal
fishing and maritime pollution.

Regarding the legal dimension of piracy in
Somalia, we look forward to continued engagement by
the Security Council on the options proposed by the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser, Mr. Jack
Lang. In considering those proposals, our efforts
should be framed by obligations under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which sets
out the legal framework and parameters applicable to
combating piracy and armed robbery at sea, as well as
other ocean activities.

Any effort to address the multiple challenges of
piracy should also seek to build capacity in Somalia's
domestic legal system and law enforcement
institutions, so that Somalia remains the epicentre of
long-term strategies to effectively deal with the
scourge of piracy.

We wish to state our appreciation for the efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
assisting States in the region with respect to
prosecutions. South Africa is heartened by the efforts
of all States that have taken on the burden of
prosecuting alleged pirates, especially our sister
countries Kenya, Seychelles and Mauritius. We support
the call for States to criminalize piracy in their national
jurisdictions. In that regard, assistance should be given
to regional States in their efforts to prosecute and
imprison pirates.

In conclusion, my delegation is of the firm view
that with a stable and prosperous Somalia, the
challenges of piracy off the coast of that country will
be overcome. We should therefore do all that we can to
help Somalia achieve the peace and stability that it
deserves. The investment of the international
community in combating piracy cannot be
disproportionate to its efforts to fight the root causes of
piracy on land and address Somalia's challenges
holistically.

