Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me, first, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I would also like to welcome the Ambassador
of Ethiopia as he begins his tenure in New York.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Special Envoy
Haysom, Special Envoy Ambassador Wais and Ms. John,
the latter two being in the region. We would like to thank
Ambassador Wais for his patience and perseverance. He

played a major role in what we are celebrating in South
Sudan today. We appreciate Mr. Haysom's dedication
in the service to the people of South Sudan. The
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan was achieved, in large
part, due to his wisdom and advice to the parties. We
wish him luck in his new assignment. We are, however,
pleased that he will remain in the region, and surely we
will continue to see him.

On behalf of the Government of South Sudan, we
would like to offer our condolences to the peace and
humanitarian workers who lost their lives in the line
of duty. Our prayers also go to the soldier who was
injured in the attack in Yei last week. We wish him a
speedy recovery.

On 12 September, South Sudanese political leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement in Addis Ababa. That
long-awaited Agreement was a result of the leaders
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), led by Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of
Ethiopia; President Omar Al-Bashir, President of the
Sudan; and President Yoweri Museveni, President of
Uganda, who, after many futile attempts, were wise
to think outside the box. For that, we are thankful and
grateful to them and the region.

As the Security Council meets today to discuss
issues regarding the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, there are winds of peace blowing in the region,
and we are happy that South Sudan is breathing those
winds ofpeace and hope. The people of South Sudan are
excited that the Government and the opposition leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement. Moreover, President
Salva Kiir Mayardit's statement on 15 September,
in which he pledged that the Government would
implement the Agreement in good faith and appealed
for forgiveness and reconciliation among the people of
South Sudan, was a call for the people of South Sudan
to unite after years of senseless war and division.

We know that the Agreement is difficult and
complicated, and the international community has
voiced some concerns about it. However, it is important
that those concerns should not be allowed to undermine
the Agreement itself, or its implementation. Instead,
we would like to appeal to the international community
to look at the signing of the Agreement as a positive
turn of events. It should send signs of encouragement
and support to the political leadership as it embarks on
the difficult task ofimplementing the Peace Agreement
and reuniting the communities in South Sudan. It is an
achievement on which the international community
should build. In the words oer. Haysom, we must not
allow the perfect to be the enemy of the good.

At this juncture, and in conclusion, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(8/2018/831) and welcome his commitment to remain
engaged during the coming years of implementation.
We urge the Council to join the Secretarnyeneral, the
African Union and IGAD in the endeavour of making
sustainable peace a reality at long last in South Sudan.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm.
