Mr. Shikapwasha (Zambia): Madam President,
allow me to congratulate you upon your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. The occasion is special in
that the United Republic of Tanzania has also served as
Chair of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region since the first Summit, in Dar es-Salaam
in November 2004, when our heads of State and
Government adopted the Dar es-Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. We therefore wish you success as
you preside over the affairs of this Council.

Zambia shares the view that peace and
development are two sides of the same coin. We
believe that there cannot be durable or lasting peace
and security without sustainable human development
and, conversely, that there cannot be any meaningful
development without peace and security. We also
believe that the absence of war does not always
guarantee human security and dignity, particularly
where poverty levels are high; nor does it guarantee
peace.

Zambia therefore maintains that, since gaining
political independence, many countries in the Great
Lakes region, like other former colonial countries, have
had to deal with the challenges of correcting the ills
and inadequacies of the colonial past, while at the same
time trying to meet the demands of newly independent
populations to provide for new jobs, more schools,
hospitals, housing and so forth. In short, peace and
security have depended very much on the fight against
poverty and underdevelopment; hence, the need to
emphasize peacebuilding and development as a
linchpin of the peace process in the Great Lakes
region.

Furthermore, in accepting the fact that the root
causes of Africa's wars, conflicts and political
instabilities are complex and multifaceted, Zambia
suggests that the approach of establishing linkages
between the four thematic areas already identified in
the peace process in the Great Lakes region should be
maintained and strengthened.

Within that context, we believe that the emphasis
on peacebuilding and development should take centre
stage in the achievement of peace and security in the
Great Lakes region. Therefore, Zambia would like to
associate itself with the efforts towards the
operationalization of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission within the context of the 2005 world
summit outcome. Zambia as a nation is always seeking
peace and peaceful means to attain world peace, looks
forward to contributing to the activities of the
Commission and is available to host any programmes
and projects that will be deemed necessary in order to
add value to the peace process in the Great Lakes
region.

I would be remiss in my contribution if I did not
account briefly for Zambia's activities in the peace
process of the Great Lakes region. Within the context
of peacebuilding and development, Zambia has
continued to participate in United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions, thereby maintaining its
profile in global and international relations. At the
regional level, every effort has been made to share the
regional ownership of solutions to most of the root
causes of poverty and underdevelopment in the Great
Lakes region through Zambia's participation and
membership in the African Union, the Southern Africa
Development Community and the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, and, only recently, as a
new signatory to the Peer Review Mechanism of the
New Partnership for Africa's Development.

At the national level, it is important to note that
in 2005 Zambia held workshops for youth, women, the
media, civil society, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector/permanent secretaries as policy
implementers, and parliamentarians in order to
strategize their respective roles in the implementation
of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration.

In the area of democracy and good governance,
Zambia has just successfully completed a review of its
electoral laws in readiness for this year's presidential,
parliamentary and local Government elections.
Meanwhile, a new draft constitution is in the process of
being made ready for enactment by Parliament.

Zambia would like to join those members that
have commended the work that the Group of Friends
has been doing in the peace process in the Great Lakes
region. Zambia is aware and shares with the Group of
Friends its understanding of the negatives encountered
in the process. We want to encourage the Council,
however, to see that the road to peace is not always
peaceable in itself. Our experience in the fight for
freedom for southern Africa in particular bears
testimony to that. Let us therefore stand firm together.
We are encouraged that the future holds great promise
for the Great Lakes region. Let us turn those challenges
into a greater vision for that area with such great
potential for regional and world peace.

As we approach the second summit in Nairobi,
which will launch the pact on security, stability and
development, the participation of both the Group of
Friends and the joint United Nations/African Union
secretariat in Nairobi is bound to become more crucial
and dependable. We would therefore appeal to the
United Nations to continue to maintain its important
role in the peace process not only by extending the
presence of the joint United Nations/African Union
secretariat, but also by strengthening the administrative
role of its staff in Nairobi.

