Mrs. Ukonga: Let me begin by thanking the
President of the Security Council for inviting the Gulf
of Guinea Commission (GGC) to participate in the
discussion on the report (see S/2012/45) of the United
Nations evaluation mission sent by the Secretary-
General to the Gulf of Guinea region and to the
secretariats of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community
of Central African States and the GGC to ascertain the

level of threat posed by piracy and to take stock of
regional and national capacities in ensuring maritime
safety and security in the region.

I would also like to convey the apologies of the
Executive Secretary of the GGC for his inability to be
personally present at this meeting, in spite of the
personal invitation addressed to him by the Togolese
presidency of the Security Council. That was due to
circumstances completely beyond his control.

I would also express our congratulations to the
United Nations assessment team that visited the Gulf
of Guinea region for the painstaking way in which it
carried out their evaluation assignment and for giving
us a detailed report on their findings. The secretariat of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission received the team on
24 November 2011. The report on the GGC contained a
true reflection of our discussions with them. Since their
visit, the Gulf of Guinea Commission has initiated
action towards effecting collaboration between it and
ECOWAS on matters of common interest including.
Among other things, such issues include possible
concerted efforts in the fight against piracy, which is
currently one of the greatest threats to economic
activity within the region; the issue of environmental
pollution and degradation; and illegal, unauthorized
and uncontrolled fishing.

The GGC has also taken steps to draft a strategy
for maritime security in the region that, once it has
been discussed and approved by the relevant higher
authorities, will constitute our basic document for
discussion and collaboration with other subregional
and international organizations.

On the issue of the report that we are considering,
the GGC would like to make some comments on the
observations made in some portions of the report.

On the legal framework, as referred to in
paragraphs 13 and 14, although the report specifically
reports on what obtains in the Republic of Benin, the
situation is more or less the same in many other
countries of the region. The legal framework for
dealing with piracy is insufficient, ineffective and
different from one country to the other, ranging from
the treatment of acts of piracy as minor misdemeanours
in some, to conspiracy to commit theft on the high seas
in others.
There is no standardized, adopted and accepted
definition of pirates in the context of the region with
the result that when pirates are caught, depending on
where and under what circumstances they are caught,
they can escape with little or no punishment. There is
therefore a need to have an accepted common
definition of acts of piracy, attracting the same type of
punishment in all the countries of the region, and
possibly the establishment of a neutral jurisdiction that
will try those arrested for acts of piracy.

What is true of piracy is also true of the legal
framework for bringing to trial those caught carrying
out illegal activities in other sectors. This means that
there is the need to harmonize the legal texts regulating
activities in these sectors and prescribing punishments
for those who run afoul of the laws.

Our second comment is on the meeting of
ECOWAS, ECCAS and the GGC, as noted in
paragraph 44 of the report. The GGC would like to
propose that the United Nations support the process of
the meeting and give the meeting all the assistance it
will require.

