Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Today's meeting is indeed
a regrettable one. I hope that the victims of chemical
weapons attacks have not been watching our debate
so far, and, in particular, the vote on today's draft
resolution, which we strongly supported. I must say that
it is highly regrettable that the Council has again failed
to unite behind an extension of the mandate of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
Many commendable efforts have been made, in
particular in the past few days to make that happen. The
Mechanism was unanimously set up by the Security
Council and with a clear objective. That objective
remains; so too does opposition. Nonetheless, allow me
to reiterate a few points.

We unequivocally and in the strongest terms
condemn the repeated use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The Joint Investigative Mechanism and its
objective, impartial and independent investigations
have our full support. We have confidence in its
professionalism, technical expertise and comprehensive
forensic analysis. We have provided technical expertise
and financial support. The mandate of the JIM. must
urgently be extended for the following well-known
reasons.

First, the JIM. plays a critical role in protecting
the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture, as the French Ambassador just stated.

Secondly, there are still some 60 cases of alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria being examined
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons that could be referred to the JIM. The sarin
attack in Lataminah on 30 March, cited in the most
recent report of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic (S/2017/931), is a case in point. It is our
duty as members of the Council to do what we can to
enable all of those attacks to be investigated, and to
hold those responsible to account. Chemical weapons
use is illegal; it constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and can amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. There can be no impunity for
such crimes.

Thirdly, we believe that the JIM. has an important
deterrent effect. The risks of new chemical weapons
attacks in Syria might increase on our watch if we do
not renew the JIM.

We have listened carefully to all arguments made
by members of the Council over the past few weeks. It
is our assessment that there should be room to reach
compromise. The JIM. was set up by the Council with a
very clear objective. That objective remains. Renewing
the JIM's mandate should be possible, but it can be
achieved only if the Council unites. We believe that
all efforts to reach agreement must continue. We will
support all serious and genuine attempts to renew the
JIM's mandate. We will continue to engage to find a
way forward.

