The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item of its agenda.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2017/1045, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1011, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 2 September to 14 November 2017.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2392 (2017).

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"As the conflict in South Sudan enters its fifth
year, the Security Council expresses continuing
deep concern at the political, security, humanitarian,
human rights and economic situation in South
Sudan, and is deeply concerned about the actions
of all parties to the conflict that are perpetuating
this, with 7.6 million people now in need of aid,
4 million displaced and 6 million lacking enough
food to feed themselves.

"The Security Council deeply regrets that the
parties have not fully taken the steps called for in
the presidential statement of the Security Council
of 23 March 2017 (S/PRST/2017/4), most notably
their adherence to the permanent ceasefire and
allowing the unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those in need, and demands that all
parties immediately do so.

"The Security Council takes note of the
ceasefire initiative by the Government, calls on the
Government to adhere to its ceasefire and urges the
opposition to reciprocate.

"The Security Council takes note of the
September 2017 mid-term implementation status
report of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and its findings that the parties to
the conflict have failed to implement substantive
elements of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan,
and that conditions for credible elections do not
presently exist.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) high-level revitalization
forum for the Agreement and looks forward to
the convening and full inclusivity of such a forum
and substantive progress on the initiative by the
end of December. The initiative will need strong,
coordinated and cohesive regional support, and the
Security Council urges IGAD to continue efforts
in this vein. The Security Council strongly urges
all parties to engage constructively in the process
to revitalize the Agreement, underlines that no
party should set preconditions to participation,
and that there must be cost and consequences for
those who undermine the high-level revitalization
forum process. The IGAD high-level revitalization
forum should be truly inclusive, in particular with
meaningful participation of women, youth and the
broader South Sudanese civil society. The Security
Council takes note of the African Union Peace and
Security Council's communique' of 20 September
and agrees that the IGAD high-level revitalization
forum is a unique window of opportunity, but
equally a last chance for the parties to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan. The
Security Council also takes note of other potentially
complementary regional initiatives.
"The Security Council welcomes the briefing
by IGAD Special Envoy Ismail Wais on the
report of the pre-forum consultations on the high-
level revitalization forum and his briefing on the
important and constructive contributions made by
a diverse range of South Sudanese stakeholders as
summarized therein, and fully supports his role
in the process. As a first priority, the Security
Council calls upon all parties to end hostilities
as a sign of commitment to the high-level
revitalization forum - as they have pledged to do.
Given the briefing by the IGAD Special Envoy,
the Security Council further urges the parties to
agree to monitored, effective and durable security
arrangements to stop the conflict; specific steps
to improve the human rights and humanitarian
situation, including safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors; the governance arrangements
so that all voices in South Sudan are represented;
a political process that produces an agreed path
to viable elections, including improved security;
and timelines for the implementation schedule of
the Agreement to reflect the need for a conducive
environment for post-transition elections. The
Security Council further urges the parties to agree
on strong monitoring and enforcement mechanisms
so that whatever is agreed through the high-level
revitalization forum is able to be effectively
implemented, and there is cost and consequence for
those who violate the agreement.

"The Security Council reminds the Government
of South Sudan of its stated commitment to
cooperating fully with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), and calls on the
Government to honour that commitment. The
Security Council notes with deep concern the
continuing obstacles that hinder the delivery of
vital life-saving assistance to the South Sudanese
people. The Council condemns attacks on national
and international humanitarian personnel and
compounds, and actions by all parties that have
targeted United Nations and humanitarian workers.

"The Security Council condemns all instances
of attacks against civilians and the military use of
hospitals and schools, and recalls that the UNMISS
mandate includes monitoring, investigating,
verifying and reporting publicly and regularly on
abuses and violations ofhuman rights and violations
of international humanitarian law, including
those that may amount to war crimes or crimes
against humanity. The Security Council reiterates
that perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of
human rights must be held accountable, in order to
break the prevailing cycle of impunity."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l7/25.

The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.

