Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation, Sir, for the update by Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock on the humanitarian situation
in Syria and commend his efforts.

Kazakhstan remains committed to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at resolving humanitarian
issues in Syria. We believe that it is of the utmost
importance to preserve all possible humanitarian access
modalities, including cross-border systems that are
indispensable to bringing humanitarian aid to millions
of people in northern and southern Syria. We appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations, under the leadership
of Mr. Lowcock and colleagues from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at Headquarters
and in the field, to supply food, fuel and drinking water
to devastated areas of Syria in need ofurgent assistance,
and to organize the evacuation of civilians. We also
support the humanitarian activities of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent
Society and United Nations agencies, which are
operating under extremely complicated conditions.

We also support members of the military contingent
who are carrying out demining actions in the liberated
territories. Efforts should be focused on creating the
conditions necessary to further stabilize those areas.
That includes ensuring compliance with the ceasefire,
including in the de-escalation zones. It is also essential to
comply with international humanitarian law. All parties
to the conflict should use their influence to ensure
unhindered humanitarian access, including assistance
in providing medical assistance and evacuation.

The issue of ensuring that the large numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the camps
receive assistance should be addressed. The Astana
process draws attention to the problem of the large
number of explosive devices left behind by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant militants in the territories
liberated from terrorists. We urge support for the
United Nations initiative to clear those territories.
That will allow for the elimination of unexploded
ordnance, the launching of humanitarian operations
and the return of refugees to their homes. Ensuring the
continuous delivery of humanitarian assistance will
facilitate that, but international support is required. It
is therefore important to unite the global efforts of all
United Nations Member States.

Kazakhstan continues to support all international
efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the
Syrian crisis. We hope that the agreements reached
within the Astana platform and the Geneva process
will be fully implemented. We are also of the strong
view that civilians should be protected. Therefore,
in our capital and within the Astana peace process,
careful work is being done to strengthen measures to
build trust between the parties. In particular, efforts
are now directed towards the release of detainees
and hostages, the transfer of bodies of the dead, and
the exchange of information on missing persons. Our
main priorities are to address the appalling flight of
detainees, abductees and missing persons and to ensure
full humanitarian access to any besieged or hard-to-
reach area, including eastern Ghouta. As the country
hosting the Astana platform, Kazakhstan will make
every effort to ensure that progress in de-escalation will
result in increased humanitarian access. We thank all
those who continue to provide substantial humanitarian
assistance to Syria through international organizations
and bilateral channels.

Lastly, we are convinced that only full compliance
with the ceasefire agreement will directly improve the
humanitarian situation and reduce the level of violence.
We commend the efforts of the stakeholders of the
Astana process and other interested parties to achieve
this goal. However, we stress that no initiative aimed
at establishing peace in the world's conflict zones can
be successful and efficient without the support of the
Security Council.

