Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): You
do us honour, Mr. President, by sticking with us
through this week, and I thank you for chairing this
important debate. I would also like to acknowledge
warmly the presence of the Norwegian Minister of
International Development, who is with us today.

My delegation is extremely grateful for the
comprehensive, full, interesting statements that Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno and Executive
Director Peter Piot made to us this morning. I shall
come back to those in a moment. But I want
particularly to thank Ambassador Holbrooke for
bringing the HIV/AIDS debate into the Security
Council a year ago. That meeting was unprecedented;
some questioned its wisdom. Looking back, it was
clearly the start of a process that has helped break the
global silence on an immediate and widespread threat
to mankind. We have made good progress since. It is a
legacy, among many others, that he leaves to the
Council and the United Nations. That is why I want to
recognize at this, his last Council meeting, the
extraordinary achievements of his 17 months.

He has not just made us think differently about
the United States and its relationship with the United
Nations, and made us do things in that context of which
we did not think ourselves capable, but he has made us
think differently about the issues themselves. What we
often lack in our business at the United Nations is
sheer political intensity, and he has brought us that in
huge measure. I thank him for his electric input and
friendship, and for his capacity through leadership, to
elevate the United Nations.

There is one other tribute that I would like to pay
in this context, and that is to his team at the United
States Mission to the United Nations. They have been
to a very special sort of charm school over the last 17
months. They have been nurse and midwife to a whole
mongrel family of initiatives, pronouncements, orders,
counter-orders, crises and real, solid achievements.
They deserve our thanks for their role in shaping the
extraordinary contribution of the United States to the
United Nations and in preserving the sanity of the
United Nations, no doubt at some small cost to their
own.

Sweden will later make a statement on behalf of
the European Union (EU) with which I align the United
Kingdom. In addition to the EU effort, the United
Kingdom is making significant new resources available
internationally and to the United Nations to tackle the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, including, most recently, $38
million to the United Nations Population Fund to help
prevent a critical shortage of condoms in the
developing world. We salute the similar efforts of other
countries, and urge those who have not yet reviewed
their contributions to do so as a matter of priority.
Together we must do what we can to develop and
promulgate vaccines and treatments and to make life
easier for HIV/AIDS victims. But preventing new
infection is of the highest importance in slowing the
spread of HIV/AIDS and limiting its human and
developmental costs.
The massive and rapid spread of HIV/AIDS is not
just a health issue. It is a human development issue, an
equity and equality issue and a significant threat to
international peace and security. It therefore needs the
coordinated response of United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council. HIV/AIDS reverses
development gains by destroying family structures,
preventing adults from earning and leaving children
exposed and vulnerable. In reversing development
gains and creating environments in which political and
ethnic tensions can worsen, HIV/AIDS can contribute
to the proliferation of armed conflict. And, conversely,
it becomes increasingly clear that security conditions
have a direct impact on the spread of HIV/AIDS and
that conflict and civil unrest can increase vulnerability
to HIV/AIDS, particularly among women and children.
Nowhere are the consequences more widespread or
more devastating than in Africa, where 21 million
people live with HIV/AIDS every day and where four
fifths of all HIV/AIDS deaths have occurred.

The very scale of the HIV/AIDS problem requires
an effective, efficient international response. But more
than that, it requires a coherent response. We have all
been involved in the United Nations system's effort to
bring together economic, social, political and military
actors to present a more coordinated and coherent
approach to conflict. As a cause and consequence of
conflict, and as a human and developmental tragedy,
HIV/AIDS needs and deserves a similar effort.

In this context, the United Kingdom commends
the work of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in providing a framework for
cooperation and leadership of the United Nations
response to HIV/AIDS. Peter Piot has done a really
excellent job over the past year in following up
Security Council resolution 1308 (2000), and I
welcome his report this morning. We support UNAIDS
development of a United Nations system strategic plan.

In resolution 1308 (2000), on the importance of
HIV awareness among peacekeepers, the Security
Council showed that it was ready to engage in a joined-
up approach to HIV/AIDS. It is clearly right that we
concern ourselves with the welfare of deployed troops
and with the civilian populations whose vulnerability
to the risk of infection can increase significantly during
conflict and instability. We welcome that resolution
and its follow-up resolution, resolution 1325 (2000), on
the importance of HIV/AIDS awareness training for
military and civilian police personnel and
peacekeeping personnel, which is essential, too, for the
protection of women affected by armed conflict.
The United Kingdom is pleased to be working
with UNAIDS to develop practical proposals for
United Nations peacekeeping forces and other
uniformed services. We warmly welcome, too, the
focus that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is bringing to the problem, which Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno set out so clearly this morning. The
cooperation framework agreement between UNAIDS
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is a
significant step, and we congratulate both teams on
taking it, as well as on setting up a senior expert panel
on HIV testing for peacekeepers.

A year on from Ambassador Holbrooke's
initiative, we have come some way, but we have a long
way left to go. The year 2001 is an important year in
global efforts to tackle the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Outside this Council, the General Assembly special
session on HIV/AIDS in June offers an opportunity to
focus international attention on the need for yet greater
efforts and yet more political and financial
commitment to tackling the epidemic. It is vitally
important that the General Assembly special session
result in increased and accelerated country-level action
to tackle HIV/AIDS across all sectors, paying
particular attention to prevention and to a coordinated
and coherent international response. It is also vitally
important that our work here in the Council, in the
funds and programmes, in the Economic and Social
Council and in the specialized agencies contribute
positively and effectively to that process. Let us decide
together, today in the Council, to mainstream
HIV/AIDS in all our relevant work on international
peace and security, especially in Africa, and to insist on
positive results.

