Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, our appreciation goes
to Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his timely
briefing on the progress made and the challenges
remaining in the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts around the world. In addition, our deep
respect goes to all peacekeepers, to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to
humanitarian agencies and their workers and to all
other actors striving to assist people in need and to
protect those at risk, sometimes even risking their own
lives.

During the six years since the introduction of the
protection agenda in the Security Council, in 1999,
considerable progress has been made in establishing a
framework of protection. That includes three Security
Council resolutions - including resolution 1674
(2006), adopted this April - several presidential
statements and an aide-memoire. Resolution 1674
(2006) is a cornerstone in the establishment of
guidelines for action by the Security Council.

While there is still room for further work on the
general framework of protection, it is clear that further
and closer attention should now be paid - as
suggested in the President's discussion paper - to the

question of how we can ensure its steady
implementation. Resolution 1674 (2006) and other
framework documents have real value only when
protection objectives, principles and guidelines are
actually translated into action. That is the challenge we
face at present, as Under-Secretary-General Egeland
also emphasized.

In that regard, the Government of Canada has
taken an excellent initiative to help OCHA organize a
series of round tables focusing on how the protection
of civilians is implemented on the ground with respect
to specific peacekeeping missions. Thus, a round-table
event was held in November last year that reviewed the
implementation of the protection mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

As the second in the series, another round table
was held last month to examine the implementation of
the protection elements of the peacekeeping mandate
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI). Japan was pleased to host the round table,
along with Canada. The findings and recommendations
from that meeting, drawn from daily protection
activities, provide valuable insights into problems and
challenges encountered in the implementation of
protection mandates, particularly in UNOCI in Cote
d'Ivoire, but also and more generally in peacekeeping
missions elsewhere. They are available in the report on
the round tables prepared by OCHA.

Let me touch upon three of these findings which
we find to be particularly relevant, together with our
own suggestions.

First, it was pointed out that the wide range of
actors involved in the protection of civilians need to
have a clear understanding of their respective
responsibilities and of the division of labour. The
national Government, civil society, the peacekeeping
mission and humanitarian actors all have important
roles to play in ensuring the safety of the population.
The aide-memoire endorsed by the Security Council in
2002 (S/2002/PRST/6, annex) established key areas of
protection activity. That was an important step forward,
but it demands further precision and clarity as to who
should perform each protection-related activity.

To address that issue, it would be worthwhile to
develop a matrix outlining who should make efforts in
which area of protection activity, in order to help
identify the roles of the respective actors involved.
Preferably, such a matrix, if it is to be realistic, would
include a time frame for the respective actors to begin
their activities and phase them out as the situation
allows. It could be conceived and prepared as a model
under the joint initiative of OCHA and DPKO, in
consultation with other relevant departments, agencies
and actors. Such a model, once developed, would need
to be constantly modified and adapted in accordance
with specific cases, particularly with the engagement
of national Governments and of the civil society of the
State in which peacekeeping missions are deployed.
This exercise could involve complex and difficult
tasks, but the process itself could contribute to a
clearer understanding of the roles and responsibilities
of the respective actors.

Secondly, in the round tables, the need to
establish an effective information-gathering and
information-sharing system involving humanitarian
actors and non-governmental organizations was
emphasized as an important and urgent requirement.
The planning of protection activities requires timely
and accurate information about situations in which
civilians are caught and need protection. Often, non-
governmental organizations deployed on the ground,
through their far-reaching assistance activities, obtain
first-hand information on the threat posed to civilians.
However, in the development of an effective system for
the gathering and sharing of information, caution must
be excercised to ensure that a clear distinction is
maintained between the activities of humanitarian non-
governmental organizations and the efforts of
peacekeepers to facilitate humanitarian activities, so as
not to undermine the neutrality and independence of
humanitarian activities. While bearing that in mind, we
believe that there is room to develop some kind of
cooperation on an information system. To that end,
dialogue with non-governmental organizations needs to
be intensified.

Thirdly and finally, round table participants noted
that when a peacekeeping mission has a protection
mandate, the mandate is often interpreted differently
by battalions drawn from different countries. That
gives rise on occasion to implementation problems. For
example, Council resolutions sometimes authorize a
protection mandate for civilians under imminent threat,
but there is a lack of clarity as to what sort of situation
constitutes an imminent threat. Can a situation of
political tension, in which protesting crowds are likely
to lead to violence and in which civilians are likely to

be subjected to attack in an atmosphere of turmoil, be
regarded as constituting an imminent threat? While the
Security Council must make sure that it gives clear
mandates to peacekeeping operations, we must bear in
mind that even such mandates are likely to be still
subject to interpretation when translated into action on
the ground.

We believe that, to help address the problem,
practical guidance on the day-to-day activities of
peacekeeping troops would be worth developing in the
Secretariat, based on best practices. Such guidelines
would in turn also be helpful for the Security Council
in discussing the mandates of peacekeeping missions.

Security Council resolution 1674 (2006) marked
a major achievement in our normative discussions. It is
now time to develop practical arrangements and devise
pragmatic measures to translate the terms of the
resolution into action. Practical arrangements and
measures may, in some sense, sound too technical, but
we should pay due attention to them, as they make a
difference on the ground. We hope that, by the time the
Secretary-General's next report is out, in October 2007,
specific progress in practical terms will have been
made to strengthen our protection efforts.

