Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, and pays
tribute to your predecessor, Deputy Foreign Minister
Volodymyr Yel'chenko of Ukraine, for his outstanding
leadership of the Council last month.

The full text of my statement will be circulated,
and I shall now read out an abridged version of it, in
compliance with your guidelines, Sir.

The Secretary-General must be commended for
both his first report on the subject (S/1999/957) and his
latest report (S/2001/331), particularly for the clear
analysis of the problem and the equally clear
recommendations contained therein. He has painted a
stark picture of the reality faced by millions of
civilians around the world in situations of armed
conflict- people caught in the midst of war and in
dire need of aid and protection - and has outlined the
measures that ought to be taken to address the problem.

The Secretary-General has made a total of 54
recommendations: 40 in his earlier report and 14 in his
current report. While they may not be exhaustive, they
are comprehensive in nature and, in the view of my
delegation, are realistic and practical recommendations
that merit the urgent attention of the Council. They
touch on virtually all aspects of the problem and on
immediate and practical steps that could be taken to
ameliorate the plight of the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children. As my delegation has no
serious difficulty in supporting many of those
recommendations that fall within the competency of
the Council, I shall not make substantive comments on
them, beyond urging the Council to consider them with
the seriousness they deserve, with a view to their early
implementation. We look forward to the early
establishment of a Council working group to follow up
on these and other recommendations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
should be all-encompassing. Such people should not
only be assured of their physical security in situations
of armed conflict, but should also be provided with
legal protection under international law. It is essential
to ensure that existing international instruments and
conventions that provide a legal basis for the protection
of civilians be observed by all parties concerned. The
perpetrators of crimes against civilians in armed
conflict, especially of those categorized as crimes
against humanity, must be made accountable for their
actions: they cannot hope to escape the full penalty of
the law even after the conflict is over. In that regard,
the work of the international criminal tribunals already
established for these purposes is particularly important
and should be strongly supported.

What is required is that all-important ingredient
of success, namely political will on the part of
members of the Council to effectively follow up on the
issue and to take the necessary measures to ensure the
protection of civilians in conflict situations, and, in a
broader context, to facilitate the resolution of these
conflicts in a concerted, comprehensive and even-
handed manner. The latter is particularly important, as
the Council cannot afford to be selective in its
approach. At the same time, a consensual approach in
the Council is essential if these recommendations are to
be effectively implemented.

Any meaningful discussion by the Council of
protection of civilians in armed conflict cannot but also
address the issue of the immediate protection of
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem. The plight of civilians caught in
conflict in the area, particularly Palestinian civilians, is
germane to our discussion today. It is clear from the
statement made just now by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, as well as from those of several other
speakers such as the representatives of Egypt and of
the United Arab Emirates, why that is so. The
arguments are cogent and irrefutable, and my
delegation fully associates itself with them.

While a number of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, both in his first report and in his
latest report, are applicable to the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, I shall refer to only two of
those recommendations. Recommendation 12 of his
earlier report asked the Council to consider

"deployment in certain cases of a preventive
peacekeeping operation, or of another preventive
monitoring presence". (S/J 999/95 7, para. 47)

Recommendation 40 (e) of the same report referred to

"The limited and proportionate use of force,
with attention to repercussions upon civilian
populations and the environment". (1bid., para. 67)

We strongly believe that the presence of a United
Nations or international force to monitor the situation
on the ground would have been a tangible
manifestation of the Council's concern about the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. Indeed,
such a presence would be an important confidence-
building measure, which would contribute enormously
to the search for a lasting solution. Malaysia would
once again urge the Council to give serious
consideration to the establishment and dispatch of such
a force. Security for the civilian population in that area
should be for all, not just for one group of people, and
if the authorities of the occupying Power cannot or do
not wish to provide protection, then it is incumbent
upon the Council to do so.

My delegation commends you, Mr. President, for
revisiting this important subject and looks forward to
concrete follow-up actions to this debate in the form of
practical steps or measures to ensure the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The many excellent
recommendations by the Secretary-General and
proposals by Member States must be seriously
considered with a view to their early implementation.
In that regard, the remarks of the Secretary-General are
particularly pertinent when he observes that

"Reports and recommendations are no substitute
for effective action. Progress in protecting
civilians is measured in lives and livelihoods,
and freedom from fear, rather than in statements
of intent or expressions of concern". (S/2001/33], para. 67)

In taking up the challenge to move from
generalities to concrete action, the Council should also
take to heart what the Secretary-General remarks in his
latest report:

"Unfortunately, the realities of distressed
populations have not changed, and the majority of
the important recommendations in that first report
have yet to be put into practice". (1bia'., para. 2)

As part and parcel of a more focused and
integrated approach, my delegation would particularly
welcome the proposal to engage and involve regional
organizations and other international actors, notably
those dealing with the protection of, and providing
humanitarian support for, civilians in armed conflict.
Also, as part of increased coordination and the
establishment of a focal point, the Policy, Advocacy
and Information Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which I
understand handles this issue, should be further
strengthened. That unit should work in close
coordination with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in the monitoring of conflict situations
affecting civilian populations and in the
implementation of measures to be approved by this
Council. I am confident, Mr. President, that under your
skilful stewardship an acceptable package of measures
will be approved before you hand over the presidency
to your successor.

