Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for allowing me to participate in the
Council's deliberations today on a topic that commands
international appeal, namely, "Protection of civilians in
armed conflict".

It is fitting that the Security Council should focus
attention on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Statistics show that this last decade before the new
millennium has witnessed more civilian casualties than in
all the previous conventional conflicts since the end of the
Second World War, conflicts that have killed around 22
million people. Ironically, this has happened in the
aftermath of the cold war, a period we all thought would
usher in an era of unprecedented peace and tranquillity
throughout the world.

It is a matter of immense regret that civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, are today the
deliberate targets in the current wave of internal conflicts.
So are the humanitarian personnel sent to provide assistance
to those in need of such assistance.

In any discussion of the plight of civilians in times of
war, the role played by small and light weapons will always
be a matter of concern to the international community. To
illustrate this disturbing phenomenon, the United Nations
Development Programme, in its Human Development
Report 1998, says that in the last decade alone armed
conflict killed 2 million children, disabled 4 to 5 million
and left 12 million homeless, more than 1 million orphaned
or separated from their parents and some 10 million
psychologically traumatized.

The report further states that the opportunity costs of
armed conflicts have remained alarming, as conflicts
continue to destroy years of progress in building social
infrastructure, establishing functioning governmental
institutions, fostering community-level solidarity and social
cohesion, and promoting economic development. Small and
light arms therefore constitute an issue of legitimate
concern for the international community.

Women, children and the elderly are the most
vulnerable groups in areas of conflict, but for children
conflict is all the more devastating an experience. Those
who deal in the delivery of humanitarian services
worldwide, particularly for children, have indicated that
300,000 children, girls and boys, have participated as
combatants in the 30 most recent conflicts. Although some
are recruited, some are just abducted.

 

Child soldiers spend their entire youth as bearers of
arms on the battlefield. All they know as they enter
adulthood is war and the killing it entails. Under these
conditions, generations of the human race miss golden
opportunities to attend school and prepare for their
uncertain future. When the war is over, they become a
liability to society. They find themselves with none of the
skills that normally come with the benefit of education
and that would have allowed them to compete in the job
market. The hapless children are doomed to a life of
abject poverty.

The alarming problem of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is a demanding and urgent matter
which, under normal circumstances, could have been less
of a problem if only the various mechanisms that have
been put in place through international instruments
adopted over the past 100 years or so were respected. To
be sure, this year, 1999, marks the commemoration of the
centenary of the first International Peace Conference,
which dealt with humanitarian law. It is also the
centenary of the Hague Convention, the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the thirtieth
anniversary of the Organization of African Unity
Convention governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa.

Most of these instruments have been ignored with
impunity, and civilians - particulary women, children,
the elderly and the sick - have been victimized.
Examples exist in Bosnia and Rwanda, where criminal
politicians had a policy of inciting ordinary people to kill
their neighbours, all because they were of a different
ethnic or tribal background. However, it is gratifying to
know that some of those tin-pot politicians are going
through trials for the genocide committed. The
establishment of Tribunals in respect of these two
countries will have been a major achievement in the
sustained effort to protect civilians in conflict situations
in the future if punishments emanating from the Tribunals
have a demonstrable effect.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child, for
example, has implications for both human rights as well
as international humanitarian and refugee law. However,
despite the existence therein of article 38, which requires
States to respect international humanitarian law and also
establishes the minimum age for conscription at 15,
warlords and other actors in situations of conflict flout
this instrument with impunity.

 

My delegation therefore supports the proposal, which
is gaining widespread acceptance in the United Nations, to
increase the minimum age to 18 and to introduce an age
requirement for United Nations peacekeepers and the
international civilian police as well. My delegation also
supports the proposal by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict to make
the recruitment of child soldiers a war crime.

Putting in place various mechanisms to eradicate the
exploitation of women, children and the elderly has proved
to be just one of the mitigating solutions. It is like a cure
for a disease that has already broken out. The best solution
is preventive action, which calls for tackling the root causes
of conflicts in the whole world.

We are thankful to the Secretary-General, who in his
report dated 13 April 1998, entitled "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa", has defined all the underlying
causes of conflict. Those are the fundamental issues that
must be addressed in order to eliminate the requirement for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The goal
should therefore be to prevent the outbreak of conflict in
the first place.

However, before the root causes of conflict can be
completely eradicated, all States must bear their
responsibilities which flow from the various international
instruments defining their obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict. By the same token, the Security Council,
too, has its own share of responsibility in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is the Security Council that
has responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In this respect, war and conflict situations
should be treated in the same way, regardless of their
location in the world.

Finally, my delegation looks forward to the report by
the Secretary-General, which is due in September 1999, on
ways in which the Council, acting within its sphere of
responsibility, could improve the physical and legal
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.

