Mr. Tun: I thank you for this opportunity to
address the Security Council with regard to the violence

and turmoil that have recently engulfed Myanmar's
Rakhine state and the ensuing humanitarian situation.
I have listened carefully to the statements made by the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the States
members of the Council.

The common thread that runs through the
commentaries is that "something is rotten in the state
of Rakhine". Assertions in the media that a campaign
of terror has been unleashed in northern Rakhine and
that unspeakable crimes have been committed against
innocent people have only served to heighten the
concern of the international community. While such
assertions might appear reasonable at first glance to a
lay observer, expert observers with knowledge of the
history of Rakhine and of Myanmar and exposure to the
propaganda tactics of terrorists will see such comments
for what they really are: subjective and emotionally
charged accounts. Nevertheless, we understand the
concern of the international community and take
serious note of it.

I would like to take this opportunity to apprise the
Council of the situation obtaining on the ground and
of our efforts to end the violence, assist all innocent
civilians affected by the turmoil and plans to find a
lasting solution to the daunting challenges we face.

First, we recognize that there is a serious situation
that needs to be addressed. But we also need to recognize
that the recent round of violence was triggered by the
attacks launched by the so-called Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorists.

We feel deeply the suffering and plight of all
affected communities - Rakhine, Muslim, Daing-net,
Mro, Thet, Mramagyi and Hindu. They are all victims
of violence and terrorism.

Terrorism constitutes one ofthe most serious threats
to international peace and security. It has no place in
our civilized world. I am sure that members will agree
with me when I say that we cannot condone terrorism
in any form or manifestation. The Government of
Myanmar has strongly condemned the acts of terror
committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
in northern Rakhine. The highest Islamic organization
in Myanmar, the All Myanmar Islamic Religious
Organization, as well as the Interfaith Dialogue Group
of Myanmar, have expressed their solidarity with the
Government and issued statements condemning the
acts of terror committed by ARSA. They stressed that
no religion can condone violence that results in the
loss of life or property. They expressed their support
for the Government's efforts to address the situation
in Rakhine and its endeavours to promote national
reconciliation and peace in the entire country.

In this regard, we welcome the statement by the
Secretary-General and many other representatives
around this table condemning the acts of terrorism. The
Government will work to ensure that the fight against
terrorism does not distract us from our commitment to
bringing peace, harmony and development to Rakhine
state. It is striving to restore normalcy. There have
been no armed clashes or clearance operations since
5 September.

Secondly, I wish to stress the fact that there is
no ethnic cleansing or genocide in Myanmar. Ethnic
cleansing and genocide are serious charges that should
not be made lightly. It would be a sad commentary on
our times if we allowed emotions to cloud our View and
asserted that what is happening in Rakhine was ethnic
cleansing without first undertaking a legal review
and making a judicial determination. I can assure the
Council that the leaders of Myanmar, who have been
struggling so long for freedom and human rights, will
never espouse a policy of genocide or ethnic cleansing
and that the Government will do everything it can to
prevent it.

As clearly stated by the State Counsellor, Aung
San Suu Kyi, in her address to the diplomatic corps in
Naypyitaw on 19 September, we condemn all human
rights violations and violence. We are committed to
the restoration of peace, stability and the rule of law
throughout the country. The security forces have been
instructed to adhere strictly to the code of conduct in
carrying out security operations, to exercise all due
restraint and to take full measures to avoid collateral
damage and the harming of innocent civilians.

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse
countries in the world. It is home to 135 officially
recognized ethnic groups, each with its own distinctive
culture and adherence to a variety ofreligions, including
Buddhism, Islam, Christianity and Hinduism. Religious
groups have been living in harmony throughout our
history. The situation that we face today is due to
terrorism and is not based on religion. It should be noted
that Muslims are not a minority in northern Rakhine.
They constitute 95 per cent of the total population
there. What is little known is that the vast majority of
Muslims did not abandon their hearth and home. While
there has been an exodus, more than 50 per cent of the
Muslim villages in northern Rakhine remain intact and
are living in peace with their neighbours, whether they
be Hindus or Buddhists.

Representatives of the diplomatic corps in Yangon,
accompanied by the media, will visit northern Rakhine
on Monday. They will have the opportunity to witness
first-hand the situation on the ground. I am happy to
note that the Government of Myanmar has extended
an invitation to the Secretary-General and the Under-
Secretary-General to visit Myanmar. We hope to
welcome them in the near future to enhance cooperation
between Myanmar and the United Nations.

Thirdly, the Government of Myanmar is fully
aware of its primary responsibility to address the
humanitarian situation. We have been providing
assistance to all displaced persons without
discrimination. We are collaborating with the The
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and donor countries, all represented in this room, to
provide assistance expeditiously in accordance with
humanitarian principles. The Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management has agreed to
work with us to deliver humanitarian assistance to all
displaced persons.

Fourthly, we are concerned by reports that
thousands of people have crossed into Bangladesh.
We would like to understand the real reasons for the
exodus. We will talk to those who have fled, as well
as to those who have opted to remain in their villages.
The vast majority of those who fled did so out of fear.
Fear was instilled in their hearts by the terrorists. Some
hundreds of Muslim villagers recently left their homes
and headed towards the border, notwithstanding the
efforts of the regional authorities to persuade them
to return to their villages. The villagers voiced their
concerns regarding the availability of humanitarian
assistance in a sustained manner, as well as fears that
they are becoming a minority in their own area.

We have learned that the villagers have been
threatened over the telephone and that they have
been persuaded by their fellow men who are already
in Bangladesh to join them. Moreover, the villagers
remain fearful of retaliation by the ARSA, following
the revelation that a large number of Hindu villagers
have been massacred and buried in mass graves. The
authorities have reassured the villagers that they would
be provided assistance and security. However, some
have chosen to cross over to Bangladesh.
There has been a growing clamour for the
repatriation of refugees who have fled from Myanmar
to Bangladesh. I would like to stress here that Myanmar
is prepared to start the verification process at any time.
Bangladesh and Myanmar are neighbours, and our two
neighbours already went through a repatriation process
in 1993.

We are working to enhance relations with
Bangladesh. I have met with the Foreign Minister
of Bangladesh here in New York last week, and the
Minister of the Office of the State Counsellor will visit
Dhaka this weekend to further discuss matters ofmutual
concern and to find ways and means to move ahead
with regard to the situation on our border. We have also
invited the Minister of Home Affairs of Bangladesh.
We will welcome him any time that he is able to come
to Myanmar and hope to take forward our cooperation
on border security matters. Our stated willingness to
discuss the issue of repatriation discredits the assertion
that there is a policy of ethnic cleansing on our part.

The new Government in Myanmar inherited a
challenging situation in Rakhine state and has had
to deal with the consequences of actions by other
actors. The current crisis is due to the acts of terrorism
perpetrated by ARSA. To address the situation, the
Government launched a number of initiatives including
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired
by Mr. Kofi Annan The recommendations of the
Commission represent a viable road map forward, and
we have embraced them. An Implementation Committee
for the recommendations has already been formed and
work is in progress. Two meetings have already been
held. We must give this Committee time and space to
go forward.

At this critical juncture in the life of our young
democracy, it is imperative that the international
community join hands with us to ensure that democracy
takes firm root and that we will succeed in carrying
out our responsibility to establish peace, stability, and
development in Rakhine and in the whole of Myanmar.
That is the only way that we can solve the conundrum
in Rakhine. The Security Council must refrain from
taking measures that exacerbate rather than alleviate
the situation there. It can and must do no less.

