The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Romania for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of China.

I associate myself with other colleagues in
thanking Mr. Holkeri for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Kosovo and on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2004/71), which is rich in detail.

We have consistently held the View that Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) provides the basis for
the settlement of the question of Kosovo and that the
"standards before status" policy is the guiding principle
for the settlement of this question. We welcome the
establishment of a review mechanism in that regard.
We believe that it will help advance the political
process in Kosovo. We hope that the parties
concerned- the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and the Kosovo Serbs in particular - will
actively cooperate with UNMIK and assist Mr. Holkeri
in expeditiously developing a detailed work plan for
the implementation of the standards for Kosovo.

We note that there has recently been a decrease in
crime in Kosovo and that the rule of law has been
strengthened. On the other hand, the economic
situation in Kosovo remains grave, and the living
conditions of ethnic minorities in particular need
improvement. We hope that the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro will soon resume their direct
dialogue on questions such as energy, transportation,
missing persons and refugee returns; we hope that the
talks will lead to concrete results as soon as possible
and create conditions for multi-ethnic harmony in
Kosovo so that its people can live and work in peace
and contentment.

The comprehensive settlement of the question of
Kosovo is an arduous task and a long process. The
parties concerned should redouble their efforts, and the
international community should continue its
engagement and support with respect to this question.
As always, China will support the efforts undertaken
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Holkeri, and by UNMIK.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I welcome the Assistant Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, and I give him the
floor.

