Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing today's open
debate on reconciliation for promoting peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts in the larger context of
international peace and security. We also thank the
Secretary-General and other briefers for sharing their
thoughts and valuable insights on the issue.

Reconciliation has proven to be a useful instrument
for sustaining peace and preventing relapse into
conflicts, both in inter-State and intra-State conflict
situations. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has a
wealth of experience in this regard. In its advisory role,
the PBC continues to inform the Security Council, the
General Assembly and Member States about how better
to support reconciliation with the aim of preventing
the recurrence of conflict and promoting durable peace
and security domestically, regionally and globally. We
must work towards further integrating this learning
into a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. Reconciliation involves a host of
issues, from ensuring the rule oflaw, accountability and
transitional justice to promoting sustainable economic
growth, national ownership, social cohesion and gender
equality and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including religious freedom.

As one of the major troop- and police-contributing
countries, Bangladesh has been supporting national
and local reconciliation strategies in countries
emerging from conflict. Under the astute leadership
of our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, we have also
had the successful experience of reconciliation in the
Chittagong Hill Tracts, which, in 1997, led to the signing
of the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord, bringing
about sustainable peace with our ethnic minorities in
that region.
Drawing from those experiences, we believe
reconciliation can be a critical enabler for resolving
the Rohingya humanitarian crisis, the brunt of which
we are bearing. We are convinced that the Security
Council can play an important role in promoting
peace in Myanmar's Rakhine state by ensuring
reconciliation and the reintegration of the Rohingya
community in Myanmar society, which can pave the
way for repatriation. Certainly, it would require a
robust enabling environment underpinned by dialogue
among the Rohingya - and, for that matter, other
ethnic minorities - the rest of Myanmar society,
and the Myanmar authorities, and by a sustainable
political process. We therefore tend to emphasize a
more comprehensive approach, particularly through
preventing violence against unarmed civilians, ending
dehumanization narratives and addressing the root
causes of conflict. There are many successful models
for achieving truth and reconciliation and transitional
justice, as we have seen in a number of countries,
including Rwanda, South Africa and Sierra Leone, and
these models may be followed. Reports of the various
United Nations mechanisms on Myanmar would also
be useful.

In addition, we wish to highlight a few points.

First, Myanmar must adopt clearly defined
strategies for reconciliation so that the returning
Rohingya can harmoniously coexist with others
in Rakhine state. In this regard, the importance of
appropriate confidence-building measures among the
parties concerned cannot be overstated. A whole-of-
society approach, with opportunities for civil society
and media actors, is key.

Secondly, any reconciliation process in Rakhine
must pass the rigours of transparency, objectivity,
trust and confidence. Accordingly, it is important
that regional or international actors are involved in
the process. Success would largely depend on the
impartiality of the actors, their compliance with agreed
norms and respect for diverse opinions and, more
importantly, international law.

Thirdly, the Security Council has to encourage
Myanmar to address core grievances and guarantee
unhindered and safe passage of relevant humanitarian
personnel and supplies to ensure the resettlement of
civilians and the reduction of humanitarian suffering.

Fourthly, we have heard first-hand accounts of how
sexual violence has been used against Rohingya women
fleeing Myanmar. Children and young people have also
borne a heavy brunt. Therefore, promoting meaningful
reconciliation and the reintegration of the Rohingya
community would require the active participation of
women and young people in the process.

Finally, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law is of paramount importance. To
that effect, the international community and the United
Nations should make appropriate use of the tools at their
disposal. As the Secretary-General said this morning,
no reconciliation can work without justice.

