Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and the
Ambassador of Kosovo for their briefings.

France welcomed Kosovo's formation of a new
Government on 9 September in the wake of the
legislative elections, which were held on 11 June and
monitored by a large number of international observers.
The establishment of new institutions is an essential
step in enabling Kosovo - which France fully supports
in both its national capacity and as a member of the
European Union (EU) - to meet its challenges and the
needs of the Kosovan people. The municipal elections
are now taking place, and the first round, held on
22 October, was an overall success. We hope that the
second round will also go well, free from attempts at
intimidation, particularly in the Serbian municipalities,
as the European Union Election Observation Mission
has highlighted.

France supports the new Prime Minister's desire
for reform, particularly in the area of economic
development and its corollary ofjob creation, as well as
improving health care and the education system. We also
welcome the unanimous ratification on 4 October of the
agreement between Kosovo and the European Union
on the disbursement of financial assistance from the
EU. Kosovo's political and economic institutions have
been consolidated in recent years, and that significant
progress, particularly on the security and economy
fronts, is reason to continue adjusting the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and coordinating it with the other international
stakeholders in Kosovo. Changing nothing is not
acceptable, considering that it is our responsibility, as
members of the Security Council, to ensure that United
Nations resources are fully adapted to the situation
on the ground. Kosovo no longer needs peacekeeping
efforts per se, so we should therefore review how we are
spending those resources.

France firmly believes that the future of Kosovo
will be shaped by the political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina conducted under the auspices of
the European Union, which has been very clear about
this. For both Serbia and Kosovo, rapprochement with
Europe is conditional on normalizing relations between
the two countries. In that respect, it is important
that the parties show good faith and a willingness to
engage with each other at the highest level. The recent
meetings of the Presidents of both countries convened
by Ms. Mogherini, the High Representative of the
European Union, at which both sides emphasized their
willingness to resume the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade, are positive signs in that regard. We have
also noted with interest the initiative of President Vueie
to launch an internal dialogue on Kosovo in Serbia.

Beyond the declarations of intent, from now on
we expect that all the agreements reached in 2013
and 2015 will be effectively implemented as soon as
possible, so that meaningful progress can be made in
fully normalizing relations between the two parties.
In that regard, we welcome the integration of Serbian
staff into Kosovo's judicial system that took place on
24 October. France fully supports the mediation efforts
led by the European Union and its High Representative,
Ms. Mogherini. We urge the Kosovo and Serbian
authorities to step up their efforts to produce concrete
results in that regard. Each side must do its part by
adopting a constructive attitude and refraining from
any provocations that could jeopardize the stability
of the region. We also stress the importance of efforts
to promote reconciliation and closer ties within and
between communities.

In conclusion, further efforts to consolidate the
rule of law in Kosovo must remain a priority. That is
a particularly firm European demand and one that we
support. Whether this issue is one of administrative
capacity-building, justice or of combating corruption
and organized crime, much remains to be done. Fighting
radicalization in all its forms must also continue to be a
priority. We therefore commend Kosovo's unconditional
commitment to this issue, both at the local level and in
the international coalition against Da'esh.

