Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The Kenya delegation is
pleased with the speed with which the Council has been
able to react to the Secretary-General's recommendations
contained in his report S/1998/90 of 1 February 1998,
which, inter alia, calls for the expansion and
improvement of the implementation of the humanitarian
programme for Iraq under Security Council resolution 986
(1995) of 14 April 1995: the oil-for-food programme. The

 

fact that the Council has responded quickly against the
backdrop of rising tensions precipitated by the current crisis
is an indication of its commitment and readiness to continue
to provide for the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.

As we have stated in the past, the oil-for-food
programme, which was conceived as an exemption to the
existing sanctions regime, is intended to minimize the
adverse effects suffered by the innocent civilian population
as a result of the embargo on the Government of Iraq. But
neither these arrangements nor the punitive impact they
were intended to have gives us any measure of comfort.
Consequently, we attach a great deal of importance to the
onerous mission of the Secretary-General to Baghdad this
weekend. The suffering of the people of Iraq should be
brought to an end once the conditions imposed by the
Security Council have been met by the Iraqi authorities.
The mission should not only avert any possible military
confrontation but also produce results that will soon provide
the first glare of light at the end of the tunnel.
The current stand-off, which we hope will be brought
to an end peacefully, should not be allowed to delay the
implementation of the Secretary-General's proposals. We
have thus favoured a draft resolution that is technical in
content and completely de-linked in substance from other
political considerations. We wish, in this regard, to express
our thanks to the drafters of the draft resolution for coming
up with the initial text and for coordinating subsequent
consultations, which have resulted in this consensus text
before us today.

The objectives underlying this draft resolution can be
realized only with the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities.
In particular, we hope that the long delays experienced after
the Council adopted resolution 986 (1995) and before its
effective implementation will not be repeated. This is even
more important since the programme review described in
the report of the Secretary-General did not benefit from the
input of the Iraqi Government. The report notes,

"Should the Council approve additional funding, all
the recommendations regarding additional inputs
would require detailed discussions with the
Government of Iraq and local authority counterparts in
order to clarify outstanding issues and to establish a
clear agreement on priorities." (S/1998/90, para. 6)

We therefore urge the Secretary-General to meet with the
Iraq side as soon as possible and work out the details
within the framework of the existing memorandum of
understanding in order to clear up any misunderstandings.

As the Secretary-General has repeatedly observed in
his reports to the Council on the oil-for-food programme,
this exceptionally unique and unprecedented programme
presents complex difficulties of implementation, with all
its attendant political, psychological and commercial
dimensions. Indeed, there is interlinkage between the
processes involved in the delivery and distribution of
supplies and the infrastructure necessary to support the
related activities. For example, seeds, fertilizer or weed
killers purchased under the humanitarian programme will
be rendered useless if the necessary implements, storage,
transportation or handling systems are not functioning due
to breakage.

The Secretary-General has addressed this matter in
his report. We agree with his conclusion that the
deterioration of basic infrastructure in sectors other than
food and health is undermining the value of our
humanitarian input. We therefore believe that means have
to be provided to Iraq not only to improve the
infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the
expanded humanitarian programme, but also to enhance
the capacity to pump sufficient oil to meet the increased
levels. It is our hope, therefore, that the Secretary-General
will act on paragraphs 11 and 12 and submit his findings
to the Council without delay.

It is for all these reasons that Kenya will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

