Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank you and the Secretary-General for

your valuable input and align myself with the statement
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

Multilateralism is an approach to addressing global
challenges collectively, pursuing international common
goals and goods cooperatively, upholding international
law solemnly and applying it to all nations equally.
True multilateralism is founded on inclusion instead
of exclusion; cooperation in place of confrontation;
equality rather than inequality; the rule of law instead
of the rule of power; pursuing the common good and
long-term objectives of all States, not the short-sighted
goals of only one State; and resolving differences
peacefully and justly, not violently and unfairly.

To solve global problems, multilateralism is not only
one option; it is the only option. It is an option, but not
optional. When multilateralism is challenged by bold
illegal unilateral actions, we must preserve it, address
its threats and promote its relevance and effectiveness.
That is essential for a rules-based international order.
International law and effective international institutions
with universal membership, such as the United Nations,
are the core elements of multilateralism. Therefore, in
order to preserve and strengthen multilateralism, the
United Nations should act decisively. That is how we
can make the United Nations relevant to all people.

We fully support the NAM. proposal to designate
an international day of multilateralism and diplomacy
for peace. We need such an annual forum to discuss
emerging challenges to multilateralism, the latest of
which is the doctrine of withdrawal from international
instruments and institutions by a member of the
Council. That, among others, has resulted in its
withdrawal from the Human Rights Council, UNESCO,
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

The JCPOA is the result of intensive negotiations
to peacefully resolve a manufactured crisis. It was
endorsed unanimously by resolution 2231 (2015), which
was drafted by the United States. The United States
withdrawal from the JCPOA and the reimposition of
unilateral sanctions four days ago appallingly violate
resolution 2231 (2015) and only defy international law.
For the first time in the history ofthe United Nations, the
United States - a permanent member of the Council,
with veto power - is penalizing nations across the
globe not for violating resolution 2231 (2015), but rather
for abiding by it. The world should not allow the United
States to pursue its unilateral, arrogant and self-centred
policy, which focuses on continuing to reorder the
world order to be founded on power, not law.

Additionally, the United States shamefully avoids
implementing the recent International Court of Justice
order issued, unanimously asking for the immediate
removal of United States sanctions. The JCPOA's
conclusion and Iran's compliance with its commitments,
as confirmed by 12 International Atomic Energy
Agency reports, is our contribution to multilateralism.
That was commended globally. Iran will continue
implementing its commitments proportionate to the
benefits it receives.

The world community should strongly condemn
and reject the United States sanctions, not only in word
but also in deed. That would be an action of pragmatic
support for international law and multilateralism

