Ms. Lucas (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate,
in my capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council, in this Security Council debate on Haiti.

As has already been said several times this
morning, Haiti is at a crucial moment. Since the new
Government came to power, some progress has been
made: public security is being better guaranteed;
considerable efforts are being made to establish
administrations and institutions that can strengthen the
rule of law; and the country is embarking on the path
of effective governance in order to combat poverty and
mobilize the country's human potential. However,
2008, with its food and fuel crises and its hurricanes
and tropical storms, seriously affected the country,
which experienced a decline of 15 per cent - or nearly
$900 million - in its gross domestic product.

How, in that context, can we not fear a new
destabilization and a resurgence of political violence?
Indeed, the correlations between socio-economic
development and political stability need no further
demonstration. Only the implementation of a
reconstruction and development strategy by the Haitian
authorities, with the strong support of the donor
community, will allow us to make the stability long-
lasting. It is therefore vital that the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council work together to
support that country in meeting these challenges.

Haiti has been on the agenda of the Economic
and Social Council for 10 years. Its Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, established in 1999 to draft
recommendations for the long-term development of
Haiti, was relaunched in November 2004. In its most
recent report to the States members of the Economic
and Social Council in July 2008, the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group noted the economic, social and political
instability in Haiti and highlighted the difficulties
related to the food and fuel crises that had severely
affected the country. It stressed the importance for
social and economic stability of jumpstarting the
economy, creating jobs, promoting rural development
and providing the neediest categories of the population
with food and basic services free of charge.
Those recommendations are still valid. It is
specifically the progress previously made in these key
areas that has been seriously undermined by the crises
and natural disasters that took place in 2008, further
exacerbating the living conditions of many Haitians.

The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti proposed
three groups of recommendations in particular to
improve the economic and social situation in Haiti and
to enhance the impact of development aid. Amongst
these recommendations, we would mention, first,
improved development planning and better
coordination of international assistance. Donors and
partners for Haiti's development should further adjust
their programmes to the facts on the ground and align
their support with the objectives and strategies
formulated by the Haitian authorities, thereby
contributing to enhancing national capacities.

In this context, it is urgent and necessary that the
donor conference to take place in Washington on
14 April mobilize the international community on
behalf of Haiti and contribute to the short-, medium-
and long-term development of the country.

The second group of recommendations pertains to
capacity-building for Haitian institutions. The
importance of stepping up institutional reforms,
particularly in the area of justice and the rule of law, as
well as in the area of customs and public
administration in general, was stressed.

The third group of recommendations focuses on
an improved use of what the Group calls the Haitian
and international economic and social development
levers. It recommends further involvement of the
private sector to pull Haiti out of poverty by creating
jobs in the structured sector. The Group also insists on
the contribution that the Haitian diaspora could make
to the development of the country, not only through
remittances, but also through its technical skills and
knowledge. For their part, donors are called on to
contribute to the implementation of the strategy
developed within the United Nations system in the
short and medium terms.
At its July session, the Economic and Social
Council will consider, within the framework of its
annual ministerial review, the theme entitled
"Implementing the internationally agreed goals and
commitments in regard to global public health". In this
context, it is important to recall that access to health
care in Haiti remains very limited and that the
inadequacies in terms of public health, and more
generally in terms of basic services, are an obstacle to
efforts being made to ensure development and growth.

Bearing mind the stabilizing effect of lasting
economic and social development, the international
community has the obligation to work in cooperation
with the Haitian authorities to develop the country and
to work with them over the long term. The Economic
and Social Council, particularly through its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group, will visit Haiti in May and will
continue to be committed in this process and to assist
the country.

