Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Brazilian presidency for convening this open debate on
the very important subject of the interdependence
between security and development. I would also like to
express my appreciation to Sarah Cliffe of the World
Bank for the Bank's insightful 2011 World
Development Report, as well as to the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission for his briefing. The
thoughtful statement by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, indicates that, today, the United Nations
works in a radically different world with new realities.

We know too well that the greatest security
threats facing us today, and in the decades ahead, go
far beyond States waging aggressive war or being
embroiled in their own internal violence. They extend
to political, economic and social exclusion and
unrest - caused by gross poverty, a severe shortage of
food and water, infectious diseases and environmental
degradation - the spread and possible use of weapons
of mass destruction; terrorism; transnational organized
crime and mass flows of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Threats recognize no national
boundaries, are interconnected and must be addressed
at the global, regional and national levels.

The central challenge for us now is to fashion a
broader understanding of security, with its
accompanying responsibilities, strategies, institutions
and systems that not only establish stability and the
rule of law but also foster social and economic
development, with the right of people to self-
determination. The principles of freedom from want
and fear and the freedom to live with dignity, with
respect for human rights, are fundamental, as they
reinforce each other and are interconnected. They
guide the processes of preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, humanitarian action,
peacebuilding, post-conflict recovery and development,
and especially the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. We must constantly refine those
tools for each theatre of operation, because each will
have its specific situation, as well as collectively for
the Security Council's strategy with regard to the rules
of engagement of peacekeeping operations and their
exit strategies, and for the steps taken for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration through
multidisciplinary and multi-tiered actions. Measures
must be taken for institution- and capacity-building and
the provision of services to promote internal stability.

It is therefore obvious that the Council must pay
attention to the resolutions of the General Assembly
and its six Committees on relevant security issues.
Likewise, the decisions of the Economic and Social
Council, which drives forward the agenda emerging
from global summits, coordinates the activities of
specialized United Nations agencies, consults non-
governmental organizations and networks with regional
commissions, provide early warning signals. The
Human Rights Council provides the indicators for
human rights in specific conflict situations. The
Peacebuilding Commission offers guidance on gaps
that threaten to undermine peace in post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery. The United Nations
humanitarian response system and governance of the
global environment, each with their ever-growing
range and scale of demands, are uniquely positioned to
monitor global security issues and to advise a shift to
stable development, which includes the participation of
women and youth.

The Council must recognize that among the key
contributors to peace and prosperity are strong
leadership, popular legitimacy and policy approaches,
which can successfully integrate security, justice, will
and opportunities for economic advancement. Thus,
short-, medium- and long-term confidence-building in
the political, development and social spheres and the
delivery of concrete results on the ground in
decentralized locations become imperative. My
country's creation of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia is an excellent
example of regional cooperation, and testifies to how
time-consuming and difficult such a process is, but also
to the fact that strong political will can make
confidence-building possible and, thus, conflict
prevention.

Conflict and fragility, and their nexus with
development, entail more cooperation than hitherto
with financial institutions - such as the World Bank,

the International Monetary Fund and regional banks -
as well as with regional structures, such as the African
Union, the New Partnership for Africa's Development
and the European Union, together with a wide variety
of other actors at the global, regional, national and
local levels. Youth are an important segment of such a
multi-stakeholder arrangement of academia, religious
leaders, human rights actors, grassroots organizations
and independent media. Their engagement is critical
for early intervention to avoid radicalization. While the
Council and peacekeeping operations have limited
mandates, they can amply benefit from the United
Nations system, which directly addresses development
issues and interacts with significant players that
perform watchdog functions.

In closing, I would like to affirm Kazakhstan's
support for the United Nations in promoting peace in
numerous ways, in particular the closure of the
Semipalatinsk nuclear test site in 1991, the
establishment of the Central Asian nuclear weapon-
free-zone in 1996 and the generation of collective
thinking by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference on peace, security and sustainable
development issues. My country also assists the
recovery process of countries in the region affected by
war and conflicts. It is essential that the Council
review the constantly evolving international security
environment and its implications for the United
Nations.

