Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We did not wish to ask for the floor once
again. However, the response delivered just now by the
representative of the Government and State of Qatar
compelled us to ask for the floor a second time.

We say to our responding colleague, first, that
we should be called representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which is a founding Member of the
United Nations. Even though the representative of
the Government and State of Qatar is ignorant of the
established diplomatic norms at the United Nations,
we will not stoop to his level. We will continue to
respect the Security Council, the rules of procedure
and the Charter and will continue to address him as the
representative of the Government and State of Qatar.

The State and Government of Qatar and the ruling
family there are today the biggest exemplars of money-
laundering and terrorist financing, if only the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) would study them in a
balanced, objective and neutral way. As we stated this
morning, the Security Council has adopted resolutions
that specifically address the behaviour of the State
and Government of Qatar, which was among the top
countries - and perhaps the only country - to pay
cash, in the form of millions of dollars, to Da'esh and
the Al-Nusra Front in Iraq and in Syria. They paid those
sums of money as ransom so that the terrorist groups
would release foreign individuals they had captured.

These are facts. My colleague the representative of
the Government and State of Qatar should not bristle
at hearing them. They once paid $20 million to ensure
the release of an Americanjournalist, who himself said
on a television interview that the mediator called his
family here in the United States. The mediator was an
Arab national, who told the journalist not to worry,
as the group - later revealed to be the Al-Nusra
Front - would in the days to come receive $20 million
from the State of Qatar as ransom for his release. That
ransom was paid following two resolutions adopted by
the Security Council to prevent the payment of ransoms.
My colleague, the representative of Qatar knows very
well what happened in Iraq, where more than half a
billion dollars were paid for the release of individuals.

I am not here to fabricate stories or to launch
politicized or false accusations, as the Qataris usually
do against Syria to justify what they have done against
the Syrian people. Why is the representative of the
Government and the State of Qatar so sensitive? I ask
him to not be so sensitive about formal statements. He
will recall that one of the most prominent members
of the ruling family of Qatar, former Prime Minister
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber Al Thani, willingly
appeared on public TV station in Qatar and then on the
BBC to say that they had spent $137 billion in Syria to
bring about the fall of President Bashar Al-Assad. When
asked how they had spent that money, he responded
that they were not the only ones to pay. Hamad bin
Jassim said that they had reached an agreement with
the Governments of other countries, which had asked
them to be at the forefront of those efforts.

I ask the Council to listen to the rationale behind
the Government of Qatar. Hamad bin Jassim said that
Syria was the prey. Speaking in the Gulf dialect, he said
that Syria was the prey that managed to escape because
we disagreed on things. That is the rationale behind the
policies of the State of Qatar - laundering money and
financing terrorism. I will tell the Council how they
are laundering money and financing terrorism. The
former Prime Minister says they spent $137 billion in
Syria. The former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Qatar,
Khalid bin Mohammad Al Attiyah, explained the issue
by saying after we liberated Aleppo in 2016, alongside
the Russians and other allies,

"even if the new United States President stops
supporting rebel groups in Aleppo or Syria, we in
Qatar will not stop. We will continue to support
those groups because we believe they will be
victorious and return to Aleppo."

Another Minister for Foreign Affairs in Qatar, who
later became the Minister of Defence, told Le Monde:
"You ask us about the Al-Nusra Front. We in
Qatar have a different approach from that of the
United Nations. We are realistic. We believe that
only Da'esh is a terrorist group. However, the
Al-Nusra Front, in our opinion, is doing a goodjob
and we will continue to support it."

So, he is telling the United Nations and the Security
Council that they are wrong - that the Al-Nusra Front
is not a terrorist group and that Qatar will continue to
support it. Then they come to the Security Council to
talk about Qatar's efforts.

We officially tell the representative of Qatar today
that every dollar paid by Qatar to the United Nations
to counter terrorism is in itself money-laundering. I
repudiate those who spend $137 billion to destroy a
country and its people, its civilization, its future and
its aspirations, and then come to the United Nations
and pay $75 million to justify their claim that they
are partners in countering terrorism. This is money-
laundering. I would ask everyone in the Chamber to
look closely at the facts. Qatar has paid $75 million
to the United Nations to combat terrorism, but openly
admits to having spent $137 billion to destroy Syria.
However, they differed on the prey.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm.
