Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today at a time when the
Palestinian territories are experiencing a continued
escalation by the Israeli occupying forces and an
intensification of Israeli military attacks against the
Gaza Strip. Tens of civilians - mostly women and
children - were killed and injured yesterday in Beit
Hanoun in northern Gaza, in blatant violation by Israel
of all international laws and norms and of its
commitments as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War. That has undermined
the credibility of Israel's commitment to the goal of
reaching a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East based on international legitimacy and to refraining
from imposing de facto policies.

The warning delivered by the Arab Group's
foreign ministers during the Security Council
ministerial meeting of 21 September has become a
reality. It has been reinforced by the Security Council's
silence and unwillingness to assume its responsibilities
in maintaining international peace and security and in
enhancing world supervision of the peace process so as
to avoid a further deterioration of the situation and
limit the possibility of further escalation in the region.
Accordingly, it is incumbent on the Council to act and
to refrain from condoning Israel's violations and illegal
practices in the occupied lands, particularly in the Gaza
Strip, where the killing, the blockade, closures, and the
bloodshed of innocent unarmed civilians continue
unabated.

Events of the past few months in Palestine and
Lebanon have proven the failure of hostile policies and
unilateral measures, and confirmed that a solution can
be attained solely at the negotiating table, the only way
to achieve peace and security between the Arabs and
the Israelis. On that basis, the mere condemnation of
the hostilities is not sufficient to make Israel comply
and refrain from its aggression. The international
community must therefore take a firm stand in order to
put an end to the ongoing political and humanitarian
tragedy and to provide the bases and necessary
guarantees to halt the ongoing disregard of United
Nations resolutions, international law, the road map,
and the role of the Quartet. In that context, the
following urgent measures should be taken.

First, Israel, the occupying Power, has to
immediately cease its aggression against the
defenceless Palestinian people, stop the killing of
civilians in the occupied lands, withdraw from the
areas that it entered in the Gaza Strip, and return to the
boundaries of 28 June 2006.

Second, Israel should lift the blockade imposed
on the Palestinian lands and take definitive confidence-
building measures, including by refraining from
targeting civilians and halting all forms violence and
collective punishment; by addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions in Gaza and the West Bank; by
discontinuing the construction of the separation wall;
and by implementing the Agreement on Movement and
Access to ease the movement of Palestinians and allow
the delivery of international humanitarian assistance to
resume.

Third, Israel should abstain from unilateral
measures that contribute to the protraction of the
conflict and prevent a final settlement from being
reached. It should also make serious efforts to build
confidence and resume negotiations in a context of
simultaneous parallel commitments from the
Palestinian side to stop the launching of rockets from
the Palestinian territories towards Israel and the
cessation of all Israeli military operations.

Fourth, the need to create an atmosphere
conducive to a return to negotiations should be
recognized through the release of the abducted Israeli
soldier, and of the Palestinian prisoners, officials and
parliamentarians arrested by Israel, taking into account
the importance of such a step to the re-establishment of
calm.

Fifth, the Security Council has to assume the
responsibilities that it has abandoned, achieve an
immediate and mutual ceasefire between the two sides
through an international monitoring mechanism to be
established under the auspices of the Security Council,
and ensure the cessation of aggression and the non-
resumption of actions by Israel against Palestinian
civilians.

Sixth, if Israel is to be made to understand that it
cannot continue to violate the human rights of
Palestinians and to occupy their lands with impunity,
its practices in the occupied Palestinian territories must
be investigated and it must be assigned criminal
responsibility for the destruction that has resulted from
its aggression.

Seventh, immediate and effective action and
measures should be taken by the international
community, including the Security Council and the
members of the Quartet, to address the Palestinian
issue and the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.
It must not be content to issue statements that do not
reflect definitive positions vis-a-vis flagrant violations.

In conclusion, we condemn the aggression, which
cannot be justified under any pretext or label, and
reiterate our call on Israel to refrain from using force to
impose a de facto situation and to return to the
negotiating table. We also reiterate our call on the
Security Council, the Quartet, and all Members of the
United Nations to strive earnestly to end the
occupation and establish the foundations of peace in
the Middle East, which has long suffered from conflict.
We emphasize that the Arab countries, in their peace
initiative of 2002, set out a strong position that still
awaits support from the Security Council and needs to
be reflected in practical initiatives and procedures to
achieve the security, peace and stability to which the
people of the region aspire.

