Ms. Bird (Australia): The history of conflict in
the Great Lakes region underscores the fact that the
trajectory towards peace is rarely linear. Burundi is a
prime example. Today a country that had just begun to
heal from the wounds of its civil war is again facing
renewed conflict. Australia is deeply concerned about
the lack of progress that has been made in resolving
Burundi's recent crisis, and about the reports of human
rights abuses. We call on all parties in Burundi,
including the authorities, to take immediate steps to end
torture, sexual violence, arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings. Human-
rights violations are important early indicators of the
potential for atrocity crimes. Respect for human rights
must be central to building sustainable peace.

As Burundi's situation demonstrates, regional and
international support to sustained political dialogue
and early preventive action are key to consolidating
peace. Australia welcomed the recent engagement on
the part of the Burundian authorities with the African
Union high-level mission, the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. However, we urge Burundi to also
engage, without preconditions, in the mediation talks
led by the East African Community. That requires
genuine engagement with opposition groups. Critically,
mediation talks, together with broader peacebuilding
efforts, must be inclusive of all, particularly women,
young people and civil society, if they are to address
the grievances that fuel conflict.

We note with concern that implementation of
the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region has recently been limited.
In that context, we welcome the agreement on the
resumption of military cooperation between the
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as today's launch of the United Nations Regional
Strategic Framework for the Great Lakes, which aims
to support the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. Australia is particularly
pleased that the Regional Strategic Framework outlines
practical steps for addressing violence against women
and girls in the region. We also commend its focus
on ending the culture of impunity by strengthening
institutions, empowering civil society organizations
and enhancing judicial cooperation.

Ultimately, countries must address the root
causes of conflicts, including historical and economic
grievances, lack of economic opportunity, scarce
resources and competition. In that regard, we would
welcome further discussion of the critical role played in
regional stability by mobilizing domestic resources and
enhancing economic integration. As we know all too
well, economic growth and prosperity, particularly when
derived from natural resources, can either fuel conflict,
as we have seen in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, or be a driver of sustainable,
inclusive growth. Peacebuilding, particularly in the
Great Lakes region, must pay particular attention to
improving the management and transparency of natural
resources, as well as ensuring that the benefits of
economic growth are shared equitably.

The path towards a peaceful, stable society is a
hard one, and we have many examples where countries
have emerged from conflict only to relapse back into it.
Indeed, the history ofthe Great Lakes region emphasizes
the fact that achieving just, meaningful and lasting
peace requires sustained effort, from action to prevent
and resolve conflict to reconciliation and recovery.
Australia welcomes the attention being focused on
those issues and I look forward to continuing to work
with the Angolan presidency, including in our role as
co-Chairs of the peacebuilding resolution negotiations
that are nearing conclusion.

