Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's open debate and also thank all of
today's briefers.

The link between terrorist groups and transnational,
serious and organized crime presents a complex and
evolving threat to international security. There are
many examples of international terrorist groups using
sophisticated criminal activities to enhance and fund
their operations and evade detection, in particular
through kidnapping for ransom, money-laundering,
drug trafficking, encryption and cybercrime.

We know that transnational, serious and organized
crime and terrorist groups are involved in money-
laundering, drug-trafficking and people-smuggling
activities, which span multiple countries. Those illicit
activities have helped produce hundreds of millions of
dollars to fund and perpetuate international terrorism
and crime. There is an urgent need to enhance
international cooperation and strategies to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from such activities.

Australia recognizes the importance of a
coordinated global response to the transnational nature
of those threats. Australia welcomes the collaboration
between the United Nations and other relevant bodies
such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF)
to address those issues. The GCTF's The Hague
Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational
Organized Crime and Terrorism notes that the nexus
between transnational organized crime and terrorism
exists in many forms and manifestations, exacerbating
the threat to international peace and security.

In recognition of the linkages across multiple
security issues, the creation of Australia's Home
Affairs portfolio in December 2017 brought together
national security policy areas, including terrorism
and transnational, serious and organized crime. The
creation of that body has enabled agencies to work
closely with partners domestically and internationally
and to share information more quickly, enhancing our
ability to address terrorist threats.

A strong counter-terrorism financing regime is
critical to disrupting any links between terrorism and
organized crime. Australia is pleased to host the next
No Money for Terror ministerial conference on counter-
terrorism financing, to be held in November. It will be
a further opportunity to strengthen the global response
against terrorist financing. The annual South-East
Asian regional Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit is
another example of multilateral cooperation focused on
understanding andre sponding to terrorism financing and
significant financial threats. It harnesses the collective
capability of the region's financial-intelligence units
to develop actionable strategies to combat terrorism
financing and serious crime. The next regional Summit
will be held in Manila, also in November.

Recognizing the need for a comprehensive response
to the threat of terrorism, Australia is also strongly
advocating for a broad range of counter-terrorism
initiatives, including the recent leaders' statement made
at the Group of Twenty Summit in Osaka on preventing
the exploitation of the Internet for terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism.

Transnational, serious and organized crime is a
complex phenomenon. Australia has committed to a
nationally integrated approach involving our health,
education, social policy, security and law-enforcement
agencies, as well as to working closely with international
partners, academia and industry to address all aspects
of transnational crime to help prevent it from being
used to support terrorism.

