Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Jan Kubis for presenting the
report (S/2013/535) and for the work he is doing as
the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission

in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his very informative statement.
This is the Council's third debate this year on the
situation in Afghanistan. We note that, in spite of the
efforts made, there continues to be uncertainty on the
political, security, humanitarian and human rights
fronts. We also note that cooperation continues to grow
between Afghanistan and the countries of the region.

On the political front, the situation continues to be
dominated by the peace process and the elections of
2014.

With regard to the peace process, the announcement
of the opening, on June 18, ofa Taliban office in another
country has dealt a blow to the process of inter-Afghan
reconciliation. The Government's decision to suspend
talks and opt for an Afghan-led dialogue is the result
of the anxiety aroused by the opening of that office,
whose attributes were interpreted in different ways.
Faced with such a situation, we urge all Afghan parties
to resume dialogue. In that regard, we commend the
joint secretariat of the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme on its work in connection with former
insurgents, to which UNAMA provides continued
support.

With regard to the 2014 presidential and provincial
elections, the preparation process has given a new
dynamic to political life in Afghanistan, with the
valuable support of the United Nations Development
Programme. The adoption of laws on the organization
and functions of the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission
is part of that dynamic. Similarly, we welcome the
consultations that led to the appointment of members of
the Commission, while we also regret the lack of civil
society organizations represented among them.

The preparations for the 2014 elections are
unfortunately taking place in an atmosphere of
insecurity. Moreover, there are disagreements about
the holding of the elections themselves. At the same
time, negative campaigns are being organized to
discourage voters. This unfortunate situation calls the
attention of the international community to the fact that
Afghanistan will always need the help of all its partners
to complete the process under way.

With regard to the importance of the 2014 elections,
while Afghan forces are increasingly assuming security-
related responsibilities, it would be appropriate for the

Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on
the state of the preparations for the elections to allow
the Council to consider the potential difficulties.

The security environment in which the elections
are being prepared is reflective of the wider situation.
Security incidents have not abated, despite the continued
recruitment by Afghan forces and efforts to strengthen
the capacity of those forces. Acts of violence are
increasing, and United Nations staff and their partners,
as well as diplomatic missions are being targeted.
The insecurity is fuelled by the problem of drugs, the
cultivation of which continues to grow. We encourage
the Afghan Government to pursue and intensify its
fight against poppy cultivation in particular.

The human rights situation is also of concern
in Afghanistan. Irregularities in the procedure
for appointing new members of the Independent
Commission for Human Rights have been reported.
We urge the Government to preserve the status of the
Commission, as it has endeavoured to do.

The protection of civilians is also weakened and
civilian casualties are in the thousands because of
the use of improvised explosive devices and stepped
up ground fighting. With regard to the persistence of
torture and other mistreatment, we urge the Government
to continue to take the appropriate measures in order to
control such violations, particularly against women and
children.

Togo also condemns the use by the insurgents of
child soldiers and welcomes the progress made in the
fight against that scourge through the Action Plan on
Underage Recruitment. In that respect, the support of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflicts and of UNICEF is
welcome.

The signing of agreements by Afghanistan with
neighbouring countries portends a promising future
in the relations between that and other States in the
region and beyond, as Mr. Kubis and the Ambassador
of Afghanistan have just affirmed. In that context,
the continued hospitality of Pakistan towards Afghan
refugees should be commended. Furthermore, the
number of people needing assistance is estimated at
more than 135,000.

I conclude by stressing that Afghanistan needs the
support of the international community as a whole more
than ever to meet the challenges facing it, especially
in view of the withdrawal of international forces by
the end of next year. In that regard, Togo would like
to again thank the United Nations, UNAMA, the
funds and programmes and Government partners for
the assistance they continue to provide to ensure that
Afghanistan can assume its place in the community of
nations.

