Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy, and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic' for their briefings.

First, allow me to emphasize that the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, in accordance with
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions,
fundamentally lies with the Government and the army
of the country in which a conflict occurs. We are
concerned that we still face constraints of access in
many locations, as well as difficulties in the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the vulnerable. We call
for strict compliance by all parties with international
humanitarian law. It is necessary for all of us to
establish the rule of law - which includes
strengthening judicial systems - and to continue the
fight against impunity. We believe that, in order to
prevent civilians being victimized and to strengthen the
protection of civilians, it is necessary to effectively
enhance systems of monitoring and reporting.

In the cases of Libya and Cote d'Ivoire, Japan
commends the effective and timely role that the
Security Council has been playing in the protection of

civilians, and we expect the Council to continue to take
effective actions to that end. As for the case of Libya,
Japan has repeatedly called on the Libyan authorities to
immediately cease committing acts of violence against
the people of Libya, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Japan strongly condemns
the violence being perpetrated by the Libyan
authorities against their own people, which has
continued unabated despite the demands of the
international community that it cease. Those who
commit violence against the Libyan people, including
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, should be held accountable for
their actions, including through the International
Criminal Court.

We support the Member States that are taking
measures in accordance with resolution 1973 (2011) to
protect civilians and civilian-populated areas under
threat of attack in Libya. At the same time, Japan
believes that all diplomatic efforts should be made to
achieve an immediate ceasefire, and strongly supports
all efforts in that regard, especially those of
Mr. Al-Khatib, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General.

On Cote d'Ivoire, Japan supports the action
taken, in accordance with resolution 1975 (2011), by
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the
French forces that support it to protect civilians,
including to prevent the use of heavy weapons in the
deteriorating security situation since the end of
November. We invite President Ouattara to cooperate
with the international investigation of human rights
violations in his country, and also expect the
perpetrators to be punished so that there is no
possibility of impunity.
A peacekeeping mandate for the protection of
civilians must be clear and achievable. It is also
important that the mission be provided with all the
resources necessary for implementing its mandate. A
comprehensive approach, along with the Council's
resolutions, will ensure the successful protection of
civilians through such measures as actions by the
Sanctions Committee; strengthening of the rule of law
through the Commission of Inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council; and close cooperation with
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Economic Community Of West African States.

The ability of the Security Council to enforce
accountability for the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, must be further strengthened. In
that regard, we expect that the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence requested under resolution 1960 (2010) will
be operational as soon as possible. We also expect the
Council to take action to hold accountable any parties
that attack schools.

