Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank you for the
opportunity to take part in this debate, Mr. President.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
the presentation of his report (S/2012/376), as well as
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie
and Mr. Philip Spoerri of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their participation and contributions.

We share the concern of many of the previous
speakers about innocent civilians in armed conflicts,
who sadly often constitute an overwhelming majority
of the victims. Women and children in particular
continue to be the most vulnerable group, subject
to various forms of extreme violence that result in
grave humanitarian crises with huge displacements of
populations in various parts of the world.

Ensuring accountability and enhancing compliance
with international legal obligations on the part of
parties to conflicts should be viewed as a key element
of the Council's responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, and one that will require a deeper
commitment and broader vision of the future. It is
important to improve the use of established sanctions
regimes and to implement the binding resolutions that
call on all States to adopt national legislation towards
the prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Establishing accountability for such serious crimes
is an important matter for my delegation in the context
of resolving the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. The
Azerbaijani authorities have the primary responsibility
to provide accountability for the violations of
humanitarian and human rights law that took place
in connection with the hundreds of thousands of
Armenians who were displaced and became refugees as
a result of ethnic cleansing and aggression on the part of
Azerbaijan in the late 1980s and early 1990s in response
to the people of Nagorno Karabakh's exercise of their
right to self-determination. The Azerbaijani authorities
are also accountable for the hundreds of Azerbaijanis
who were massacred in the town of Khojalu by the
Azerbaijani National Front.

During those years, Armenia's entire border area
with Azerbaijan was transformed into a battlefield.
That resulted in the destruction and occupation of
many areas of Armenian territory, including the village
of Artsvashen, as well as Shahumian, Getashen and
another 18 Armenian villages in the northern region of
Nagorno Karabakh. Those territories were invaded and
have remained under occupation by Azerbaijani armed
forces for the last 20 years. Azerbaijani aggression
also resulted in significant casualties and losses among
the civilian population. Innocent civilians in Nagorno
Karabakh and neighbouring regions of Armenia were
subjected to a barrage of heavy artillery, missiles,
shelling and bombing. The Azerbaijani army fired
indiscriminately on homes, schools, kindergartens,
hospitals and even ambulances.

During the aforementioned period when civilians
faced a continuing escalation of violence, the Armenian
side took decisive humanitarian action to mitigate the
suffering of civilians by exercising its responsibility
to protect the physical security of the population, fully
complying with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Today, we continue to be greatly concerned
about the humanitarian impact of Azerbaijan's use
of force and weapons against independent Nagorno
Karabakh and in densely populated areas bordering
Armenia.

As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, there are fundamental differences between the
concepts of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the responsibility to protect, although both are
important and relevant in the context of protection. The
two concepts are, however, connected and in that way
share the same legal foundation of the rejection of the
use of force and of diametric opposition to rule by force
or the use of force.

Again in the context of resolving the conflict in
Nagorno Karabakh, both the Minsk Group co-Chairs of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations Secretary-General have
called on the parties to undertake confidence-building
measures, particularly those that would remove the
threats to the civilian population. To that end, the
recent statement made in the margins of the Group
of 20 Summit in Los Cabos by the Presidents of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair countries - France, the
Russian Federation and the United States - underlined
that military force will not resolve the conflict and can
only prolong the suffering and hardships endured for
too long by the peoples of the region. Only a peaceful
negotiated settlement will allow the entire region
to move beyond the status quo towards a secure and
prosperous future.

We welcome the statement of the leaders of the
Minsk Group co-Chair countries and once again call
on Azerbaijan to cease all violence and provocations,
including subversive activities and the kidnapping of
civilians along the Armenia-Azerbaijan border and the
line of contact with Nagorno Karabakh. We strongly
believe that a fundamental and lasting solution to the
problem can be achieved only by peaceful means, based
on the principles of international law and within an
agreed international format.

It is important that the Council focus on the
protection of civilians within an overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must
be built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the
root causes of the conflict under discussion in order to
prevent any renewal of that conflict in the future, and
should provide reliable and adequate security protection
guarantees to the population concerned, thus assuring
them of sustainable peace and development.

