Mr. Nunez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Chairs of the Committees for the
information they have provided. The three Committees
have carried out commendable work that Cuba values
and closely follows. My country, as all know, complies
strictly with its obligations under resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

Cuba reiterates its firmest rejection of all terrorist
acts, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations, regardless of who commits them,
against whom they are perpetrated and where they are
carried out. All terrorist acts, for whatever purposes
they are carried out, must be condemned.

The Cuban people has suffered first hand a broad
spectrum of terrorist attacks since the triumph of its
Revolution. As indicated by President Raul Castro,

"as early as March 1960, President Eisenhower
approved a covert action programme against the
island that was declassified a few years ago. The
United States Central Intelligence Agency played
a leading role in planning, providing logistical
support, recruiting and training mercenaries to
carry out terrorist acts under the aegis of the
Government of that country - arson, bombings,
sabotage of every type, the seizing of aircraft,
ships and Cuban citizens, attacks against our
Government offices and killings of diplomats,
machine gunning of dozens of facilities, many
attempts to put an end to the lives of the principal
leaders of the Revolution, and particularly
hundreds of plans and actions targeting the
Commander-in-chief".

The Cuban people have lost some 3,478 of their
number as victims of terrorism. Another 2,099 have
been left permanently disabled by acts of terrorism
carried out over the course of half a century against our
country. This is precisely why we strongly condemn all
acts and manifestations of terrorism, wherever and by
whomsoever committed. Cuba has an impeccable

11-3390]
record in addressing terrorism, and I wish to reiterate
our steadfast resolve not to allow Cuban territory to be
used to organize, instigate, support or carry out acts of
terrorism.

My country has systematically provided a number
of comprehensive reports on this topic to the relevant
Committee. We have strict and effective controls on
our borders, based on our more than 50 years of
experience fighting terrorism, that have allowed us to
thwart many acts of terrorism. Cuba has subscribed to
the 13 international conventions on this topic and
strictly complies with its commitments and obligations
arising from the resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council.

My country does not possess weapons of mass
destruction of any type and has no intention to acquire
them. It respects its obligations under relevant
international instruments on nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons.

We believe the adoption by the General Assembly
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (resolution 60/288) to be of the utmost
importance. My country has implemented various
legislative measures in this area, including long before
the adoption of the Strategy, with a view to preventing
and suppressing all acts and activities directly or
indirectly relating to terrorism.

For all of these reasons, I reiterate Cuba's
rejection of the unilateral development by the
Government of the United States of America of a list of
States that supposedly support terrorism, and the
inclusion of Cuba on that list. This practice is in
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It is spurious and politically
motivated. No Government can arrogate the right to
categorize the actions of other nations with regard to
terrorism, especially not a Government of double
standards that refuses to prosecute confessed
perpetrators of horrendous terrorist acts against Cuba
and other countries of this hemisphere, such as Luis
Posada Carriles, allowing them instead to roam free
and participate in political activities.

I have here a book entitled Voices from the Other
Side: An Oral History of Terrorism Against Cuba, by
Keith Bolender, which I make available to the relevant
Committee and the Security Council, together with the
other materials with which we keep the Committee
informed. This book, which was launched here at the
United Nations on 26 April, contains a detailed
explanation of the many terrorist acts perpetrated
against the Cuban people, organized and funded from
the United States, with the participation of a mafia that
enjoys impunity in this country.

I also have here, available to the Committee, a
DVD entitled "Cuba's Reasons: Path of Terror", with
information and testimony from the Salvadorian
terrorist Francisco Chavez Abarca, who was recruited
by Posada Carriles to carry out criminal acts against
Cuba. These materials, together with many others from
the same series, can be accessed on the website
www.cubadebate.cu.

All of these actions against Cuba enjoy the
blessing of the United States Government.
Incontrovertible proof of that can be seen in the result
of the recent legal farce in El Paso against the well-
known and self-confessed terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, who was tried not for terrorism but for
perjury, despite all the evidence against him in the
possession of the United States Government. He was
acquitted of all charges and moves freely about this
country, enjoying official protection and announcing
further terrorist acts with total impunity.

On the other hand, five Cuban patriots - heroes
in my country - were unjustly sentenced and cruelly
imprisoned for trying to prevent terrorist acts against
Cuba from the United States. Only three weeks ago, on
25 April, the Prosecutor requested that the habeas
corpus petition made by one of them, Gerardo
Hernandez Nordelo, be rejected, and did the same
shortly thereafter with respect to those made by
Antonio Guerrero and Rene' Gonzalez. These three,
together with Ramon Labariino and Fernando
Gonzalez, are irrefutable proof of the terrorism
perpetrated by the United States against the Cuban
people.

I reiterate here once again our willingness to
make a more detailed presentation on these issues
before the Counter-Terrorism Committee and to
provide any additional information or clarification
deemed necessary.

Cuba will continue to strictly comply with the
provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) and to cooperate with the subsidiary
bodies created pursuant to those resolutions.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country's readiness
to cooperate with all States, including the United States
of America, in preventing and combating international
terrorism on the basis of mutual respect, the sovereign
equality of States and the principles and norms of
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations.

