Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
and his team for their splendid work. I also thank
Ambassador Saikal. It has been a true pleasure for the
Spanish delegation to work with the Afghan Mission.

We have just adopted resolution 2274 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for one more year,
in keeping with the desires of the Afghan Government
and in consultation with it. The members ofthe Council
are aware of the new era that began a year ago with the
transformation decade, and acknowledge the progressive
efforts that have been undertaken in Afghanistan. By
way of this new resolution, the Council underscores
these extremes and expresses its desire to continue to
support the Government and people of Afghanistan on
their path of reform, progress, internal reconciliation
and regional and global integration.

My delegation subscribes to the statement that
will be made later by the observer of the European
Union. Notwithstanding my capacity as penholder of
the Council, I should like to briefly take stock of the
resolution we have just adopted.

I would like to refer to the Tripartite Review
Commission. As members will recall, in response to
a series of concerns expressed by Afghanistan, one
year ago the Security Council, through resolution 2210
(2015), mandated a commission that included the Afghan
Government, United Nations and the donor community,
to consider the role, structure and activities of the
United Nations in the country. During our discussions
on Afghanistan last September (S/PV.7526), we took
note of the document containing the recommendations
resulting from that review (see S/2015/713). In the
resolution adopted today, the Council took account
of those recommendations in a pre-eminent manner
by renewing the mandate of UNAMA. In that regard,
we stress the importance of Afghan leadership
and ownership that underlay the exercise, and of
strengthening the legitimacy of UNAMA. Without
attempting to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight
some of the references made in the outcome document
of the Tripartite Review Commission.

First, reference was made to the ongoing good offices
of the Mission, as well as to the need to emphasize the
role of the United Nations in the promotion of human
rights and the rule of law, including the rights of women

and gender equality, and in helping Afghanistan to meet
its international commitments in this regard. Finally, the
report referred to the importance of the humanitarian
dimension of the United Nations, in particular as the
facilitator of humanitarian access.

Secondly, the new resolution takes note of the most
relevant measures adopted by the Afghan Government in
the past year, and refers to the main challenges awaiting
in the year to come. In that regard, the Council renews
and reiterates its call on the international community
to continue to support Afghanistan; expresses its firm
support for the Government of National Unity and its
reform agenda; and recalls the two significant meetings
that will take place in 2016: the Warsaw NATO summit
in July, and the ministerial conference to be convened
jointly by Afghanistan and the European Union in
Brussels on 4 and 5 October.

As was just mentioned by the Special Representative,
the most recent report (S/2016/2l8) of the Secretary-
General recalls the difficulties encountered by the
Afghan Government in implementing its reform
agenda, as well as the deterioration in the security
situation despite the courageous and decisive actions
of the Afghan security forces throughout the territory
of the country. We are particularly concerned by the
ongoing increase in the number of security incidents
and the number of civilian victims of the conflict. We
are concerned by the situation of children, with regard
to which the Government recently adopted significant
legislative measures. We are concerned by the express
threat by the Taliban against the press, the media and
humanitarian workers. And we are concerned by the
increase in what the report calls high-profile attacks,
such as what happened in December in Spain's Embassy
in Kabul, which took the lives of two Spanish police
and five Afghan civilians.

My delegation reiterates Spain's support to
Afghanistan in meeting all those challenges, as well
as in implementing its agenda for reform and in its
process of regional economic integration. Similarly,
we would like to express our desire that the electoral
process announced for this year will make it possible
to strengthen Afghan democracy and make further
progress along the path towards political and
social stability.

Thirdly, I would like to highlight the renewed efforts
of the Afghan Government in recent months, with
the support of the United States, China and Pakistan

through the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, to make
progress in the peace process. In today's resolution,
the Security Council expresses its decisive support for
those efforts. We trust that soon the efforts undertaken
by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group will lead,
in line with the road map that has been developed, to
direct peace talks between the Afghan Government
and the representatives who are authorized to represent
the Taliban, in order to work towards a cessation of
hostilities and towards lasting peace. We encourage
all those relevant actors to persevere in their efforts to
make that possible.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating Spain's
conviction that the international community's
commitment to Afghanistan will be maintained, as will
all of our desires to continue supporting the country, its
institutions and its citizens.

