Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Indian presidency for convening today's open debate
and also to thank the Indian and Portuguese delegations
for the detailed concept note (S/2012/853, annex) for our
discussion. It is timely that after one year we continue
debate in an open format on this important issue.

If we want to improve the Council's efficiency,
enhance its legitimacy and strengthen its role as a
body entrusted by the Charter with the maintenance
of international peace and security, we must consider
improving its working methods and, most importantly,
its transparency vis-a-vis the wider United Nations
membership. In recent years we have seen some progress
towards the realization of those goals. We welcome the
initiatives by the group of five small nations in that
respect. The Council should represent the interests
and address the concerns of the entire United Nations
membership.

All United Nations Members have been constantly
confronted with an increasing number of Security
Council decisions with notable security, legal and
financial implications for each Member State. For that
reason also the Council must ensure better transparency
and engagement with non-Council members in its
decision-making processes on a more regular basis.
The holding of open briefings and debates remains of
particular importance. The wider membership should
have an opportunity for its views to be heard and, to
the extent possible, reflected in the outcomes of those
debates. Consideration could be given to the order
of speakers, while also allowing some time between
the meeting and the adoption of a possible outcome
document. That would demonstrate that the Council
is willing to reflect on views presented by the wider
membership before taking a final decision.

The distribution of concept papers that include
guiding questions should be guaranteed well in
advance, so that delegations can adequately prepare for
their interventions. We should also not underestimate
the role of regional and subregional organizations,
which not only possess knowledge about specific
threats affecting their regions but also are better suited
to ensuring a more coordinated approach at the local,
national and regional levels.

To enhance the Council's capacity for prevention
we support regular open briefings by the Secretariat,
the Special Representatives of and Special Advisers to
the Secretary-General on the situations on the Council's
agenda and those of emerging concern, including by
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.

Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society play a crucial role in raising awareness. Regular
thematic Arria Formula meetings could effectively
complement the work of the Council on more specific
issues, in order to make better use of information
available from the NGO sector.

The Security Council should emphasize the
importance of the rule of law in dealing with matters
on its agenda. That includes references to upholding
and promoting international law and ensuring that its
own decisions are firmly rooted in that body of law,
including the Charter, international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
criminal law. Special attention should be paid to the
protection of civilians and those most vulnerable. We
urge the permanent members to refrain from the use
of the veto in the event of genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

Slovenia remains convinced that Security Council
reform needs to address both enlargement of its
membership and improvement of its working methods.
In that context, it is crucial to ensure that the Council
continues to regularly assess how its practice matches
the goals set out in the note by the President contained
in document S/2006/507, with all updates, and that it
continues to collect and build on valuable input from
the whole membership on ways to further improve its
working methods.

