Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
the delegation of Senegal warmly welcomes the initiative
taken by your country to convene this important open
debate, which gives us an opportunity to reiterate our
deep collective commitment to the protection of civilian
populations in times of armed conflict. The fact that
you yourself, Mr. Vice-Minister, have travelled to New
York to preside over the debate is to be commended.
The Senegalese delegation also wishes to congratulate
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor at Oxfam.

The bleak picture painted by the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2015/453) reminds us that despite the
progress achieved in the normative field, the struggle
for the effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict is far from having been won. The truth is that
the strong support of the international community
for the relevant legal instruments and mechanisms is,
sadly, far from having become translated into action on
the ground, where the realities remain very troubling.
What is therefore required is a genuine mobilization and
greater proactivity on the part of the Council to ensure
a more effective protection of civilians in general and
of women and children in particular.

In that respect, the Security Council must increase
its vigilance and its efforts to ensure respect by all
parties to conflict, Governments as well as non-State
actors, for their obligations under international law
with regard to the protection of civilians.

The Senegalese delegation believes that prevention
and mediation are the least costly approaches, including
in terms of loss of human life, to ensure the protection
of civilians, and that the promotion of a lasting peace
is the most sustainable way of creating such an
environment. Prevention must be based on a system of
rapid analysis and early warning, allowing us to carry
out more nimble actions.

In that respect, strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, which tend to
have a better understanding of the factors involved in a
conflict and of local socioeconomic dynamics, as well
as the involvement of political, religious and community
leaders, can have a positive impact on the protection
of civilians. Cooperation with the non-governmental
organizations deployed in conflict areas also seems
essential to us.

In any event, the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, must play a vital role in this respect,
as it bears primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and therefore for
protecting human security throughout the world. That
is why the Council's actions should focus more sharply
on the creation of a genuine culture of prevention of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Concerning the fight against impunity, the
existing criminal Tribunals, especially the International
Criminal Court, must be strongly supported in that
respect.

The Council has an array of tools ranging from
preventive deployment to the dispatch of peacekeeping
or peacebuilding forces. The report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) highlights the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping operations contribute significantly to
protecting, on a daily basis, thousands of civilians
through the monitoring and upholding of human rights;
their physical presence; deterrence and protection
measures; and support for the development of the rule
of law, in a context of political engagement with the
parties to a conflict.

At the operational level, peacekeepers should be
provided the means and capacities required to properly
and effectively implement their mandates, particularly
given the fact that missions are being deployed to
increasingly hostile and demanding environments,
which, naturally, can make the implementation of their

obligations difficult in terms of providing protection.

Senegal has adopted a number of provisions in the
framework of the protection of civilians, on which I
will elaborate.
First, Senegal began very early the process of the
harmonization of its national legal framework with the
relevant international standards, and has also adopted
a national strategy for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.

The 2016 action plan of the Chiefs of Staff of the
Senegalese armed forces, which is geared towards
training troops in the area of the rights and protection
of civilians, states: "Within and beyond national
borders, the Senegalese armed forces have a duty not
to perpetrate abuses. Moreover, they must be protective
of vulnerable groups such as women and children". In
other words, the protection of civilians in theatres of
deployment is a pre-eminent reason for the presence
of Senegalese troops. Senegal's support for the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians is part of the
same dynamic.

To give shape to this vision, my country has
committed to bolstering the capacities of its armed
forces in the field of armed-conflict law by placing the
emphasis on training and the planning and conduct of
operations, with the goal of allowing Senegalese men
and women involved in armed conflict, at whatever
level, to be more familiar with and, above all, strictly
to discharge their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

I should like to give two examples of the actions
taken by the Senegalese security and defence forces.
First, the Senegalese security and defence forces
maintain ongoing cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which has
allowed army schools and training centres to receive
education on international humanitarian law, which
is regularly provided under the auspices of the ICRC.
Two teacher-training seminars were held in 2012 and
2014, respectively, for some 30 Senegalese officers, and
conference cycles geared to peacekeeping contingents
have been drawn up for the next year.

A second example is the close cooperation of the
Senegalese armed forces with the Save the Children
non-governmental organization, which has resulted in,
inter alia, the creation, at the level of Chiefs of Staff,
of a committee - the Child Rights and Protection
Section - responsible for the implementation and
coordination of troop-training activities in the area of
the rights and protection of children before, during and
after conflicts. The second outcome of the collaboration
with Save the Children was the adoption of a plan of
action for 2016 to train officers about the rights and
protection of children.
With regard to punishments that could be imposed,
a range of strict disciplinary measures has been
envisaged in the event of confirmed violations of
international humanitarian law - violence, abuse, rape,
et cetera * by one or more members of the Senegalese
armed forces. Those measures include imprisonment
for high-level military officers; the arrest of
non-commissioned officers and officers; repatriation;
disciplinary action with the possibility of dismissal;
or trial before a civil and/or military tribunal. In any
event, for the Senegalese armed forces, information and
training in international humanitarian law are major
priorities based on the pursuit of two goals. The first
is to comply with our legal texts and our international
obligations; the second is to protect the image of our
army, the professionalism and republican character of
which are recognized around the world.

All of that contributes to the implementation by

my country of the zero-tolerance policy. The notion

of the "army-nation" is the ideal of the Senegalese

armed forces, whose motto is "They may kill us, but

they cannot dishonour us". That ideal and motto were

embodied to the highest degree by the courageous

late Captain Mbaye Diagne, who, throughout his

professional career, embodied the ideal of the protection

of citizens, sadly at the cost of his life. After many

dangerous missions, the late Captain Mbaye Diagne

lost his life during the genocide in Rwanda in his efforts

to save hundreds of unprotected, innocent people from

certain death. In recognition and in memory of that late

Senegalese officer, the United Nations took the historic

decision to establish the Captain Mbaye Diagne Medal

for Exceptional Courage, which is awarded each year

to men and women who, like him, have distinguished

themselves in the various theatres of engagement by

their commendable commitment to the vulnerable.

In 2015 the medal was not awarded owing to a lack

of deserving candidates. It is that model of the late

Captain Mbaye Diagne that the Senegalese delegation

would like to offer to peacekeepers, Blue Helmets,

wherever their noble duty calls them, so that they, as

United Nations forces, may be able to call upon and be
deserving of the necessary trust of the populations of
the countries in which they serve. That trust underpins
peacekeeping, strengthens social ties and alleviates the
tensions born of conflict that are inherent to all life in
society.

