Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin
by condemning the recent terrorist attacks that occurred
on 20 June in Kabul and Badakhshan, which caused
loss of life and injuries. We extend our solidarity to
the people and the Government of Afghanistan and we
convey our condolences to the families ofthe victims of
such a terrible terrorist attack.

We would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Hayson,
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his commendable efforts
to promote peace and stability in Afghanistan in his
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. As this is his last briefing to the Security
Council in his capacity as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA, we
would like to wish him every success in his future
endeavours. We would also like to express our support
to Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, who will take
over the leadership of UNAMA. We also express
our gratitude to the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, our friend Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal,
for his statement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is following
with concern the sensitive political and security
situation in Afghanistan, which continues to pose major
challenges to that country. The dialogue process with
the Taliban insurgency has been seriously impacted by
the armed group's refusal to participate in the peace
talks and by foreign interference. It is essential to create
a favourable political environment for carrying out the
agenda for change proposed by President Ashraf Ghani,
with the participation of all actors in Afghan society and
as an Afghan-led process free of foreign interference.

In that context, the strengthening of dialogue
and mutual trust among all parties is essential to
consolidate peace. It is therefore necessary to redouble
efforts along those lines with the support of the
international community. Of special interest are the
peace agreements reached by the Afghan authorities
and the Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin. The agreements are a
positive sign that other opposition groups might engage
in similar initiatives with the Afghan authorities,
thereby paving the way for national reconciliation.

Venezuela reiterates its call on the Taliban
insurgency to decisivelyjoin the peace talks. We support
what was said by the Secretary-General, who noted that
direct negotiations between the Taliban and the Afghan
Government are key to that process. In that regard, we
appreciate the positive role that has been played by
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, which includes
Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States,
in support of the national peace and reconciliation
dialogue between the Afghan Government and Taliban.

The security situation has been negatively impacted
by the Taliban's continued military operations. In
that regard, we note with concern the increase in the
number of armed clashes in 2016, with the east and
south-east regions being the most affected. According
to the report (S/2016/532) of the Secretary-General, the
year 2016 is showing higher rates ofviolence than those
of June 2014.

Afghanistan has also been destabilized by the
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), whose cells, according to the report (S/2016/92)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2253 (2015), are located in southern and
western Afghanistan. Over 1,000 foreign terrorist
fighters are operating in the country. That is why
ISIS and other terrorist groups pose a serious
threat to peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region and must be fought within the framework of
international cooperation.

At the political level, we recognize the recent
advances in the strengthening of Afghanistan's
institutions following the appointment of officials
to high-level positions in the Office of the Attorney
General and the Ministry of Defence. Similarly, we
welcome the initiative and commitment of President
Ghani on holding parliamentary and district elections
in October, with UNAMA's assistance. In that regard,
Venezuela highlights the constructive work carried out
by UNAMA in coordination with the Government. The
role of the Mission has been crucial to the promotion
of peace, national reconciliation, regional cooperation
and economic and social development. We extend
our thanks to the Mission and commend the efforts it
undertakes for the reconstruction of the country.

In the area of the political empowerment of women
within the framework of resolution 1325 (2000), we
emphasize the interaction between UNAMA and
the Ministry of Women of Afghanistan to strengthen
women's protection services and eradicate violence
against women. The opening of 23 centres to address
this issue demonstrates the Afghan Government's
commitment in this area. We encourage it to continue
working in that direction.

Our country hopes that dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and Pakistan will be strengthened
in order to contribute to stability in the region. The
political clashes between the two nations must be
overcome for the benefit of their peoples. The shared
challenges in the political, economic and security fields
call for greater understanding by the authorities of the
two countries in order to overcome mistrust and the
problems affecting them. We welcome the strengthening
of regional cooperation among Afghanistan, India and
Iran, which has been seen in the signing ofthe trilateral
transport and transit agreement, which will facilitate
trade among the three countries and the countries
of Central Asia. The ongoing high-level visits to the
country from its neighbours are a clear indication of
this trend towards dialogue and solving problems of
common interest within the region itself.

The Brussels international conference for the
development of Afghanistan, to be held in October,
is vital for the promotion of stability, security and
economic and social development of the nation.
We therefore urge the international community to
continue supporting the people and the Government
of Afghanistan by providing resources and capacity-
building to promote its comprehensive development. It
is worth noting that improving the country's security
situation will have a positive impact on political,
economic and social dynamics.

Drug trafficking continues to pose serious threats
to peace and stability in Afghanistan, while also being
a public health problem with serious consequences for
the Afghan people. As indicated in the report, 7 per
cent of Afghanistan's gross domestic product comes
from drug trafficking. While there has been a decrease
in the overall value of opium cultivation, the Taliban
insurgency continues to use illegal drug trafficking
to finance their terrorist activities. In that regard, we
recognize the efforts undertaken by the Government in
this area, which has received assistance from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We reiterate that
an effective fight against drugs requires international
cooperation, including among neighbouring countries,
to prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.

The armed conflict in Afghanistan continues
to impact civilians, who are the main victims of the
armed clashes between the parties. According to
the report, 600 people were killed and 1,373 were
injured during the reporting period, which reflects a
2 per cent increase. The report submitted by UNAMA
acknowledges that women and children are the most
affected by the spiralling violence. In 2015, there was
a 37 per cent increase in fatalities among women and
a 34 per cent increase among children. Similarly, we
express our concern about the detention of children on
charges of associating with armed groups.

Finally, we encourage the Government of Afghanistan
to continue its efforts to promote a comprehensive and
inclusive political process leading to the establishment
of a strong and lasting peace, to make progress in
gaining control of its entire territory and resources, to
strengthen the State and its institutions to the benefit of
its people, who have been affected by so many years of
war and violence.

