Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine highly
commends the initiative of your country, Mr. President,
to hold this important debate on how to improve the
protection of war-affected civilians. I would also like
to thank Mr. Ian Egeland for his very informative
briefing to the Security Council as Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

During the past five years, the Security Council
has increasingly focused its attention on the situation
of civilians in armed conflict. The fourth report of the
Secretary-General on this problem (S/2004/431) is
under consideration by the Council today. The
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Iraq, Afghanistan, the Middle East, West and Central
Africa and other regions of the world only compel us to
concentrate on what was done during all those years to
better protect vulnerable civilians and on what is to be
done for further improvement of our collective actions
in this regard.

True, we have witnessed a certain progress in the
sphere of the protection of civilians. But we have also
witnessed many lives of innocent civilians lost on the
way, as well as many lives of those who served to
ensure a better present and a better future for them.
Unfortunately, there is still a lack of political will and
of willingness by parties to conflicts to improve all
relevant international instruments or indeed to
implement existing ones. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for the continued engagement of the international
community in order to ensure that civilians are not
deprived of their rights.

We welcome the fact that since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1296 (2000) the mandates
of major peacekeeping operations have been broadened
to include physical protection of civilians under
imminent threat of violence. The inclusion in
peacekeeping mandates of such elements as the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation of combatants, as well as of measures to
protect refugees and returnees is, in our View, an
important step towards achieving the goal of protecting
the rights of civilians.

In our View, these concerns should be addressed
on a systematic basis. In that regard, the revised aide-
memoire adopted by the Security Council last year
(S/PRST/2003/27, annex) has become a practical tool
that provides a basis for the analysis and diagnosis of
key issues that arise out of conflict. We also note with
satisfaction the ongoing work on the elaboration of the
road map based on the 10 points raised by the
Secretary-General in his report.

Turning to those specific problems, I would like
to touch upon some of them that, in our View, are
crucially important. First, we think that humanitarian
assistance does much to improve the protection of
civilian populations and the prospects for a successful
transition to reconciliation. As most conflicts have a
transboundary character and impact, the role of
regional organizations cannot be overestimated. Those
organizations should be involved as soon as possible,
and the Security Council should continue to play a
proactive role in this sphere. We also consider Security
Council missions to be a useful, practical tool in
assisting humanitarian access. Further strengthening of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council has, in our View, an
important role in areas that are at the heart of peace-
building.

Individuals should be protected from crimes
against humanity. They are to be protected because
these crimes are most often committed in times of
armed conflict. The International Criminal Court (ICC)
has become a reality aimed at acting effectively in
preventing and punishing violations of humanitarian
law. Therefore, the potential of the ICC should be
given due consideration in countering the impunity of
persons responsible for the most serious crimes.

Safeguarding the security of their humanitarian
personnel remains a key challenge for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners. The number of
losses among United Nations staff and associated
personnel is of major concern for Ukraine as a country
that has experienced the bitterness of human loss from
among its peacekeepers in various United Nations
operations. As one of the countries initiators of the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, Ukraine fully supports the
ongoing work within the United Nation on the
extension of its legal regime and hopes that this will be
finished successfully in the near future.

Finally, I would like once again, as my colleagues
have done, to underline the importance of the
protection of women and children. Since the Council
first considered this issue in 1998, a degree of progress
has been achieved. However, success in standard-
setting must not be cause for complacency. In many
regions of the world children and women continue to
be the main victims of conflict. Children are killed,
orphaned, maimed, abducted, deprived of education
and care, recruited and used as child soldiers on a
massive scale and left with deep emotional scars and
trauma as a result. Women and girls are more and more
often directly targeted, being threatened with rape,
domestic violence, sexual exploitation, trafficking,
sexual humiliation and mutilation. Ukraine continues to
advocate for the deployment of child-protection and
gender advisers in peacekeeping missions in order to
effectively integrate the rights and well-being of
women and children into peacekeeping and peace-
building processes.

