Mr. Shearer: Mr. President, I thank you for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan and the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force.

It may seem unusual to start my briefing off with
a weather report, but it is important to announce that
the rains have arrived in South Sudan. These seasonal
rains dictate almost every aspect of life in the country,
including the cycle of conflict. Across the country, we
are seeing the last push to position forces before roads
become impassable for the next four months. And with
that, the nature of conflict changes.

Significant military moves have been most evident
in the north, on the west bank ofthe Nile River in Shilluk
tribal areas, and in northern Jonglei, in the eastern
part of the country, inhabited mainly by Nuer. In both
areas, the Government's Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) has captured former SPLA in Opposition
strongholds and reinforced their positions.

In the former Unity State, in the centre of the
country, the SPLA continues low-intensity battles.
Declared a famine zone in February, the area remains
highly volatile, with many displaced people. On
3 May, a base of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), located just 500 metres from Leer
town, came under direct fire. Ghanaian peacekeepers
responded robustly, returning fire, and repelled the
attack. An internal investigation is under way to
determine who carried out the attack and why. Sadly,
it prompted some humanitarian organizations working
alongside UNMISS to downsize their presence at a
time when their efforts are desperately needed. They
are brave people, but they should never be a target. If
for no other reason, I condemn in the strongest terms
that callous attack.

Intercommunal conflicts persist across the country.
A long-standing tension between the Dinka Bor and
the Murle communities in Jonglei in the east escalated
dangerously, threatening hundreds of lives over the
past few weeks. UNMISS has persisted with mediation
efforts, and over the past two weeks, has supported the
visits of a delegation led by First Vice-President Taban
Deng Gai shuttling between the various communities.
Yesterday, those efforts culminated in the signing of a
joint cessation ofhostilities agreement. It is only a start,
but I am encouraged by the willingness of both sides
to progress with further talks on substance, which, of
course, we will continue to support.

In Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, in the west, clashes
between the SPLA and opposition forces have
continued, with 22,000 people arriving in the town of
Wau from surrounding areas to seek refuge with the
United Nations and with churches. The Government
has consistently prevented access to areas outside of
Wau, but recently an UNMISS Bangladeshi infantry
patrol was able to reach the south-west areas of Wau,
which had previously been off-limits, only to find the
area completely abandoned and evidence of armed
activity all around.

In the south, in the Equatorias, clashes between the
SPLA and allied militias persist, with Yei town once
again in the focus. Violence in Yei has been unrelenting,
as the joint report released by ourselves and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights documented with respect to the events that
happened between July 2016 and January 2017. The
report, which was released last week, documents 114
killings by pro-Government forces. The extent of the
abuses by opposition groups remains unclear, because
our access to those areas has been impeded. But
satellite imagery also corroborated field observations
of the widespread burning of homes and villages.

Since January, UNMISS has deployed almost
continuous long-duration patrols to Yei. The latest
reached the area this week - despite warning shots
being fired at them. Its presence has enabled human
rights violations to be investigated and engagement to
occur with stakeholders in the course of the conflict and,
most importantly, to reassure civilians, who are feeling
very vulnerable. Follow-up missions are planned.

The rains may bring a respite to large-scale military
manoeuvres, but they complicate the humanitarian
response and bring the inevitable spectre of cholera to
South Sudan. To date, 7,700 cases have been reported.
Over 60 per cent of the country will now be impossible
to access by road or by dirt airstrips, and humanitarian
efforts will have to rely on air and barge transport.

A focus of the humanitarian responders during
this past month has been to support more than 20,000
civilians who fled the minute village of Aburoc
in Upper Nile, after being displaced by SPLA and
opposition fighting. Most arrived in Aburoc in a very
weak state - the perfect conditions for cholera to tear
through their numbers.

UNMISS helicoptered in a detachment of Rwandan
peacekeepers to Aburoc in early May for a short-term
deployment that then gave the confidence needed
for humanitarian agencies to deploy immediately
afterwards. Cholera has broken out in the town, but the
improved water supplies and the presence of a strong
medical response from agencies there have contained
its spread and have undoubtedly saved many lives. Such
a more nimble approach on the part of our peacekeepers
working with others is a formula that we can replicate,
along with the improved robustness I reported to the
Council in my previous briefing (see S/PV.7930).

I applaud the humanitarians working in South
Sudan. Their efforts in one of the toughest and most
operationally difficult environments - and in the most
remote places - have saved countless lives. I wish to
particularly acknowledge the World Food Programme,
which has pre-positioned over 90 per cent ofits food aid
for the coming rainy season. Yes, we face problems in
gaining access to some areas. These obstacles are mostly
posed by local actors, particularly where fighting is
ongoing. However, I condemn the unacceptable levels
of violence that continue to be directed towards aid
workers, which include threats, arrests, assaults and
even murder.

As the latest Secretary-General's 30-day report
details, the deployment of the first wave of the regional
protection force vanguard has begun. To date, all 60
members of the Bangladeshi construction-engineering
advance team have arrived in Juba with their equipment,
and the advance team of the Nepalese high-readiness
company will be on the ground by the end of the month.
The main bodies of those contingents are on track to
arrive by July. Pending the final tax exemptions for the
Rwandan advance infantry company, it should deploy
in late June or July, and I understand that the equipment
for the scheduled Ethiopian infantry company is being
refurbished. It should deploy by August.

With the arrival of the rains, the focus of the conflict
tends to shift from the battlefield to the political arena.
Already, we are seeing signs of some political shifts.
As you know, on 9 May, President Salva Kiir dismissed
SPLA Chief of General StaffPaul Malong. After briefly
leaving the capital and heading west to his home town
of Aweil, Malong returned to Juba, and the situation
seemed to calm. The President recently announced
several changes to the structure and appointments of
the SPLA and also replaced the Aweil governor. Most
expect further changes and a possible reshuffling of
some cabinet posts.

The President has also moved ahead with the
national dialogue, with a formal launch on Monday this
week in Juba, attended by Ugandan President Yoweri
Museveni. He again declared a unilateral ceasefire
and pledged to review the cases of political prisoners.
Those announcements are very welcome. There will
be close scrutiny, however, of the number of prisoners
who are actually released and whether the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, the organization that was established by
the peace agreement to monitor ceasefire violations
and which is supported by UNMISS, can move freely
to perform its ceasefire monitoring tasks. The proof of
the pudding is, as they say, in the eating.

While the national dialogue should bring a
welcome focus on reconciliation for it to be credible,
it needs, as we have said before, to involve the genuine
participation of opposition constituencies. Meanwhile,
opposition groups, mainly outside the country, have
come together around the common position and jointly
denounced the dialogue.

As many Council members have acknowledged,
States of the region hold significant influence on the
political process. Yesterday, I met with the Chair of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
President Festus Mogae, in Juba, who updated us on his
engagements with regional actors over the past months.
President Museveni, speaking at Monday's national
dialogue launch, called for a review of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement, but made no mention of
the peace agreement. In my recent meeting with him,
together with United Nations Special Envoy for Sudan
and South Sudan Nicholas Haysom, he also reiterated his
outreach to opposition leaders, in particular concerning
elections. At the same time, there are reports that Kenya
is engaging with opposition figures based outside the
country. I am encouraged to see Member States in the
region stepping up their engagement. It remains critical,
however, that a coherent and unified regional position
on South Sudan be forthcoming.

As I mentioned last month (see S/PV.7930), it is now
more than ever imperative to ensure that the Council
unites on a common strategy to advance the political
process in South Sudan. We acknowledge and thank
Council members individually and collectively for their
support of UNMISS and the humanitarian community,
both of which are overcoming immense difficulties in
order to make a real difference to people's lives. But
unity of purpose will send the best signal to South
Sudan's political leaders that they must focus first and
foremost on the plight of their citizens.

