Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for Mr. Zahir Tanin's comprehensive briefing,
and we welcome the presence among us of Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ambassador Vlora Citaku.
Peru is closely following the situation in Kosovo,
and despite the progress made, we are concerned
about the progressive deterioration of the process of
normalizing relations between Belgrade and Pristina,
which we believe is fundamental to consolidating
peace, stability and prosperity, both in Kosovo and the
region. In this respect, we regret that it will soon be
one year since the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between the parties was suspended. We support the
efforts of the international community in this regard
but emphasize that the responsibility for resuming
the process lies primarily with Belgrade and Pristina.
Accordingly, we echo the call of the Secretary-General
to remove all obstacles to dialogue. We believe that the
tariff on imports and the continuing exacerbation of
confrontational rhetoric, particularly from the political
class, do not contribute to achieving this goal.

Given that the parliamentary elections have now
been completed, we await the swift formation of a
Government that, in a constructive manner and in good
faith, will undertake the necessary measures to resume
the dialogue. We recall the commitment of the parties
under the Brussels Agreement and resolution 1244
(1999). With regard to this process, we wish to reiterate
the importance of involving the citizens ofboth parties,
particularly women and young people. We welcome
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting the women
and peace and security and the youth and peace and
security agendas with a view to contributing to their
full and substantive implementation. These efforts
contribute to the reconciliation process, which is
indispensable to overcoming the divisions of the past.
It also entails the recognition of cultural diversity,
respect for the rights of ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities and the protection of historical and
cultural heritage.

In that regard, it is essential to continue
strengthening institutions and the rule of law, and
we recognize the role of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Specialist Chambers
in supporting this complex task. In the same vein,
we also wish to recognize the initiatives undertaken
by UNMIK, in coordination with the entities of the
United Nations system, in promoting human rights, the
protection of children, intercommunal dialogue, the
safe and dignified return ofinternally displaced persons
and the provision of assistance to victims of sexual
violence. Also in this context, we wish to highlight the
importance ofinitiatives aimed at combating corruption
and organized crime, in accordance with the law, human
rights and international agreements and standards. We
regret the incident stemming from a 28 May police
action involving United Nations staff members. Peru
reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to respect
the immunity of United Nations officials, and that
those officials themselves have a responsibility to be
impartial in carrying out their duties.

We wish to conclude by reiterating our recognition
of the work of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and all other international organizations
committed to our shared task of consolidating
sustainable peace in Kosovo.

We commend the South African presidency of the
Council for the efficient and professional work carried
out during the month of October.

