Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting on
Kosovo and thanks the Secretary-General for his very
detailed report (S/2003/ 113) and Mr. Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing.

Concerned to ensure effective monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), the
Secretary-General and the members of the Security
Council successively carried out missions to Kosovo
and Belgrade in November and December 2002,
respectively. The Council's mission enabled us to
assess the progress achieved and the challenges
remaining, and to identify measures to be taken to deal
with the situation on the ground. Our 4676th meeting,
on 19 December 2002, was also very edifying with
regard to those issues. The report that Mr. Steiner has
just presented is part of the same dynamic.

While taking note of the successes achieved in
the framework of the functioning of democratic
institutions, my delegation encourages strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, in strict
respect for resolution 1244 (1999).
We welcome the extension of UNMIK's
administration to northern Mitrovica and hail the
Povratak coalition's decision to return to the Assembly.
We urge the leaders of the majority and of the
minorities to cooperate to a greater extent, taking into
account the interests of all Kosovars.

We encourage the efforts under way in the area of
decentralization, and once again we emphasize the
need for the application of the benchmarks. We fully
endorse the principle of "standards before status",
which remains indisputable.

Moreover, we appreciate the measures under way
in the areas of security and the judiciary, which have
helped to improve the rule of law. However, efforts
must be continued in the area of freedom of movement
until a psychology of mutual acceptance among the
various communities can be established.

The return of refugees and the restoration of
property remain subjects of concern. My delegation
once again welcomes the setting up of a refugee task
force and the actions undertaken with regard to the
return of goods. We appeal to the international
community, particularly the donor community, to
contribute more to the implementation of UNMIK's
2003 strategy for the sustainable return of refugees.

In addition, we welcome the economic progress
achieved in 2002. As we have always indicated,
development programmes, in order to succeed, must
take into account the interests of all components and all
categories of the province, as well as the objectives of
regional stabilization.

Moreover, it should be emphasized that the
Kosovo Protection Corps should maintain its legal
status in order to avoid any ambiguity. In that regard,
my delegation encourages UNMIK and KFOR to
continue their efforts.

In conclusion, we believe that the establishment
of a lasting peace in Kosovo will be possible only
through sustained commitment by the leaders, the civil
servants, the civil society and the entire population of
Kosovo in order to transcend differences and useless
quarrels and to focus on the defence of common
interests that will enable all to thrive.

