Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Madam President, for your presence and
for convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict,x) as well as for your well-
rounded concept paper on the agenda item before us
(S/20123/447, annex).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
very important topic for Indonesia. While the Security
Council has considered this topic for more than a
decade, in recent years the international community
has witnessed a growing number of civilian deaths,
including of women, children and the elderly. We wish
to thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their respective useful briefings, which
highlight progress on the protection of civilians and the
persistent challenges during armed conflicts.

This meeting is particularly timely as today we
hold an annual memorial service in memory of United
Nations personnel who lost their lives in the line of duty
in the past year and for fallen United Nations staff as
well as survivors of the horrific bombing in Baghdad
10 years ago.

We must explore how improvements can be brought
about in order to have tangible results in protecting
civilians and how we can galvanize actions across the
spectrum to ensure that basic human rights, especially
the right to life of civilians in armed conflict, are
protected. While noting the progress made in setting
up the international normative framework, and the
international experiences and best practices on this
issue that are increasingly being provided, we concur
with the Secretary-General's observations on the need
to translate the normative framework and commitments
into concrete improvements for the protection of
civilians on the ground.

It is therefore vital to make progress in effectively
addressing the five core challenges identified in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376). In that
regard, my delegation would like to share some of its
observations as follows.

First, on the strengthening of compliance with
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, Indonesia was pleased to support,
together with your country, Madam President, as well
as Norway, Austria and Uganda, the Conference held
in Oslo earlier this year on reclaiming the protection
of civilians under international humanitarian law.
Prior to the Conference, Indonesia, together with
Norway, hosted a regional workshop on international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in
Jakarta in November 2010. Participants at that workshop
included representatives from 12 countries of the
region, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
academics, militaries, non-governmental organizations
and national human rights institutions. The workshop
adopted a co-chair's summary, among others, stressing
the applicability of international humanitarian law
to all parties to armed conflict, irrespective of the
underlying cause of conflict, and noted that a serious
gap remained between protection that civilians are
entitled to under international law and the reality that
they face on the ground. International humanitarian
law, particularly common article 3, also establishes a
comprehensive framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict obliging all parties, both State and
non-State armed actors, to protect civilians from harm
resulting from hostilities. While compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law as well as refugee
law by armed State actors can in general be monitored
through various existing modalities, there are indeed
challenges when it comes to non-State armed groups. It
is widely understood that there are limits as concerns
State-centric international instruments in addressing
protection vis-a-vis those groups.

In that regard, efforts to enhance compliance with
international humanitarian law principles by non-State
armed groups should be further developed. Efforts
such as the use of unilateral declarations, special
arrangements between Governments and non-State
armed groups and deeds of commitment have been
reported to be effective tools for engagement and to
hold armed groups accountable for their actions.

Secondly, ensuring safe passage and unfettered
access to humanitarian assistance is fundamental
to enhancing access to affected populations. While
it is the primary responsibility of the Government
concerned to provide the necessary guarantees for
access to humanitarian assistance, all warring parties,
including armed non-State actors, must shoulder
that responsibility. All parties to conflict must abide
by the rule of distinction, as the most fundamental
principle of international humanitarian law, which is
essential to ensuring the protection of civilians. We
are concerned by the challenges to the application of
that rule, especially in a situation where attacks take
place in densely populated areas and where the nature
of conflict becomes asymmetric, compounded by the
use of new technologies such as cyberwarfare, drones
and explosive weapons.

The growing involvement of private security
companies in armed conflict also brings about new
challenges, particularly when parties do not always
clearly distinguish themselves from the civilian
population and intermingle with civilians, increasing
the risk of civilian harm. We welcome the discussion
held on this issue at the recent session of the Working
Group on the Use of Mercenaries, which stressed,
among other things, that the use of private security
companies by the United Nations creates potential legal
and reputational risks to the Organization, especially
in the context of peacekeeping operations and other
United Nations missions. As Blue Helmets have been
playing a critical role in assisting host countries
and humanitarian actors, mixing them with private
contractors may pose risks not only to civilians but also
to the safety and security of humanitarian actors and
the peacekeepers themselves.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, it is crucial that there be greater
focus on developing effective tools and supporting and
strengthening national capacities and resources.

The role of Member States in promoting compliance
and accountability, including through domestic
legislation and legal means, is necessary to prevent
violations. In that regard, every State has a responsibility
not only to undertake the requisite national steps but to
support the furthering of a global culture that ascribes
the highest importance to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts and respect for their human rights.

Finally, Indonesia underlines that nothing is
more dreadful than allowing civilians, particularly
women and children, to be the casualties and collateral
damage in armed conflict. Bolstering adherence to
international humanitarian and human rights law
with enhanced political will and partnership among
countries, backed by a solid United Nations response
to human catastrophes, is essential to strengthening the
protection of civilians. Let us all exercise our respective
responsibilities fully to that end.

