Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening this
formal meeting, and to the Secretary-General for his
report and for his participation in this meeting. We would
also like to extend our thanks to the Office of the Iraq
Programme and to the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) for their efforts on the subject before the
Council.

The grave humanitarian situation affecting the Iraqi
population is nothing new for the Security Council. It was
because of the impact the sanctions regime was having on
the civilian population that, almost as soon as sanctions
were imposed on that country - and particularly since
1995 - the Council began devising exceptions to it in
order at least to avoid increasing the suffering of the Iraqi
people. It was in that context that the delegation of
Argentina actively participated in the negotiations that led
to the adoption five years ago of resolution 986 (1995),
around Easter of that year.
The humanitarian situation in Iraq improved with the
establishment of the oil-for-food programme. But we then
learned, through reports issued by the panels presided
over by Ambassador Celso Amorim beginning in
February 1999, that the resources generated by that
programme were insufficient to meet the basic needs of
the people, in spite of the improvements that had been
gradually made in that mechanism.

The crisis that made it impossible for the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) to continue to
fulfil the mandate given to it by resolution 687 (1991) did
nothing to ease the humanitarian situation in Iraq. The

 

adverse political context prevailing at that time prevented
the Council from reaching the necessary agreements to take
measures to substantively improve the situation.

It took us almost a year to redesign the regime
applicable to Iraq, both in terms of sanctions and in terms
of disarmament and ongoing monitoring and verification.
The result of that process was the adoption of resolution
1284 (1999), which embodied our hopes that the United
Nations would once again be in Iraq, with the clear
possibility of a suspension of the sanctions regime. Barely
three months after the adoption of that resolution, we can
see both positive and negative features in the present
situation.

First of all, we are concerned that the process of
contract approval in the sanctions Committee is still far
slower than would be optimal for improving certain sectors
essential to the well-being of the civilian population of Iraq.
The lack of elements vital to restoring electricity-generating
capacity and drinking water supplies are examples of this.
A solution to this question requires more than the
improvements that can be made through the sanctions
Committee. It is also necessary that the providers of goods
to Iraq strictly comply with the terms of agreed contracts.

We are also concerned about the state of Iraq's oil
sector infrastructure, which, according to the reports we
have received, is increasingly lamentable. The lack of
security and the environmental damage caused by this
situation threaten future generations of Iraqis, whom we
wish to see spared the hardships being suffered by the
present generation.

It is for these reasons that we support the draft
resolution making it possible to use a total of $600 million
out of the funds generated in accordance with resolutions
1242 (1999) and 1281 (1999) to purchase spare parts for
the oil sector. Our delegation has also supported these
initiatives in the Iraq sanctions Committee, and we are
prepared to increase the amounts assigned to this sector
once again if the Secretary-General so recommends on the
basis of expert reports.

Another source of concern for us is the prompt
application of the disarmament aspects of resolution 1284
(1999). It is a positive sign that the members of the College
of Commissioners have already been appointed. We hope
that we will have the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
organizational plan in the coming days. That resolution
remains a source of hope for our delegation,
notwithstanding the difficulties we have encountered in
implementing it. The suspension of sanctions is a real
possibility under the terms of that resolution and, in the
current political context, it would seem the most
productive way of definitively alleviating the suffering of
the Iraqi people, who are not the targets of those
sanctions.

There can be no doubt that the sanctions - which
have a purpose and which are aimed at the
Government - are one of the chief causes of the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. But those problems are
compounded by other aspects related to respect for human
rights. We hope that in the near future Iraqi civilians will
not only have their material needs met, but will also be
able to live under acceptable political conditions in which
their basic rights are respected. The first step will be the
full application of resolution 1284 (1999), which will
require all delegations in the Council to renew their
commitment to this agenda item. We hope to contribute
our own efforts to making this possible.

