Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to thank
our three briefers and welcome Ambassador Jonathan
Cohen, the new Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States, to the Chamber today. We wish
him every success. My delegation has the following
comments to make.

First, with regard to the political front, we note the
efforts and commitment of the Government of the Central
African Republic to making progress in restoring State
authority throughout the country, despite its persistent
challenges, which include limited resources, weak
public institutions and insecurity, as other speakers,
including my Polish colleague, have pointed out.
Like Ambassador Alemu of Ethiopia, as expressed in
his inspiring and meaningful statement, we too are
concerned about the intensifying sectarian rhetoric and
intercommunal disputes, which have resulted in higher
levels of armed conflict, thereby undermining every
effort to achieve national reconciliation and worsening
the country's already fragile security situation. We
note the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) in supporting peace initiatives
at the local community level with the aim of building
confidence and reducing violence.

We also pay tribute to the panel of facilitators for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
and note the importance of continuing a dialogue
with armed groups and seeking peaceful means of
disarmament. We therefore join others in urging all
armed groups to lay down their arms. We recognize
the role that President Touadera has taken in leading
and supporting peaceful political processes within the
framework of the African Initiative. The first meeting of
the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic, with the participation of the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of Central African
States and the United Nations, is an important step
in that direction. Coordinating the actions of regional
and international partners will help the country to
consolidate its gains and move forward towards the key
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union's Agenda 2063, as well as the
AU's effort to silence the guns by 2020. We support
the work of MINUSCA in resolving the multifaceted
security issues in the Central African Republic using
both military and non-military methods, including
comprehensive measures to prevent young people from
participating in armed violence.

Secondly, with regard to the security front, we
stress the importance of ensuring that the Government
continues to implement its national security strategy
and joint concept for the deployment of the defence
and internal security forces, as well as its management
of weapons and ammunition, with the support of
MINUSCA and other partners. We also commend
the invaluable contribution that the European Union
Training Mission has made to training Central
African forces.

We also want to note the importance of the
initiative that other States in the region have taken
to intensify the bilateral commissions between the
Central African Republic and Cameroon, Chad and
Sudan. We hope they will enable effective cooperation
not just in addressing transnational security threats but
also in revitalizing economic ties. It is important that
regional and international partners continue supporting
the Government's efforts to address vital issues of
security and justice, as well as such important aspects
of development as providing basic services to the
population and creatingjobs.

Thirdly, on the humanitarian front, against a
backdrop of underfunding and a reduced humanitarian
presence, the increasing numbers ofinternally displaced
people and refugees from the Central African Republic
in neighbouring countries demand the international
community's immediate attention.

Lastly, in expressing our full support to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and his able team, we would like
to emphasize that with the Government's clear Vision of
the way to tackle the challenges it is facing, we have an
opportunity before us and we should continue to strive
to give the people of the Central African Republic the
support they deserve and expect.

