Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing and commend his
tireless efforts and dedication to achieving peace and
stability in the region. We welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo - which
chairs the Peace and Security Council Framework
Regional Oversight Mechanism - Ambassador
Raymond Serge Bale', and thank him for his briefing
as well.

Kazakhstan commends the ongoing efforts of the
signatory countries to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which is vital
for achieving stability in the region. We welcome
the growing ownership of the signatories in terms of
implementing the Framework and working towards
ongoing reforms. At the same time, we express concern
at the recurring cycles of conflict and violence, as
well as at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
the region.

The destabilizing activities of local and foreign
armed groups are exacerbating political tensions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is necessary
to support and strengthen the capacity of the Forces
armies de la Republique democratique du Congo
to combat armed groups with the assistance of the
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is also important to reactivate the regional
follow-up mechanism to expedite the repatriation of
disarmed combatants in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries.

We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy in
working with the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community, the European Union
and other partners to develop a coordinated regional
and international approach for stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we
hope that the recent meeting of the guarantors, held
in Addis Ababa from 24 to 26 February, will bring
positive results. The political aspiration and will of
regional leaders are important.

We share the concern about the lack of progress in

the inter-Burundian dialogue. We call on all stakeholders
to make efforts to establish a constructive dialogue
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, leading to peaceful, free and
inclusive elections. We therefore welcome the efforts
of the facilitator, the former President of Tanzania,
Benjamin Mkapa. The international community should
continue to support the East African Community in the
promotion of inclusive dialogue.
The suffering of the 11 million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in the region should remain the focus
of the international community. We commend the work
of the Special Envoy in seeking durable solutions and
coordinating the work of humanitarian organizations.
Donors' commitments in this process are crucial. We
hope that during the high-level humanitarian conference
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo scheduled to
take place in Geneva on 13 April, viable solutions will
be found to provide vital support to the millions of IDPs
and refugees.

Important factors for stability in conflict-affected
countries are the observance of human rights and an
effective system of justice. To that end, cooperation
between judicial bodies of the countries of the region
can become an effective mechanism in the eradication
of impunity and thus should be supported.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
current conflict zones, which have become a source of
income for armed groups and criminal networks, must
be addressed by both the countries of the region and
bilateral partners by ensuring the implementation of
the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.

We further note that the Peace and Security Council
Framework is an essential foundation for sustainable
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. We therefore encourage
all signatories to continue their efforts to fulfil its
provisions with a view to addressing the root causes
of conflict, including the strengthening of regional
cooperation and economic integration.

To conclude, we would like to underscore the
significance of strengthening the security-development
nexus while addressing the current political, security,
social and economic situation in the region. Such
challenges also require a concerted response from
regional and international partners. We are convinced
that all United Nations agencies should deliver as one
in providing assistance in a coordinated manner across
the region.

