Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
you and your delegation for having taken the initiative
of holding this meeting on the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Allow me also to tell you how gratified my
delegation is to see you, in your capacity as Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, presiding over our debate this
morning.

I should like to start by saying that the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes is enshrined in
Mexico's Constitution, and that it is one of the focal
points guiding our foreign policy.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is, indeed, the
main principle on which the United Nations is built.
Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations establishes that the Members of the
Organization shall settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security, and justice, are not endangered.

This is not only an obligation enshrined in the
Charter, but also a general obligation that arises from
customary international law. Additionally, Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter asks the Members to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use of
force. This is a binding standard in international law. It
states also that the use of force is restricted to the
situations described in Chapter VII.

The International Court of Justice is an
instrument on which the parties must rely when a
dispute has a legal dimension or context. The
obligation to rely on the peaceful settlement of disputes
is an essential prerequisite to coexistence, friendship
and cooperation among nations. The basis of this
obligation is, quite simply, the observance of and
respect for international law.
In this context, Mexico has always preferred to
exhaust all possible means of avoiding the use of force.
Exhausting all possible peaceful solutions is, from our
perspective, not only a legal obligation but also a moral
one as regards international relations.

It is also incumbent upon the General Assembly
to act, as it has, through declarations and resolutions
that contribute to reaffirming the fundamental nature of
the general obligation of all States to settle their
disputes in a peaceful way. In that regard, we would
like to recall the importance and applicability of the
Manila Declaration on the Pacific Settlement of
International Disputes, as well as of other declarations
adopted by the Assembly. It should also be pointed out
that the General Assembly recently adopted its
resolution 57/26, concerning the prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes.

Nevertheless, there is no doubt that Chapter VI is
the fundamental instrument provided by the Charter of
the United Nations for the pacific settlement of
disputes. Fundamentally, the responsibility to resolve
conflicts and disputes rests, first and foremost, with the
parties. As provided for in Chapter VI of the Charter,
the responsibilities of the General Assembly and the
Security Council in that regard are subsidiary in nature.
The will of the parties to come forward to engage in
negotiations to find a pacific solution to a conflict is
paramount. We nevertheless believe that both the
General Assembly and the Security Council could play
a far more active role in peacefully preventing and
resolving conflicts. Chapter VI provides a legal
framework within which the Security Council could
play a much more active part. Although the Council
has leeway with regard to exercising its functions, the
maintenance of international peace and security would
undoubtedly be strengthened if the Council and its
members were to resort more often to Chapter VI of the
Charter when promoting peace negotiations.

Beyond the procedures and means set out in
Chapter VI, the pacific settlement of disputes and the
prevention of conflict are today consistent with the
capacity of the Organization and of the international
community as a whole to specifically address conflict
situations, to go to the aid of populations affected by
conflict and to contain the effects of violence. In that
regard, peacekeeping operations have proven to be very
useful in preventing future conflicts, addressing
underlying causes, creating confidence-building
mechanisms and bringing parties to the negotiating
table. Even when a conflict has already broken out, the
United Nations can make a significant contribution to
preventing a conflict from becoming protracted. The
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the World Food Programme - in a word,
the tools available to the Organization and the
operational mechanisms employed in specific
situations of violence and conflict - should be the best
methods, tools and recourse to peacefully resolve
disputes and to prevent future conflicts. The post of
Representative of the Secretary-General has also
become an effective and very powerful tool in
promoting the pacific settlement of disputes.

In that light, my delegation would like to
underscore a valuable lesson learned from the United
Nations. The involvement of women has proven to be
particularly useful and effective in peacekeeping
operations and in promoting the pacific settlement of
disputes. Women make a difference in finding and
consolidating peace. My country therefore urges the
Secretariat once again to achieve its gender policy
goals and commitments by involving many more
women in the Organization's most important tasks.

The Security Council continues to focus almost
exclusively on crises and emergencies after they have
broken out. In order to prevent conflict, the Security
Council could establish a series of practical measures,
such as calling on the Secretariat to produce periodic
regional or subregional reports on threats to
international peace and security. It could also study the
possibility of implementing the proposals made by the
Secretary-General in his millennium report
(A/54/2000) and establishing an informal ad hoc
working group, a subsidiary body or an informal
technical arrangement to discuss measures for the
pacific settlement of disputes that could be
implemented for conflicts that are already on the
Council's agenda or that will soon to be added to it. It
could also look into the possibility of using the Arria
formula or another similar arrangement to hold
informal debates outside the Council Chamber in order
to exchange views on possible means to settle a dispute
with those most closely involved. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes today's meeting as a particularly
useful exercise.

We believe that the Security Council should also
turn more often to the provisions of paragraph 3 of
Article 36 of the Charter, which states that legal
disputes should as a general rule be referred by the
parties to the International Court of Justice in
accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the
Court. To that end, it is essential that States that have
not yet done so make a declaration in accordance with
paragraph 2 of Article 36 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice in which they recognize
as compulsory the jurisdiction of the Court with respect
to any other State accepting the same obligation. That
invitation applies also to States that have withdrawn
their declarations.

My delegation is pleased with the role played by
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
which we believe will be increasingly important in the
pacific settlement of conflicts pertaining to the
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and generally as
regards ocean affairs.

We would also like to highlight the growing
possibilities that exist for the pacific settlement of
disputes as a result of the proliferation of international
courts and tribunals. This illustrates the international
community's desire to have various alternative means
at hand to resolve its differences in the spirit of
Chapter VI of the Charter.

Before I conclude my statement, my delegation
would like to underscore the fact that, as regards
reforming the Organization, we must carefully examine
and critically review the legal instruments available to
us in order to adapt them and bring them into line with
current circumstances. We must work ambitiously and
creatively. We must commit the highest political levels
of the Governments represented at the United Nations
to carrying out a thorough review of the mechanisms at
the disposal of the Organization - as well as those that
it will have to build and the institutional arrangements
it will have to establish - so that we may be more
effective at preventing conflict and finding pacific
settlements to disputes; so that States will more
unequivocally commit themselves to complying with
the decisions of the Security Council and to respecting
the norms of international law; and so that we may
realize the dream of the Organization, namely, to
eliminate the use of force.

