Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to thank you for
convening this meeting today. I also thank Mr. Alvaro
de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his useful briefing, although he failed to
make any reference to the occupied Syrian Golan in his
description of current events in the context of the
situation in the Middle East. The Israeli occupation
authorities continue to detain scores of Syrian nationals
in their detention camps and prisons and to build
settlements in the Syrian Golan, in violation of
Security Council resolution 497 (1981).

I would be remiss if I failed on this occasion to
extend our thanks and gratitude to the delegation of the
Russian Federation for its successful and distinguished
conduct of the Council's deliberations last month. We
also thank the Secretary-General for stressing the
comprehensive nature of any solution to the Arab-
Israeli conflict and the situation in the Middle East.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements to be made by the representatives of Kuwait
on behalf of the Arab Group, of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
One surprising irony in the annals of the United
Nations - without which Israel, created by the
Organization, would not have seen the light - is the
fact that, over the years, while Israel has pursued its
racist, expansionist, settler occupation of Arab
territories and continued to suppress and aggress the

Palestinians, it has become a staunch adversary of
peace and obstinately flouts the will of the
international community, as represented by the
resolutions of this Organization. Never before has a
United Nations Member so challenged the
Organization or shown the ingratitude that Israel has
shown since it was created.

So true is this that the expressions "double
standards" and "double benchmarks" were coined and
insinuated themselves into diplomatic jargon with
specific reference to the imbalance in the treatment of
Israel that frustrates the will of the international
community. Regrettably, the high and mighty continue
to cover up Israel's attempts to obstruct the will of the
international community, to protect Israel politically
and legally from the consequences of its behaviour, and
to prevent it from being held accountable for its
ongoing occupation policies.

A reading of General Assembly resolution 273
(III) of 11 May 1949, whereby the General Assembly
voted to accept Israel as a Member of the United
Nations, reveals that the General Assembly noted then
that "Israel is a peace-loving State and is able and
willing to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter" and "the declaration by the State of Israel that
it 'unreservedly accepts the obligations of the United
Nations Charter and undertakes to honour them from
the day when it becomes a Member of the United
Nations'" (General Assembly resolution 273 (111),
second andfourth preambular paragraphs).

Given the fact that Israel has violated every
condition of membership in the United Nations,
reneged on its commitment to respect the Charter and
shown its true colours as a peace-hating rather than a
peace-loving country, it is legitimate from the legal
perspective to question the obligation which the
aforementioned resolution places on the international
community and the extent of Israel's violation of the
principles and purposes of the Charter.

The Security Council is meeting today, for
perhaps the thousandth time, to debate the agenda item
entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question". Israel, the occupying Power,
is wantonly violating all international laws and ethical
norms. The new chapter in the ongoing saga of terror
by Israel - as defined by legal norms, the occupying
Power of Arab territories - began on 6 February 2007
with its excavation activity that seeks to undermine the
foundations of the Al-Aqsa mosque, which holds
symbolic and sacred significance to Muslims
throughout the world and to the Islamic faith itself.
That new act of Israeli provocation is a continuation of
the Israeli approach to which we have become
accustomed. Israel's current aggression against
Al-Aqsa mosque is not the first of its kind, for it also
attempted to burn down the mosque in 1969 and
excavated a tunnel near the mosque in 1996. In another
act of aggression, on 28 September 2000, Ariel Sharon,
leader of the right-wing opposition at the time, visited
the Al-Aqsa mosque compound, which led to the
outbreak of the second Palestinian intifada and to the
hampering of the peace process.

A reading of historical documents since 1967
reveals Israel's deliberate steps to alter the
demographic map of Jerusalem. The first of those steps
occurred in 1968, just one year after the occupation of
Jerusalem, when Israel laid siege to a 3.5 square
kilometre area of that city and made plans to build
Jewish settlements there. Within a few years, Israel
established what it called the first cordon around
Jerusalem. When no one budged in response to Israel's
violation of international law, Israel took a second step
in 1970 and confiscated 12 square kilometres of the
northern part of Jerusalem and established what it
called the second cordon. In its third step, in 1980,
Israel set up what it referred to as the third cordon,
following the confiscation of 4.4 square kilometres in
the northern part of occupied Jerusalem. Those acts of
confiscation, which violated United Nations
resolutions and the relevant international instruments
that affirm the illegality of building on occupied
territory, provided the opportunity for Israel to build its
settlements.

Statistics indicate that the number of Palestinian
residential units in 1967, prior to Israel's occupation of
the city of Jerusalem, totalled 12,000 - a figure that
eventually rose to 38,000 units. Statistics also indicate
that 15,000 residential units, which are home to
280,000 Palestinians, are classified as illegal units by
the occupation authorities. Moreover, in 1967 there
were no Israeli settlement units in Jerusalem. However,
today, that number is more than 59,000 settler units, all
of which are illegal under international law and which
house 182,000 Israeli settlers from the Jewish diaspora
who have come to live on the territory of others.

I shall summarize Israel's establishment of
settlements in Jerusalem, a lamentable step that the
international community has called illegal, as follows.

First, Israeli occupation forces confiscated 2,000
dunums of land in the Palestinian village of Al-Walaja
to build 5,000 units for settlers. Then they built 4,600
settler units near the village of Telat Al-Tayara. Then,
as part of the Jabal Abu Ghneim project, they built
17,500 residential units. And, as part of a project
announced in January 2007, another 1,000 settler units
will be built in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area of
Jerusalem.

I felt obliged to cite those historical events in
order to remind the international community, which the
Security Council represents, that Israel has been aware
beforehand of the likely results of its provocative acts.
I am not at all surprised that Israel is determined to
push events to the point of escalation, given that there
are now signs of easing of tensions regarding the
Palestinian issue, following the agreement arrived at by
the Palestinian parties at Mecca - which was
successfully brokered by Damascus. It is also not
surprising, because the entire international community
has now welcomed the declaration of a Government of
national unity in Palestine that will work to realize the
aspirations of the Palestinian people to independence,
freedom and the establishment of an independent State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Syria has been
tireless in seeking to bring the various Palestinian
parties to the negotiating table and to achieve a
rapprochement of view points in order to ensure that
the enemies of just and lasting peace will not prevail
and to overcome all pretexts by Israel that there is no
Palestinian partner for peace.

In turn, the Israeli Government committed yet
another act of aggression against the Al-Aqsa mosque,
in an effort to foil Arab and international efforts to
relaunch the peace process, as well as to undermine all
that has been achieved thus far and to impede all
diplomatic efforts. I should point out that, legally
speaking, Israel's act of aggression against the Al-Aqsa
mosque is a flagrant violation of Israel's responsibility
as an occupying Power in terms of altering the
character of occupied Palestinian territory, which
includes East Jerusalem, under the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and Security Council resolution 478 (1980).
From the political perspective, Israel's recent
actions pose a serious threat to international efforts to
revive the peace process. Among other things, those
actions are aimed at aborting the possibility of holding
negotiations on final status issues, especially those
pertaining to Jerusalem and the return of refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/ 149.
This is taking place at a time when major capitals,
eminent persons and others with political influence -
both from the Arab world as well as from the rest of
the world - are striving to relaunch the peace process
and bring the parties closer to a resolution.

My country has always stressed that its strategic
choice is a just and comprehensive peace. For my
country, a strategic peace is one that requires a genuine
commitment by both parties. It is contrary to a peace
based on a fait accompli that gives Israel everything,
for nothing in return.

Strategic peace is a responsibility and a decision.
It is not manoeuvring, irresponsibility, or merely
buying time. Strategic peace is built on decisions of
international legitimacy, such as resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Israel must understand that peace requires the full
withdrawal from the occupied Golan to the line of
4June 1967 and also the withdrawal from other
Lebanese and occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem.

On this occasion, I would like to stress that a just
and equitable resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict is
not elusive, if the Israelis show the real political will to
make peace. Israel's will is an issue that was discussed
by most of the Member States that took the floor today.

Above all else, peace is a responsibility. It
requires more courage than war does. As such, the
Arab-Israeli conflict has, from its earliest days, seen
more than 30 Arab and international peace initiatives,
all of which faced Israeli rejection, supported by the
use of the veto 44 times by a super-Power. Unless
Israeli Governments and their protectors assume their
responsibilities, show courage and understand that
promoting the logic of might in international relations
and the choice of military might will not last, our
region will lack peace and stability and the suffering of
its peoples will continue unabated. International peace
and security will always be threatened; the principle of
land for peace will be empty words, and international
relations will always be marred by acute tension.

