Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, I will devote my regular briefing on the
situation in the Middle East to presenting the twelfth
report on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (8/2019/938). The report covers
the period between 12 September and 6 December 2019.
As members have already received the written report,
in today's briefing I will provide a brief update on
developments related to the provisions of the resolution
that have taken place following the submission of the
report to the Council.

As detailed in the report, no steps were taken during
the reporting period to "cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem", as demanded by the Council in paragraph
2 of the resolution.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Since 6 December, an
additional eight structures were demolished or seized
by the Israeli authorities, resulting in the displacement
of some 20 people.

In its paragraph 6, resolution 2334 (2016)
also "calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians". Unfortunately, the
violence continues, even during the few days since the
submission of the report. In the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, 16 Palestinians were injured in various
incidents, including in clashes with the Israeli security
forces during demonstrations, security operations,
settler-related attacks and other incidents since the end
of the reporting period.

Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence have also
continued. While most demonstrations remained
relatively peaceful, some protesters engaged in violent
activities. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) responded
with riot-dispersal means and live fire, injuring some
38 people. On 17 December, a Palestinian was killed
by an Israeli drone as he approached the perimeter
fence. According to the IDF, the man was armed. Three
rockets were also launched by Gaza militants towards
Israel, causing no injuries.

On 9 December, assailants slashed the tires of more
than 160 Palestinian cars in the Shuafat neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem and sprayed anti-Arab graffiti.
Additional vehicles were vandalized or set on fire in
two villages in Bethlehem and in another two villages
in Ramallah. The Israeli police are investigating the
Shuafat incident.

Several dozen Israeli activists from the Tag Meir
forum visited the Shuafat neighbourhood following the
attack in order to express their rejection of the violence
and their solidarity with Shuafat's residents. They were
hosted by Hussein and Suha Abu Khdeir, whose son
Mohammad was murdered in a terror attack in 2014.

Resolution 2334 (2016), in its paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties "to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement, and inflammatory rhetoric". Unfortunately,
such actions and rhetoric have continued. The resolution
also reiterated calls by the Middle East Quartet for
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the
two-State solution.

In recent weeks, the United Nations has continued
its engagement with senior Palestinian officials and
different factions towards holding inclusive elections
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. In
preparation for possible 2020 parliamentary and
presidential elections, and upon the request for
technical assistance from Palestine's Central Elections
Commission, a United Nations electoral needs
assessment mission was deployed to the occupied
Palestinian territory earlier this week. On 10 December,
the Palestinian Authority announced that it had
officially sent a request to Israel to allow Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem to participate in potential
presidential and legislative elections.

I would like to focus on some of the observations
concerning the implementation of the resolution's
provisions. In the three years since the Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), plans for over 22,000 units have
been advanced or approved in West Bank settlements,
including in East Jerusalem. Tenders for approximately
8,000 units have been issued. Those numbers should be
of serious concern to all who continue to support the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State alongside Israel. Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly
states that the establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Settlements
must therefore cease immediately and completely.

The continued demolition and seizure of
Palestinian structures, including internationally
funded humanitarian projects, is also of significant
concern. That practice is not in line with international
humanitarian law and must stop. Affected populations
must be duly compensated for damages incurred.
Similarly, the high number of Palestinian households in
East Jerusalem with eviction cases filed against them
is alarming. As an occupying Power, Israel must abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian law.

I remain gravely concerned about the continuing
violence, terror attacks against civilians and incitement
to violence, which greatly exacerbate mistrust between
Israelis and Palestinians and are fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian population centres is prohibited
by international humanitarian law, and Palestinian
militants must immediately cease that practice.

The security situation in Gaza remains very
fragile. The use of force by Israel at the Gaza perimeter
fence and the number of Palestinians killed and injured
also remains a significant concern. Security forces
must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force
only when strictly necessary and in response to an
imminent threat of death or serious injury. Hamas
must stop the firing of rockets and ensure that protests
remain peaceful. Children should never be the target of
violence or be used or put in harm's way.

Reports of increased numbers of settler-related
attacks and harassment are also deeply concerning,
particularly around the olive harvest season and in
Hebron. Further measures must be taken to ensure
that Israel fulfils its obligations to protect Palestinian
civilians from violence, including by settlers, and to
investigate and hold accountable those responsible for
such attacks.

Provocative and inflammatory rhetoric during
the reporting period continued to deepen the divide
and fuelled further mistrust between Israelis and
Palestinians. Leaders and officials must set a tone that
encourages tolerance and facilitates increased dialogue.

I am particularly appalled by the racist and
inflammatory statements that aim to spread fear and
hatred among people. I call on all to join the United
Nations to condemn all such statements. Regrettably,
statements on the prospect of annexation of the Jordan
Valley and other parts of the West Bank also continue.
Such steps, if implemented, would constitute a serious
violation of international law and would be destructive
to the realization of the two-State solution and the
prospects for peace.

September marked one year since the start of
the implementation of the United Nations package of
urgent humanitarian and economic interventions for
Gaza. The efforts to date have achieved important
results, yet the situation remains very fragile. Security
risks abound, movement and access restrictions
remain severe and there has been no progress towards
intra-Palestinian unity. Some of the investments made
to date, as a result of efforts by the United Nations,
will end on 31 December. Without additional funding
and a durable Israeli and Palestinian commitment, the
situation in Gaza could once again be pushed to the
brink of collapse. The stakes are too high to allow that
to happen. All stakeholders must act to prevent the
ongoing crisis in Gaza from deepening further.

On its own, no amount of humanitarian or economic
support will resolve either the situation in Gaza or the
broader conflict. Gaza ultimately requires political
solutions. Taking into consideration its legitimate
security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the restrictions
on the movement of goods and people to and from
Gaza, with the goal of ultimately lifting them. Only
by fully lifting the closures, in line with resolution
1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the
humanitarian crisis. It is also critical to end the militant
build-up in Gaza and the constant threat of rocket fire,
and to reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national authority, in accordance
with the recommendations of the 2016 Middle East
Quartet report (see S/2016/595).

In that context, it is critical that the important
Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts
continue. The United Nations stands firm in its
support of Egypt's efforts in that regard. I call on all
Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to advance
Palestinian unity.

I welcome ongoing discussions on the holding of
Palestinian general elections. If elections materialize,
they would be the first Palestinian elections since 2006,
giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions. The
international community should support that process.

As I emphasized in my previous briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8669), three critical elements are
required for elections to be credible - first, they
must be organized across the occupied Palestinian
territory, in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and Gaza, in line with the Palestinian basic law,
electoral legislation and international best practices;
secondly, both legislative and presidential elections
are necessary and should be held within a clearly
identified and reasonable time frame; and, thirdly,
broad intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on
the modalities of holding such elections.

Palestinians have been denied their democratic right
to vote for too long. I am hopeful that the Palestinian
President will very soon issue a decree scheduling
legislative and presidential elections and that Israel will
allow voting in East Jerusalem.

Despite the partial agreement reached between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority on 3 October on
clearance revenues, it remains critical that both sides
engage in a constructive manner with the goal of
restoring the revenue transfers in full, in accordance
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.

The financial situation of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, unfortunately, has also continued to worsen.
Urgent disbursement of donor funds is essential to
ensure that operations can be sustained through the end
of the year.

I also call on Member States to support the 2020
humanitarian response plan for the occupied Palestinian
territory, launched on 11 December. The plan calls for
approximately $348 million to provide basic food,
protection, health care, shelter, water and sanitation to
about 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

This month marks three years since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016). The situation on the ground
since then has only deteriorated. Settlements have
expanded significantly, demolitions have accelerated,
violence and incitement have continued, achieving
intra-Palestinian unity remains elusive and credible
negotiations have yet to be launched. I remain greatly
concerned by the persistent lack of progress towards
ending the occupation and realizing a negotiated two-
State solution. As I have consistently stated, it is not
enough to call for the renewal of our collective efforts
to that end. We must take concrete action.

Absent the renewed commitment of the parties
and the international community to pursue concrete
measures that will lead to genuine political progress,
the situation will continue to worsen. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is in a fragile phase, with the
occupation deepening, political uncertainty prevailing
and volatile regional dynamics threatening to further
destabilize the situation.

I once again urge leaders on all sides to summon
the necessary political will to take concrete steps in
support of ending the occupation and realizing a lasting
peace, resulting in two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace, within secure
and recognized borders and with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States.

