The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2004/892, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Chile, France, Germany,
Romania, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2004/895, containing the text of a letter dated
10 November 2004 from the representative of the
Gambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and to document 5/2004/896, containing the
text of a letter dated 9 November 2004 from the
representative of Nigeria addressed to the President of
the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(8/2004/892) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1572 (2004).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


