Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Ithank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, and the Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Olof Skoog,
for their comprehensive briefings.

Uruguay congratulates the Government and the
people of Liberia for the progress achieved in bringing
stability to the country. It is also important to recognize
that the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
has played a leading role in this process for more than

13 years. Liberia is currently going through a crucial
moment on the eve of the presidential and legislative
elections, and less than a year before the definitive
termination of UNMIL, which was established under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

The holding of presidential and legislative
elections, which are scheduled for October, and the
peaceful transfer of power in January 2018 will be
important milestones in consolidating peace in Liberia.
Uruguay is convinced that democratic processes that
are conducted in a free, inclusive and transparent
manner and with the highest possible participation
of voters are precisely those that make it possible to
forge a lasting peace. We note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Government to implement State authority
throughout Liberian territory. Only in that way will all
of the country's inhabitants be able to benefit from the
dividends of peace.

However, many challenges remain for Liberia. The
country will need to step up its efforts in the area of
security. It will also be necessary to address the root
causes that fuelled the conflict in the past. With that
in mind, it is essential to enact pertinent legislation
on land-ownership rights and local administration.
Furthermore, it will be important to strengthen State
institutions that promote and ensure compliance with
rules. Corruption is another scourge affecting Liberia
that needs to be eliminated from all levels of Government
so that it has solid, transparent and reliable institutions.

Uruguay notes with particular concern the human
rights situation in Liberia, which is a fundamental
aspect in which the desired progress has not yet been
achieved. In order for the efforts focused on the stability
and security of the country to be maintained in the
long run, the protection and promotion of human rights
will need to be one of the top priorities, together with
accountability and such issues as restorative justice,
truth and reconciliation. It is also a source of serious
concern that there are many cases of sexual violence
and gender violence, certain persistent harmful
traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation
and accusations of witchcraft, and restrictions on
the freedom of expression. Sexual and gender-based
violence, which has particularly affected girls, is a
problem that must be urgently addressed.

The awareness-raising campaign about such cases,
organized by UNMIL and the Liberian Ministry for
Gender, Childhood and Social Protection, is a step in
the right direction. However, efforts should be stepped
up by the Government to prevent and respond to such
crimes and put an end to the persistent impunity of
those who perpetrate them. Bearing in mind the still
precarious situation of human rights in Liberia, Uruguay
would endorse the observations of the Secretary-
General on the need to establish a satellite office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
especially in the light of the imminent withdrawal of
UNMIL from the country.

Today's meeting offers us an excellent opportunity
to congratulate UNMIL for its work in supporting the
Government of Liberia and in providing protection to
civilians, as well as for its contribution to achieving
national peace and reconciliation in the country.
Uruguay hopes to see the closure of UNMIL, a process
that has been under way for some time, take place in
a timely and successful manner. Our delegation also
acknowledges the work of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission for its work with the
Government and international and local partners and
for its drafting of a peacebuilding plan for Liberia. In
that regard, we would like to thank and particularly
congratulate the Swedish delegation for its leadership.

The United Nations - in particular the
Security Council, UNMIL and the Peacebuilding
Commission i has provided support for the peace
process in Liberia through various actions that will, we
hope, together with the efforts of the people and the
Government of Liberia, contribute to making Liberia a
success story.

