Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, and
your country for the efforts undertaken during your
presidency of the Security Council in safeguarding
its pivotal role in maintaining international peace
and security.
I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing and for his efforts to achieve
progress in the region's peace process.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer as a result
of the ongoing Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories and the lack of a political vision for a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution. Their human
rights continue to be systematically violated and they
are deprived of their fundamental rights, in conjunction
with dire economic and social conditions, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. That has led to a substantial increase
in poverty and the denial of the most basic human
rights. It highlights the magnitude of the historical
injustice being suffered by those people and requires
positive international action to end the tragedy.

Jordan underscores the centrality of the Palestinian
question and the need to find a just and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and suffering,
which would allow the Palestinian people to enjoy
their right to live in freedom and dignity within their
own State. Our position on the Palestinian question is
resolute and steadfast. Our message to the world is that
the injustices suffered by the Palestinians must come
to an end so that the brotherly Palestinian people can
establish an independent and sovereign State. The two-
State solution, in accordance with international law,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative, is the only way to end the conflict
by establishing an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Hashemite custodianship of J erusalem's Muslim
and Christian holy sites is a solemn responsibility that
Jordan is proud to shoulder. My country will spare
no effort in withstanding any attempts to change the
historical Arab, Islamic and Christian identity of the
holy city. The Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the ongoing Israeli violations and provocations
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Haram al-Sharif. We
particularly condemn the provocative incursions by
Israeli extremists and settlers into the courtyards of
Haram al-Sharif, which are systematically carried out
under the protection of the Israeli police. Such actions
are condemned and rejected. They violate the sanctity
of that sacred place and upsets worshippers and
Muslims all over the world. They also violate Israel's
obligations as an occupying Power under international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as all
international conventions and norms that emphasize
the need to respect places of worship for all religions.
My country condemns the forced displacement
and deportation of the inhabitants of Khan Al-Ahmar
as part of an expansionist settlement policy that Israel
uses to impose a fait accompli and to undermine the
two-State solution, threatening further instability in
the region.

The serious financial deficit of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is hampering its ability to provide
basic services to millions of refugees and poses a threat
to the stability ofhost communities. That leaves us with
two options - either to nurture a positive generation
of young people or to leave them prey to the forces of
extremism and despair.

Despite the efforts of the international community
to reduce the deficit, which stood at $446 million at the
beginning of this year and now stands at $64 million,
we continue to face that problem at the beginning of
each year. We must therefore come up with innovative
ideas and constructive initiatives to ensure predictable
and sustainable funding for UNRWA so that it can
carry out its United Nations mandate, respect the rights
of refugees to live in dignity, guarantee the rights of
more than 500,000 refugee children to go to school
and continue to provide them and their families with
vital services.

The Syrian crisis is now entering its eighth year.
A political solution remains the only feasible way to
guarantee peace and stability in Syria and to maintain
its territorial integrity. A political solution must be
acceptable to the brotherly Syrian people and meet their
aspirations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We
commend the key role of the United Nations in making
progress towards a political solution to the crisis in
Syria. We refer, in particular, to the statement issued by
the small group of the global coalition on Syria, which
underscores the importance of forming a constitutional
committee without delay and enabling it to start its
work on the political process, with the participation of
all Syrian stakeholders and under the auspices of the
United Nations.

Iwould also like to congratulate the State of brotherly
Iraq on the success of its parliamentary elections and
the recent selection of the three presidencies, benefiting
Iraq and the region as a whole. I emphasize our
commitment to continuing to cooperate with the new
Iraqi Government. My country stood by Iraq as it faced
the scourge of terrorism and will continue to do so as
the country seeks to rebuild itself, based on our firm
belief that the success of Iraq is a success for all and
that a united, democratic, safe and secure Iraq is in the
interests of its people, the entire region and the world.

The absence of a just solution to the Palestinian
question and the continuation of the crisis in Syria,
as well as the challenges facing some countries in the
region as they seek to consolidate security, stability
and reconstruction, are issues that compel us to work
harder and to stand unified in order to overcome
those difficulties and challenges. Those exceptional
circumstances call for a unified strategic vision and the
strengthening of our capacity to preserve international
peace and security by institutionalizing joint action and
translating it into reality.

