Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
office you now hold. It is good to see you in the hot seat
so soon after your arrival in New York, and my delegation
pledges to work with you, not only during this coming
month but for the remainder of Argentina's term on the
Security Council. It is very good to have you here.

It is good also to see my very good friend Sergio
Vieira de Mello back in New York and to hear such an
impressive briefing. The systematic and objective-based
approach that he has just outlined suggests that East Timor
does indeed stand a very good chance of becoming the
paradigm of nation-building that he mentioned. Long may
that systematic, accurate and targeted management of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) continue.

We do not have much time this morning, and I really
want in my statement to concentrate only on two or three
points. They are, first, our concern - and here we agree
with what Sergio Vieira de Mello has said - that money
is not being made available on the ground fast enough to
allow reconstruction and other elements of the UNTAET
package to get under way. The second is the security
situation, on which there is mostly good news, but where
there are some slightly worrying elements as well. And the
third is our concern over the slow pace of civilian police
deployment.

On security, I think the Council owes a debt to both
the International Force in East Timor INTERFET and
UNTAET for restoring stability in the security situation.
We welcome the progress that has been made in the
smooth transition from INTERFET to UNTAET, and we
hope that this will be continued so that it finishes on
schedule, by the end of February. But I was slightly
concerned to hear Mr. Vieira de Mello's remarks about
militia activity around Oecussi. Clearly, this is something
that both INTERFET in its remaining time and UN TAET
will need to watch very closely. If the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General can throw any
further light on UNTAET's assessment of militia
influence, activity and ability to mount continued
disruption, we would be very interested to hear that
assessment. Clearly, the sooner that those elements of the
military desist from their activities and recognize that
they, like everyone else, must work towards the common
objective of an independent and peaceful East Timor, the
better.

Secondly, the work that the UNTAET civilian police
component have done so far is encouraging, but we are
concerned about the rise in crime noted in the Secretary-
General's report. Clearly there are a number of elements
to this. I was particularly impressed by the fairly shocking
statistic that Mr. Vieira de Mello quoted at the beginning
of his statement: that 80 per cent of the population is now
without means of support, whereas prices are twice as
high as they were before the consultation.

This requires a complex strategy. Clearly crime is
likely to come down only when ordinary people in East
Timor have a means of pursuing their livelihoods. But
also it requires an effective civil policing operation to
ensure that the gains already made in terms of security
and civil society are not lost.

The proposed start of civilian police training in
March is therefore very welcome. Clearly, it is right that
this should be targeted towards effective local law
enforcement, and, clearly, it is good that UNTAET is now
taking initiatives to bring more local police officers back
on line.

I would only add, though, that it is important that
when those local police come on line they operate in
accordance with internationally accepted standards. I hope
that it will be possible for UNTAET to blend into the
deployment of these people a suitable training element so
that the police force can start off completely on the right
foot.

The progress on the establishment of the public
administration is welcome, too. But here again I want to

 

underline our concern at the delays in disbursement of
much-needed funds for reconstruction and other projects. It
is very important that the World Bank trust fund come on
line quickly so that these programmes can begin.

I hope that the Special Representative and the
Secretariat will not hesitate to come forward if they feel
that there is anything that members of the Council or the
Council itself can do to speed that process along. Clearly,
the sort of vacuum that Mr. Vieira de Mello has outlined is
highly undesirable, and we must try to ensure that
UNTAET's activities show a secular increase and get off to
a very good start, not least - as the Special Representative
has outlined - so that the United Nations can maintain the
confidence of the Timorese people.

Finally, I should touch on the issue of human rights,
which Mr. Vieira de Mello has mentioned as one of
UNTAET's key objectives, particularly in the context of
investigating and safeguarding evidence of serious crimes
during the unhappy period last year after the consultation.
We welcome the publication of both the International
Commission of Inquiry report and the report of the
Indonesian Commission of Inquiry into Human Rights
Violations in East Timor, known as KPP-HAM. Both
reports illustrate graphically the seriousness of what
happened in East Timor last year.

The United Kingdom considers it vital that those
responsible for the serious violations of human rights and
humanitarian law in East Timor be brought to justice. At
his meeting with Prime Minister Blair two days ago,
President Wahid of Indonesia made it clear that Indonesia
wants to see justice done. We very much welcome this
commitment. All cases should be pursued vigorously, even
if they lead to the top.

The United Kingdom has offered support to that
process. While we do not close off any options, we look
forward to a credible legal process in Indonesia.

It is important that the Security Council respond to the
Secretary-General's letter of 31 January, covering the report
of the International Commission of Inquiry. I am sure that
you, Mr. President, will schedule informal consultations in
due course on this matter.

