Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for initiating this debate on children in
armed conflict. New Zealand also thanks the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2007/757). New Zealand
agrees with the report's recommendation that the
Security Council should not limit its attention to the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, but should give
equal weight to all categories of grave violations
against children, namely, killing and maiming, attacks
against schools and hospitals, rape and other grave
sexual violence, abduction and the denial of
humanitarian access.

We were proud to sponsor recently Council
resolution 1820 (2008) and welcome the recognition
that children in armed conflict are acutely vulnerable to
sexual violence. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's next report, as requested in resolution 1820
(2008), and call for action to stop abuses against
children.

We commend the progress made by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, with France as
its Chair. We want to see it continue to publish
conclusions that lead to strong and swift action against
the perpetrators of grave violations against children.
The Working Group is a vital component of a series of
mechanisms for ensuring that children affected by
conflict are protected.

We recognize the dedication of Special
Representative Radhika Coomaraswamy to the
commitments in her mandate and to the valuable
findings she brings back from her field visits.

We acknowledge that today is the tenth
anniversary of the creation of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and take the opportunity to
reiterate the central importance of the ICC in bringing
to justice the perpetrators of abuse against children.

New Zealand commends all those involved, those
countries where progress has been reported and
especially the Security Council for the ongoing efforts
to better ensure the safety of children affected by
conflict. We call on the Council to continue its work to
fulfil the mandate set out in resolution 1612 (2005),
which we believe continues to provide sound
foundations for the valuable work of the Special
Representative.

