Mr. Sharma: I wish to express my appreciation
to all the delegations that have spoken today. Their
views and advice provide extremely important and
valuable input in our work. Some of the points that
were made need to be accorded greater reflection and
scrutiny, and I assure members that we shall do this.
The words of support which delegations have spoken
for our efforts have been of great encouragement to us,
and I shall certainly convey those words to my team,
which supports me so well. I thank delegations for the
confidence they have expressed. We hope to live up to
it.

I particularly thank the many delegations that
have advocated continued and strengthened donor
support to Timor-Leste; such partnership will be
essential to Timor-Leste for many, many years to come.
We rely on this continued commitment and solidarity,
which has to date been so generously in evidence from
all institutional and national partners and civil society.
Many delegations, indeed, have expressed this in their
statements.

As I have been kindly invited by you to respond,
Mr. President, I shall not abuse your generosity
overmuch. I intend to respond very briefly, and I hope
my observations are found to be of interest and useful
on some of the points which have been common to
statements by delegations and on others that were very
pointedly put in the form of questions addressed to me.
The most important theme, I find, as emphasized by the
majority of delegations, is that of justice and the rule of
law. I strongly believe that the rule of law is the
foundation for all other societal and Government
activities. That view is shared by the leaders of Timor-
Leste, as I indicated in my statement.

However, we have to recognize that inherent
difficulties related to judges' lack of experience, court
language and the legal system are, and will remain, a
continuing challenge. There will be a continuing long-
term need for international assistance, within the
Ministry of Justice, the courts and the prison sector,
well beyond the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).

I have, therefore, been consciously involving the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
other multilateral and bilateral agencies in any
initiatives that UNMISET takes in order to promote the
objectives of the Government of Timor-Leste in
enhancing the functioning of the judicial system. In
this, it is important to bear in mind that we can, at best,
play the role of adviser and facilitator. The Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Sukehiro Hasegawa, who is also the UNDP Resident
Representative, in consultation with me, has prepared
input to the action plan of the Ministry of Justice; this
was an extensive document and, I believe, was
appreciated. The document set out what we saw as
challenges, the way in which those challenges could be
met, and who could be the potential partners in meeting
those challenges. An outline of the plan, as developed
by the Ministry of Justice as a national plan, was
presented to donors on 11 October. I should also inform
members that we are pursuing our contribution in this
sector by deploying needs assessment missions, also
coordinated by UNDP.

An assessment team on the prison system visited
last month and has already issued an extremely useful
report. Currently, there is also an assessment team in
the police sector.

A delegation made reference to the Judicial
Magistrates Statutes. Here again, I would emphasize
that, on the draft legislation, we had made our advice
clearly known both to the Government and to
Parliament, and we had also invited the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the
independence of judges and lawyers, Mr. Param
Cumaraswamy, and the Government also had the
benefit of his views. An issue was raised about the
legality of detentions. This issue is known, and also
forms part of the prison assessment report.

The other important theme emphasized by many
delegations was the role of human rights and the office
of the "Provedor". We have been instrumental in
promoting the search for the appropriate role for the
"Provedor", and a seminar was arranged on this team.
UNMISET has also mainstreamed promotion and
protection of human rights in all its activities. It is also
working towards the creation of a human rights
thematic group, which would involve all United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
I should emphasize here that the commitment of
the Government of Timor-Leste to human rights is
exemplary. Just a few days ago, on 6 November, the
Council of Ministers approved the ratification of a
number of human rights treaties. These are being
considered by the national Parliament with a view to
acceding to them by international Human Rights Day
on 10 December. These treaties include the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights; the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women; the Convention on the Rights of the
Child; the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families; and many others.

It is significant that among the treaties the
Council of Ministers has recommended for signature is
the Migrant Workers' Convention. At present, there are
19 signatories to that Convention, and Timor-Leste's
signature will have the effect of bringing the
Convention into force, since 20 signatures are required.

The Human Rights Unit of UNMISET, in
cooperation with other partners, continues to provide
training to Timorese authorities, particularly the police.
During August and September, a series of three-day
courses were organized for offices of the special police
unit on human rights and conflict management.
Training has also been provided to Timorese police
officers and to the vulnerable persons unit of the police
in various districts.

In Timor-Leste, there has been a small increase in
incidents against returnees. Such incidents are
prompted either by allegations of their involvement in
militia activities or by their efforts to reclaim land that
originally belonged to them. The human rights unit is
monitoring the well-being of returnees and is providing
assistance where appropriate. Such cases underline the
need for continued support for the work of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and also the process - mandated by the Council - of
the investigation, prosecution and judgement of serious
crimes. The Commission has achieved full strength and
has conducted the first reconciliation process in Likisa.
Indeed, I visited Likisa and spoke to the
Commissioners personally. All of them were united in
expressing the view that it would be an important
contribution to the process of social healing, to which
President Gusmao attaches such enormous importance.

There were some queries raised as to
international advisers. I shall not talk about the
stability advisers, as most of the questions raised
pertained to the development posts. The 228
development posts that have been identified fall within
four thematic areas: financial services, which has 73;
essential services, such as health, education and
transport, which has 68; governance and centralized
services, which has 57; and the legal and justice
system, which has 30. Of the 228, only 49 have been
recruited thus far and another 33 are in the process of
being recruited, either by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) or by bilateral
donors. Expressions of interest have been received
from donor agencies for another 48 posts, and, even if
all of them materialized, there would be a major
shortfall in funding for 98 positions, or nearly half of
the entire programme.

The largest funding gaps are currently in the
Ministry of Planning and Finance, 24 posts; the
Ministry of Transport, Communications and Public
Works, 20 posts; and centralized services, particularly
translators and legal advisers, 18 posts. We have been
queried as to whether there was something that
UNMISET could do about the time scale of those
development posts. I should clarify that the process
depends entirely upon the willingness and the energy
with which donors pick up the posts after having
examined them. In fact, the full list can be found on a
web site - www.nndp.east-timor.org - and I would
encourage all those in a position to do so to contribute
to this critical programme.

Many questions were raised concerning the
serious-crimes process. Here, something needs to be
said immediately and at the outset. UNMISET is
playing the role that is appropriate for it: ensuring that
all administrative and infrastructure facilities required
by the investigators, prosecutors, defence lawyers and
courts are made available to them. At the same time, it
is acutely aware that it must not interfere - or even
appear to interfere - with the legal and judicial
processes, which will take their own course. We would
be happy to share with any interested delegation the
current state of indictments and other details that we
have. Here, I should emphasize that the question of the
balance between reconciliation and justice is a theme
of the utmost importance in many peacekeeping
missions, and Timor-Leste is no exception.

There was a reference made to the need for a
forensic pathologist. We recognize that need, and we
identified it almost immediately after UNMISET had
begun its work. I personally met the Minister for
Health and officials in the Ministry of Justice in that
regard. To have a facility with a professional forensic
pathologist requires many years, because a cadre with
medical degrees is needed. So what we are also
concentrating on is engaging partners - particularly in
the neighbourhood - who can make their experts
available from time to time so that there is no backlog
in the morgue. We are also seeking long-term solutions.
Many references were made to veterans. A
prominent grievance has been that treatment accorded
to veterans and a lack of programmes devoted to them
may give that sector of the population a sense of denial
of dignity, worth and social usefulness, which needs to
be corrected. That is entirely recognized by the
Government. I have discussed the issue with the
leaders on several occasions, and, as a result of those
discussions, the President has established two
commissions to define and determine the exact
numbers of former combatants of the period 1974-1979
and Falintil veterans of the period 1979-1999. Prime
Minister Alkatiri has also drafted a project proposal for
the gainful employment of Falintil veterans. Those
ideas are being pursued further through the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for
consideration by bilateral and multilateral donors. I
strongly believe that redressing the genuine grievances
of former combatants and of Falintil veterans would
contribute to enhancing the stability of Timor-Leste.

References were also made to border
demarcation. As that is an issue that is closely
connected to UNMISET's mandate, I should like to lay
out the situation very clearly for members. The
previous report (S/2002/432) estimated, in its
paragraph 93, that by July 2003 the border would be
demarcated and its management assumed by civilian
authorities, including the police. It was further
indicated, in paragraph 97, that the process of
demarcating the border was at an early stage and that,
if there were no delays in the process, the boundary
could be determined by the end of 2002 and the
international boundary could be demarcated by July
2003. Security Council resolution 1410 (2002), apart
from requesting UNMISET to give full effect to the
three programmes of the mandate implementation plan,
stressed the critical importance of cooperation between
the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia, as well
as with UNMISET, in particular by working together to
secure agreement on the issue of border demarcation.
I am happy to inform the Council that the
Government of Indonesia have, in cooperation with
UNMISET, attempted to move forward in this
direction. The first meeting of the Joint Ministerial

Commission for Bilateral Cooperation - held in
Jakarta on 7 and 8 October, during which UNMISET
actively cooperated with both countries - agreed to

invite the Joint Border Committee to make every effort
to finalize agreement by 30 June 2003 on a line that
constitutes the border in accordance with the 1904
treaty between Portugal and the Netherlands and the
1914 arbitral decision and other relevant legal
instruments and in accordance with which the land
border can be demarcated unequivocally.

UNMISET is fully prepared to continue its active
cooperation with both countries in their efforts to meet
the target they have established to finalize this
agreement. The first meeting of the renewed Joint
Border Committee, which was revived at the Joint
Commission, is expected to be held in mid December,
and Indonesia and Timor-Leste are in the process of
finalizing mutually convenient dates through regular
diplomatic channels.

Of course, after the agreement on the line that
constitutes the border has been finalized, the process of
physical demarcation - if both countries decide to do
so - may take a fairly long time. However, once the
agreement on the border has been secured, with militia
threats maintained at current low levels and civilian
management of the border assured by concerned
authorities, I do not believe that absence of physical
demarcation should impede the withdrawal of
peacekeeping forces. I believe that you would be able
to maintain a schedule for withdrawal of peacekeeping
forces.

Refugees have also been mentioned by many
delegations. So far, the year 2002 has seen over 29,900
refugee returns to Timor-Leste, as compared to some
18,000 during 2001.

While the year began on a slow note, with 675
and 938 refugee returns being recorded in January and
February, the rate picked up considerably in March,
with 3,644, and almost doubled to 6,031 in April
following encouragement by the then President-elect
Xanana Gusmao during his visit to Atambour and
Kefah along with UNMISET and UNHCR on 4 April.
The high momentum of returns was maintained in May,
June, July and August, when more than 4,000 refugees
returned. In July there were, in fact, more than 5,000.
However, since the first of September, the rate of
return has slowed to a trickle, with 119 returns in
September, 37 in October and 72 so far in November,
of whom 52 returned only yesterday.

However, it has to be recognized that the
repatriation of refugees to Timor-Leste has been a
veritable success story. Out of about 260,000 refugees,
nearly 223,000 have returned to Timor-Leste since the
refugee repatriation movements assisted by UNHCR
and IOM. began three years ago. This figure must be
seen in perspective. As I mentioned in my statement, it
represents a return of over 25 per cent of the entire
population of Timor-Leste.

The return of refugees is motivated by several
factors, such as reconciliation meetings and the work
of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. After the latest visit, over three days,
by President Gusmao and others, there is the
expectation that the process of refugee return will pick

up.

With regard to relations with Indonesia, which
was alluded to by many delegations, I am happy to
state that this core relationship, guided by the political
leadership in both countries, is developing in a most
cooperative and mutually beneficial manner. The visit
of President Megawati to Timor-Leste for the
Independence Day celebration and that of President
Gusmao to Indonesia on 2 and 3 July - when the Joint
Ministerial Commission was constituted - and an
early meeting of the Commission on 8 and 9 October
and the positive results achieved in the Commission are
to be saluted. In this connection I would like to express
my deep gratitude for the gracious reception accorded
to me by the leadership of Indonesia in the course of
my visit.

A reference was made to a phase five in West
Timor. I believe that this issue is being discussed
between the United Nations Security Coordinator and
the Government of Indonesia.

Another point raised concerned assets and
compensation. A reference was made to the zero option
in this connection. It is true that some statements were
made earlier in which the zero option was
recommended from the side of the Government of
Timor-Leste as a possible solution. However, during
the recent meeting of the Joint Commission this matter
was further discussed, and I wish to inform the Council
that the meeting agreed to seek comprehensive
solutions in the interests of further strengthening
cooperation between close neighbours on residual legal
matters such as assets - private, individual, corporate
and government. In addition, both parties agreed in
principle to find innovative settlements on corporate
assets through conversion of those assets for
Indonesian investment, including joint ventures. Both
parties have agreed to hold a technical meeting within
six months, before the second meeting of the Joint
Commission. We can greet this forward-looking
decisions.

On the question of delimitation of land and sea
borders, which was also referred to, I would like to
state that, at the same meeting of the Joint
Commission, it was decided that the two issues should
be treated separately. The Joint Border Committee was
revived in order to attend to the question of the land
border, on which I have already given the details, but it
was decided that issues relating to marine affairs would
be relegated to another subcommittee of the Joint
Commission because marine affairs involve many
issues which should be attended to holistically, such as
environment and pollution, fisheries, the economic
zone, piracy and shipping issues.

On the issue of benchmarking, the question was
raised of whether we would be able to follow the
excellent example of Mr. Michael Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo.
Here, I would like to provide the clarification that we
are, indeed, developing and assessing the benchmarks
for UNMISET's mandates, and we would be happy to
share them. But I trust that the distinction will be
appreciated that, with the emergence of a sovereign and
independent Timor-Leste, the benchmarks for the
country as a whole should be those that it decides for
itself. They are nonetheless fairly precise, specific and
measurable, and are contained in the National
Development Plan of Timor-Leste, copies of which can
be easily procured.

One delegation asked whether we could shed
some light on the current economic and budgetary
situation. UNMISET tries to be extremely active in
promoting various forms of useful economic activity
and in giving such advice as we think would be
appropriate, even in the economic field. With regard to
the specific matter of the budgetary and economic
situation, however, I would suggest that a better and,
certainly, more reliable source would be the institutions
of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. I will be discussing this requirement, expressed
by delegations, and we will be indicating on our web
site - which I trust representatives will find
interesting in its own right - how that information can
be accessed by those who are interested. The address of
the site is www.unmiset.org.

You will be relieved, Mr. President, to know that
I am now drawing to a close. I thought I should speak
at some length because of the great engagement of the
various delegations that have spoken. I trust that the
few comments that I have made have been useful for
delegations.

In conclusion, I would like just to allude to
observations made by one delegation that Timor-Leste
has an advantage in being a latecomer among the
comity of nations, inasmuch as it can learn from the
mistakes of others. That is a very pertinent observation.
The current leadership of that country is in a unique
and historic position. Surely it will be considering the
work that it does now from the perspective of how it
will be seen in about 20 years' time, when people look
back at the country's history and see the direction that
the first leadership gave to it. I am confident that the
vision that must be demonstrated to the country and the
world will, indeed, be there - now and for later
generations.

The same delegation said that we must get the
pace of transition right, and I would like to conclude on
that point. We have to ensure not only that UNMISET
does its work satisfactorily but also that it prepares the
ground for a transition that is seamless and painless
and that propels the nation of Timor-Leste forward
with confidence, socially, politically and economically.

