Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too should like to express our gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting,
and also to Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
very comprehensive briefing.

The Russian Federation considers it deeply
symbolic that our meeting today is taking place
practically on the first anniversary of the popular
consultation on the status of East Timor. Looking back
over the events of this year, we cannot but recall the
casualties and destruction which came in the wake of
the proclamation of the results of the consultation, and
the not-indifferent reactions on the part of the world
community to events in East Timor. The United
Nations and its Security Council have made a
contribution on a par with their mission to ensure peace
in this region. This policy should be continued.

Clearly the anniversary does not detract from our
evaluating the priorities of today. As in any other
sphere, positive achievements are interspersed with
negative developments. Among the former, naturally,
we must include the efforts aimed at national
reconciliation and, for example, such a welcome
development as the opening in Dili of the first
employment centre.

Among the factors of concern, we find it
necessary to recall the cessation, as of 22 August, of
operations of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in West Timor, which Mr.
Annabi told us about, in response to the beating of
humanitarian staff at the hands of the so-called militias.
We express our satisfaction at the intention to resume
this activity. We consider that the problem of refugee
camps located in the Indonesian part of the island
should be resolved if possible in the shortest time. In
this connection we are hopeful, in light of the new
plans announced by the Indonesian authorities in this
sphere. At any rate, we would like to underscore the
need to ensure the security of United Nations and
international staff.

In conclusion, we wish to express the hope that
the second year of the transition to independence in
East Timor will prove richer in good news.

