The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Emanuel Issoze-
Ngondet, Permanent Representative of Gabon, for his
excellent stewardship as President of the Security
Council for the month of March 2010. I am sure I
speak for all members in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Issoze-Ngondet and his able team for
their productivity and the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council's business last
month. We are very grateful to them.

Also, as this is the first time that the Council is
meeting in this new temporary Chamber, I should like
to say that there may be some inconveniences for
members of the Council and for those attending
meetings. But I hope we will make the best use of this
arrangement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning Iraq

First report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009)
(S/2010/166)

Letter dated 18 March 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/153)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests that
Mr. Abdul Basit Turky Saed, head of Iraq's Committee
of Financial Experts, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite Mr. Turky Saed to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Turky Saed
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
also agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jun Yamazaki,
Controller of the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Yamazaki to take a seat at the Council
table.

I welcome Mr. Turky Saed and Mr. Yamazaki to
the Council.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I would like draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/ 166, which contains the
first report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009), as well as to
document S/2010/153, which contains the text of a
letter dated 18 March 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Iraq addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
two briefings, first from Mr. Turky Saed and,
subsequently, from Mr. Yamazaki. I now give the floor
to Mr. Turky Saed.


