Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. The United States shares
everyone's concern about the heightened tensions in
Jerusalem. All parties should work to reduce these
tensions, and we offer whatever assistance we can
in helping to do that. At the holy sites, it is vital that
both access and security be ensured. In keeping with
Mr. Mladenov's recommendation, I am going to refrain
from further comment on this sensitive issue in the
hope that wisdom will prevail over emotions.

This is our monthly gathering to discuss the Middle
East. The complicated and seemingly unending conflict
there is frustrating to many Americans. It is frustrating
to me. But truth be told, the Security Council often makes
the Middle East more complicated than it actually is. It
obsesses over Israel, and it refuses to acknowledge one
ofthe chief sources of conflict and killing in the Middle
East. That is Iran and its partner militia, the Lebanese
Hizbullah. Hizbullah is a terrorist organization. In
its own words, it is "dedicated to the destruction of
Israel". It has the blood of hundreds of Americans and
thousands of others on its hands. Together with its
Iranian patron, Hizbullah seeks to cause destruction
throughout the Middle East. Some regard Hizbullah as
having two wings: a terrorist wing and a political and
social wing. This is a convenient excuse for Hizbullah,
but it is dangerous fiction. Just because a terrorist
group also promotes political candidates for office does
not make it any less a terrorist group.

For a glimpse of Hizbullah's true nature, we need
look no further than its work on behalf of the Syrian
dictator. From its base in Lebanon, Hizbullah sends
its men into Syria. There, they have been responsible
for some of the bloodiest campaigns of a very bloody
war. They are returning to Lebanon battle-hardened
and their presence in Syria keeps open their supply
route of sophisticated weapons from Iran. Simply put,
Hizbullah has grown stronger. It is preparing its men
and its arsenal for a future war. None of this is secret.
The leader of Hizbullah boasts about the destruction
that his group of capable of. He talks openly about the
support Iran provides. Hizbullah even takes journalists
on tours of its military operations on the border that
Lebanon shares with Israel - operations that are in
defiance of the Council.

It is no secret where the United Nations stands
either. It has adopted multiple resolutions calling on
Hizbullah to disarm. It has called on the Lebanese
State to exercise control over its territory. But neither
of these things has happened. The trend is very much
in the opposite direction. Hizbullah openly defies these
resolutions and impedes the Lebanese Government's
ability to exercise full control over its territory. For too
long, the Security Council has chosen to pretend that
the status quo is acceptable to the people of Lebanon. It
is not. Hizbullah's illegal weapons build-up is putting
the people of Lebanon in great danger. Remarkably, the
Council has not even been able to bring itself to use the
word "Hizbullah" in recent resolutions or statements
on Lebanon. Many here are happy to name Israel time
after time, but Hizbullah is somehow off limits. It is
absurd; worse than that, it is dangerous.

The least the American people expect from the
Council is to acknowledge the obvious threats that
are right in front of us. How can I explain to them that
there is a terrorist organization preparing its men and
its arsenal for war, but that the United Nations refuses
to even say its name. That must change. We must
show Hizbullah that it cannot get away with its illegal
weapons. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) has an important role to play. The United
States supports UNIFIL, but there is much more that
UNIFIL should do to help prevent another conflict. It
can begin by acknowledging what is happening right
under its nose. There are reports of UNIFIL not fully
investigating alleged violations. Sometimes it fails to
report what its investigators have found. If UNIFIL
cannot acknowledge illegal weapons that Hizbullah
parades in front of the media, one wonders what else
it is missing. We will have more to say about UNIFIL
when its mandate is up for renewal next month.
The American people sympathize with the
challenges facing the Lebanese people. We will continue
to support them as they combat the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and host over a million refugees.
We understand that the issues in the Middle East are
complex, but we also understand right and wrong, and
we expect our leaders to know the difference as well.
Hizbullah is a destructive terrorist force. It is a major
obstacle to peace and the dangers it poses are getting
larger, not smaller. Simply acknowledging this and
saying it aloud would be a significant step forward,
but we must do more than that. We must begin to get
serious about enforcing our own resolutions that have
been routinely violated by Iran and Hizbullah.

