Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Today's debate is timely as
it coincides with the conclusion of the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), which will
provide useful guidance for Member States in their
implementation of the resolution.

Pakistan has been a consistent supporter of
the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), and our
commitment to its implementation has remained second
to none. It is in the interests of all States to prevent the
proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction to States as
well as non-State actors. During the open consultations
conducted under the comprehensive review, we, along
with many other States, stressed that its emphasis
should be on an effective, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States,
across the board, rather than on expanding its scope.
Resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today, reflects the
balance required to make the mechanism more effective.

Improved matchmaking by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
making it more responsive to requests by States for
assistance, is imperative. In that regard, we welcome
provisions along those lines in resolution 2325 (2016).
Closer cooperation between the Security Council and
international and regional organizations is needed in
order to coordinate activities so as to avoid duplication
and to focus on the most important areas.

Resolution 1540 (2004) has positively contributed
to the advancement of non-proliferation goals. Its
success owes less to its representing action under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations than
to the cooperative approach that it has engendered
aimed at promotinng implementation. The resolution
stresses the importance of engagement with States and
recognizes the voluntary nature of country visits, which
are to be conducted at the invitation of States. That
is expected to enhance ownership of the resolution's
implementation. We would also like to highlight the
resolution's provisions that none of the obligations in
resolution 1540 (2004) should be interpreted in such a
way as to alter the responsibilities of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

Let me underscore Pakistan's commitment to its
non-proliferation obligations, including the steps taken
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Pakistan has submitted four national implementation
reports under the resolution. Our fifth report on its
implementation will be submitted shortly, and, next
February, we will organize a seminar on promoting
better implementation of the resolution at the
regional level.

Pakistan has elaborated and implemented a
comprehensive export-control regime that is fully
harmonized with those of the Nuclear Suppliers Group
(NSG), the Missile Technology Control Regime and
the Australia Group. We have also declared voluntary
adherence to NSG guidelines. Pakistan is participating
in the IAEA Incident and Trafficking Database. We
have effectively participated in and contributed to the
Nuclear Security Summit process. Our ratification of
the 2005 amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and our adherence to the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) guidelines are among
the recent steps that we have taken. Pakistan has been
an active partner of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism since its inception, in 2007, and has
contributed to the development of its guidelines. We
declared a unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing and
offered to translate that into a bilateral arrangement on
non-testing with India.

Those credentials clearly establish Pakistan's
eligibility to become a member ofthe NSG. The grant of
waivers to long-standing non-proliferation regimes and
rules carries obvious proliferation risks and undermines
regional strategic stability. It is therefore critical that
an equitable, non-discriminatory and criteria-based
approach to promoting civil nuclear cooperation and
membership in export controls regimes, in particular
that of the NSG, be adopted.

