Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): The Nicaraguan delegation joins in the
congratulations that have been conveyed to you, Sir, on
your wise conduct of the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you for having convened
today's important meeting.

The proliferation of all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery is of ongoing
concern to the international community because of the
threat it represents to the very existence of humankind.
That concern first arose during the First World War, in
which there was massive use of mustard gas and the
spread of infections through pathogenic bacteria. It was
on a day like today in 1915 that the town of Ypres in
France was attacked with asphyxiating gas by enemy
forces. The terrible and massive use of such weapons
in that war led in 1925 to the drafting of the Geneva
Protocol, which prohibited the use of asphyxiating,
poisonous or other gases, and of bacteriological
methods of warfare.

In the early 1930s, the League of Nations
attempted to achieve a complete prohibition of those
weapons of mass destruction that existed at that time,
but it failed. It was only following the Second World
War and the creation of the United Nations that some
results were seen with the drafting of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction, which was adopted
in General Assembly resolution 2826 (XXVI) and
came into force in 1975.

In 1992, after a decade of intensive negotiations,
agreement was reached on the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,
which came into force on 29 April 1997. This was the
first treaty adopted in the multilateral context to ban an
entire category of weapons of mass destruction.

In another connection, a world non-proliferation
regime was established on the basis of the 1968 Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, based on
the safeguards system of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, with the aim of preventing the
diversion of nuclear materials into military and other
banned activities. Likewise of great importance is the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material of 3 March 1980, which recognizes the
legitimate peaceful uses of nuclear energy by States,
but charges them with the responsibility of preventing
the illegal use or seizure of nuclear material.

Notwithstanding the implementation of those
international conventions and other global, regional
and bilateral instruments by the vast majority of
Member States, transnational terrorist groups have
found sophisticated means to circumvent, to a certain
extent, the substance of those instruments. The
instruments must be strengthened in order to prevent
barbaric terrorist acts from unleashing, by means of
such weaponry, catastrophes in terms of human lives
lost and material damage, such as those reflected in the
images recently broadcast on television of Kurds
massacred in Northern Iraq by asphyxiating gas in
1988; the 1995 sarin gas attack in the Tokyo subway;
or the disastrous consequences of the 11 September
2001 attack in the United States and the 11 March 2004
attack in Madrid. We must also prevent the diversion of
nuclear technologies, such as has occurred between
countries.
The draft resolution being discussed in the Security
Council largely fulfils that purpose. The document
appeals to all States to cooperate, in conformity with their
national legislation and international law, in adopting
measures and establishing domestic controls to prevent
any form of support for non-State actors in developing,
acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting,
transferring or using nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery, while
establishing domestic controls over such weapons.

It also appeals to all States to cooperate among
themselves, in conformity with their national
legislation and international law, in preventing the
illicit trafficking of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons, their delivery systems and related materials.
The draft resolution further urges Member States to
promote the universal adoption of, full compliance
with and, where necessary, the strengthening of
multilateral treaties, particularly those designed to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons.

My delegation recognizes the need to enhance the
coordination of efforts at the global, regional and
bilateral levels to prevent terrorist acts, which may
involve thousands of innocent victims, from recurring.
To that end, we believe it necessary to intensify our
response to that evil, in keeping with the provisions of
the United Nations Charter, since the gravity of such
acts poses a threat to humankind and to international
peace and security.

