Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to contribute today. We
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2010/181), Radhika Coomaraswamy for the
outstanding role she continues to play as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mexico
for its long and commendable history of promoting the
issue of children in armed conflict, including by having
convened today's debate.

As we sit in the comfort of this Chamber, it is
nearing 9 pm. in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, 11 pm. in the Sudan and 3 am. in Myanmar.
And as we speak, in such places and elsewhere,
children are being handed guns and told to fight,
suffering the vilest forms of sexual assault, abuse and
rape, or are being disfigured, maimed or even
murdered.

Member States, the various organs of the United
Nations and the Security Council all have a vital role to
play in protecting such children, and there has been
some progress on that. For example, New Zealand
welcomes the efforts of those countries that have been
de-listed from the annexes of the Secretary-General's
report and of others that have committed to action
plans. We also welcome the fact that child protection
enjoys a high profile on the Council's agenda.

However, while there has been progress, much
remains to be done. In the interests of time, I will
highlight just four recommendations that New Zealand
considers important.

First, while we welcome their highlighted listing
in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2010/ 181), it
is distressing that there are still 16 parties that, in that
context, have recruited, maimed, killed, raped or
sexually violated children for at least five years. Those
parties are ignoring international law, as well as
Council resolutions, presidential statements and
conclusions, and more needs to be done to hold them
accountable. In line with the Secretary-General's
recommendations, we encourage the Council to include
the recruitment and use of children in the mandates of
its sanctions committees; to ensure that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is asked to
brief those committees more regularly; and to prioritize
persistent violators on its agenda. We encourage the
Council to refer persistent violators to existing
sanctions committees and to consider other targeted
measures where no sanctions committee exists.

Secondly, we urge those countries concerned to
allow United Nations contact teams to meet with
non-State armed groups to enable them to prepare
action plans and carry out other protection measures.
And we ask the Council to take a more active role to
ensure that contact. We note, for example, that
Government restrictions prevent the United Nations
country team in Myanmar from contacting non-State
armed groups. That greatly hinders its monitoring and
verification activities and means that action plans
cannot be concluded.

Thirdly, New Zealand advocates the Security
Council's taking a more active role to ensure that
parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
reports develop and execute action plans with clear
timelines. The Council should ensure that any
non-compliance with those plans is promptly dealt
with, using the full range of tools at the disposal of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Fourthly, there has been a disturbing increase in
the number of politically and ideologically motivated
attacks on and threats to teachers, students and
educational facilities. We call on the Security Council,
in line with international law and its presidential
statement of 29 April last year (S/PRST/2009/9), to
take a more active role in bringing those violations to
an end. One possible step could be for country task
forces of the monitoring and reporting mechanism to
improve the level of information in their reports on the
motivations for and extent of attacks on schools. In his
annual and country-specific reports, the Secretary-
General could also detail effective strategies for the
prevention of such attacks and to improve response and
accountability.

Another step could be the more concrete
inclusion of child protection, including access to and
the quality and political neutrality of education, in
future Council outcomes on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Eventually, the monitoring and
reporting mechanism triggers could be expanded to
include attacks on schools.

Those are just four steps that could be taken to
protect children. There are others, and the ongoing and
systematic commitment of the Security Council,
Member States, the United Nations and its organs is
required to ensure overall action and compliance. In
addressing this matter, we should also keep in mind
that one of the most effective ways of ensuring the
well-being of children is to protect their parents, and
that requires the ongoing action of States to protect
civilians in armed conflicts, especially women.

In that respect, New Zealand ensures a conflict-
sensitive approach in its development assistance to the
education and health sectors of fragile States, including
human rights education; provides support for the
elimination of gender-based violence; and works to
foster sustainable and equitable economic
development. All of this contributes to building a safe
environment where parents and children see options for
their future beyond the perpetuation of conflict.

I note that, because of insufficient age
determination procedures, the Afghan National Police
(ANP) is listed in annex I of the Secretary-General's
report. New Zealand welcomes the fact that the ANP
already has measures in place to verify the minimum
age of recruits, and we encourage its ongoing
commitment, as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, to additional measures to verify the age of
recruits, as the Afghan National Army has already
done. We hope that the implementation of such
measures will lead to the de-listing of the ANP, and we
encourage the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, UNICEF and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to work
closely with the ANP to implement those measures.

Those children in the deserts, jungles and forests
of whom I spoke and who, as we speak, are being
forced to fight, are being raped, maimed or even
murdered are the children that we must think of during
this debate. It is our collective duty to protect them.
