Ms. Kamara (Liberia): Liberia joins previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate on the all-important issue of post-
conflict peacebuilding. It conforms to the tradition
of Morocco's active involvement in the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations. It
is also reflective of the Security Council's continued
interest in, and commitment to, peacebuilding as part
of its larger responsibility for international peace and
security, which we commend.

We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2012/ 746), which records the progress achieved
in the United Nations support for peacebuilding
activities in conflict-affected countries and charts
future directions for the improvement of peacebuilding
interventions by the United Nations system and its
Member States. The emphasis on inclusivity resonates
well, because we know that marginalization, alienation
and the culture of exclusive politics are root causes
of conflict. The report's embrace of the principles of
institution-building and statebuilding as core elements
of peacebuilding is very encouraging. As a member
of the Group of Seven Plus, Liberia subscribes to
those principles and believes that they are critical to
preventing a relapse into conflict and to building the
resilience of States.

Current trends, reflecting growing collaboration
and cooperation between conflict-affected countries
and the wider international community, have given
peacebuilding in post-conflict settings a new dimension
and dynamism. That cooperation can evolve into
partnership when both parties agree on peacebuilding
arrangements that are country-specific, avoid the
one-solution-fits-all approach and ensure burden-
sharing in implementing agreed strategies.

Two years ago, Liberia was placed on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
That engagement followed earlier efforts by the
United Nations to strengthen peace dividends by the
infusion of emergency funding for peacebuilding
activities. The direct engagement with the PBC,
however, has provided an opportunity for Liberia to
focus singularly on critical areas requiring urgent
resuscitation - the security sector, the rule of law
and national reconciliation. The responsibilities and
accountabilities of both the Government and the PBC
for achieving agreed objectives are encapsulated in a
statement of mutual commitments. The partnership is
driving a set of programmes and interventions that have
become indispensable to the attainment of sustainable
peace in Liberia.

The support of the peacebuilding architecture,
specifically the Liberia configuration of the PBC, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, together with the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, has been critical to the progress achieved in
implementing strategies for reform of the security
sector and the judiciary. They have also played a
catalytic role in engendering support from bilateral
partners. Through various cooperation arrangements,
including South-South and triangular cooperation,
institutions are being created and rehabilitated. That
includes the development of policy and infrastructure
as well as capacity enhancement to benefit the national
police, the immigration service and the judiciary.

Most notable among the programmes are plans for
the construction of five justice and security hubs at
strategic locations throughout the country, one of which
is nearing completion. The hubs will contribute to the
achievement of multiple objectives, which include, for
justice institutions, decentralization and better delivery
of their services; for citizens, greater access to justice
mechanisms and a stronger sense of security; and, for
the State, the extension of its authority throughout the
entire territory of the country, in order to better provide
protection to its people and more effectively monitor its
borders. The completion of the justice hubs will bring
monumental change, especially for Liberians in the
hinterland of the country, who have suffered the effects
of isolation and marginalization.

National reconciliation is ultimately one of the
most secure foundations upon which to build durable
peace. For Liberia, reconciliation is paramount for
national recovery, because it is only by addressing
historical ethnic and social cleavages that the social
fabric of Liberian society can be firmly restored.
That is why the development of a plan for national
reconciliation was prioritized in Liberia's partnership
with the PBC. With critical technical support from the
United Nations Development Programme, a road map
for national reconciliation was crafted. It benefited
from consultations with the Liberia configuration.
Most importantly, the road map received overwhelming
support and validation from the Liberian people
through country-wide consultations. I am pleased
to say that the road map was formally endorsed at a
national conference convened last week, together with
a national vision for Liberia up to 2030.

We know that peacebuilding does not come
without challenges. That is a normal phenomenon and
not peculiar to Liberia. As peacebuilding is a process
to be approached from a long-term perspective, it is
important to manage expectations for immediate or at
least speedy results.

Secondly, there is the challenge of predictable
and sustained financial resources, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report, which, when lacking,
generate uncertainty and anxiety. While the PBF is a
stabilizing force in that regard, there is an expectation
of greater fulfilment of the PBC mandate for resource
mobilization. Strong partnerships, including with the
international financial institutions, are important. My
Government's responsibility to ensure the sustainability
of the investments made in the agreed priority areas is
also a challenge, which is being met through gradual
increases in budget allocations to specific sectors.

Looking to the future, we can say that the
implementation of all planned peacebuilding activities
in Liberia will bring transformational change. We
look forward to that eventuality. In the meantime, we
remain appreciative of all of our partners, including
those who are involved with the various United Nations
peacebuilding entities or who are part of the United
Nations system, for their steadfast support. We urge
them to continue to accompany Liberia on the path to
sustainable peace.

Our thanks go to the members of the Liberia
configuration for their support. A special word of
appreciation is offered to Sweden, which has assumed
the current chairmanship of the configuration on a full-
time basis. Sweden is also playing a pivotal role on the
ground in Monrovia in coordinating donor inputs and
ensuring an integrated approach to meeting needs in
priority areas, including the requirements for a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

