The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Director-
General of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov; Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011); and Ms. Wazhma
Frogh, founding member of Women and Peace Studies
Organization and member of Afghanistan's High Peace
Council, for their comprehensive briefings.

As the lead country of the Afghanistan file, Japan
has been seeking a broad range of opinions from
Member States, international organizations and civil
society. I appreciate our colleagues, in particular
Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for supporting our
work in the Council and useful inputs throughout 2017.
During our term, we have tried to facilitate the Council's
discussion on Afghanistan, taking into account the
dynamic and changing situation on the ground. The
Council successfully streamlined the text of resolution
2344 (2017) on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in March in order to
crystallize the Mission's core mandate and critical
issues we should address.

The strategic review of the Secretary-General in
August provided the Council with important findings.
It is regrettable that we were not able to have an
opportunity to deeply discuss the way to incorporate
those findings into the next mandate, but Japan believes
that the next penholder and Council members will
skilfully accomplish this task. The Council's mission
to Afghanistan, which is scheduled in January, will
give it first-hand information and fresh input conducive
for upcoming discussions towards the next mandate
renewal. We will follow these discussions with great
interest after we have left the Council.

One of the most important findings of the strategic
review is that Afghanistan is not yet in a post-conflict
situation where sufficient stability exists to focus
on institution-building and development-oriented
activities. This position obviously coincides with well-
used concepts, such as "self-reliance" and "Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned". We have repeatedly expressed
our full commitment to continuing our support for
Afghanistan so that Afghanistan will achieve self-
reliance to the point where donors no longer need to
announce multi-year pledges.

It was noteworthy that Special Representative
Yamamoto used the phrase "Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned" in the context not only of the peace process,
but also of the electoral preparations. Japan will
extend the necessary support for such Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned elections. Meanwhile, on the timing, we
strongly call on the Government of Afghanistan to hold
parliamentary and district council elections in 2018.

Sadly, the briefing by Special Representative
Yamamoto today again revealed the harsh and volatile
security situations in Afghanistan. In the short term,
the tireless efforts of the Afghan security forces to push
back the Taliban and conduct anti-terrorism operations
are crucial, but in the long run only genuine progress on
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process will
be able to provide significant security improvements.

Japan is aware of UNAMA's potential role in the
peace process. However, we do not see unity among
regional stakeholders on this issue and are worried that
the lack of common understanding may exacerbate the
environment for the Afghan Government in advancing
the peace process. Therefore, Japan hopes that the
second round of the Kabul process in February next
year will yield tangible steps and clarify the role of
UNAMA in the peace process.

Today's briefing by the Director-General of
UNODC was alarming. Opium poppy cultivation and
illicit trafficking of opiates fuel instability and violent
extremism. Japan has been cooperating with the
UNODC and some Member States on counter-narcotics
and will continue such efforts. We are providing support
to allow Afghans to fight poverty not with poppies but
with the revival of their legitimate agricultural sector.
We believe that Afghanistan's expanded agricultural
productivity allows it to export products to neighbouring
countries, thereby strengthening regional cooperation.

Afghanistan possesses the potential for self-
reliance. The Council and the international community
are committed to extending support for Afghanistan in
its efforts to move towards peace and stability and to
undertake institution-building and development. We
should strive to see that commitment implemented and
help provide for a better future for Afghanistan and
its people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

