Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank the Chinese presidency
for having organized this important and timely debate
on strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa. I
thank also the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their thorough and constructive briefings
this morning.

We also condemn the recent attacks on Blue
Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
express our condolences in connection with the deaths
of peacekeepers from Tanzania and Malawi.

Brazil has a long history of engagement with
United Nations peace efforts and has actively taken
part in several peacekeeping operations on the African
continent. From the outset, we contributed to the
United Nations Emergency Force in Suez, from 1956
to 1967, and to the United Nations Operation in the
Congo, from 1960 to 1964. We also made important
troop contributions to the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique and to the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission. Over the years, our troops have
been recognized for their discipline, performance and
ability to operate in complex scenarios.

Currently, Brazil contributes police, military
observers and staff officers to six United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Africa, and Brazilian
General Elias Martins is the Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition
to deploying troops, Brazil is also engaged in the
predeployment training of African military engineers
through triangular partnership projects.
The Brazilian Peace Operations Joint Training
Center is an important means of promoting the
exchange of best practices between Brazil and African
countries in peacekeeping missions. Through bilateral
channels, Brazil has also engaged with African
partners in cooperation projects aimed at strengthening
peacekeeping capacities. For instance, the Brazilian
army currently maintains cooperation initiatives with
several African countries, including Cabo Verde,
Ethiopia, Mozambique, Namibia, Sao Tome and
Principe, and South Africa.

From ourvast collective experience in peacekeeping,
we can draw important lessons and identify good
practices that are useful to address challenges and
explore opportunities for an effective United Nations
engagement in peace efforts in Africa. A common trait
of successful peacekeeping missions is that they work
in close collaboration with United Nations agencies
and international partners involved with the promotion
of sustainable development. We must ensure that
long-term peacebuilding and development strategies
remain effective before, during and after the temporary
engagement of peacekeepers.

As they are the most important United Nations
presence in conflict settings, peacekeepers have
a fundamental role to play as a platform for early
peacebuilding. In order to fulfil their mandates,
peacekeeping missions are often required to help
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants, as
well as to assist in the rebuilding and strengthening
of local institutions and the promotion of the rule of
law. They should also have some flexibility to carry
out targeted and concrete quick-impact projects. Those
are responsibilities that will ultimately lead to greater
stability and allow for mission drawdown.

Another recommendation we would make on the
basis of previous experience is that a limited set of core
political goals should guide every task we assign to
our peacekeeping missions in Africa. Peacekeeping is
meant to be a temporary but decisive endeavour.

Moreover, Security Council mandates should
always be matched by the necessary human and
financial resources. The viability of a mission's tasks
and the need for the prioritization and sequencing of
mandates must be assessed coherently.

It is essential that the African perspective be
taken into account in decision-making processes
on all African issues, particularly the mandates
of peacekeeping missions on the continent. Only
through a reform of the Security Council, with the
expansion of both the permanent and non-permanent
categories of membership, can the issue of the
representation of African and developing countries be
adequately addressed.

The prerogatives of being a permanent member of
the Security Council involve special responsibilities
in the funding of the Council's decisions. It is not
reasonable to expect developing countries to have
additional financial responsibilities with regard to
peacekeeping operations without a corresponding
reform of the composition of the Security Council. We
also believe that the funding of the special political
missions established by the Security Council should
follow the peacekeeping scale of assessments.

A final point I would like to make is the need
for partnerships. We cannot expect our peacekeeping
missions in Africa to carry out the ambitious role
we want them to play without fluid cooperation with
African regional and subregional organizations, which
have increasingly assumed responsibility for security
issues on the continent.

By strengthening United Nations support for
African missions, we can make full use of Chapter
VIII of the Charter and promote African ownership in
addressing its peace and security challenges. However,
neither the principles nor best the interests of the United
Nations and Africa will be served if such support is
disproportionately focused on military operations once
conflict has broken out. Supporting the primacy of
African politics in preventing and peacefully solving
African problems should be part and parcel of a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to enhance
African capabilities in the area of peace and security.

African Union operations pursuing mandates
established by the Security Council must be adequately
funded. It is important that in-depth discussions be held
in the General Assembly, particularly on any case in
which assessed contributions might be considered.

As we are celebrating this year the centenary of the
birth of Nelson Mandela, let me end my intervention by
quoting his words:

"To be free is not merely to cast off one's chains,
but to live in a way that respects and enhances the
freedom of others".

Madiba's message makes solidarity a condition
for the full realization of freedom. That is exactly the
promise of the Security Council's global collective
security mechanism, whose bedrock concept is that
global peace is indivisible. Freeing Africa from
conflict, poverty and violent extremism is indeed a
global responsibility, and United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Africa are a necessary tool for us to achieve
that goal.

