Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the state of the overall work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) since the last report (see S/PV.8364), in
accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution 2395 (2017).

Terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
still pose a significant challenge to Member States
and a grave threat to international peace and security.
Terrorist groups are also tending to shift their focus
towards more localized narratives, marked by a greater
focus on local or national issues. Our major concerns
are further exacerbated not only by the activities of the
foreign terrorist fighters who remain in the conflict zones
but also by returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters and their family members and the potential risk
posed by the forthcoming release of imprisoned foreign
terrorist fighters, including frustrated travellers. Other
forms of violent extremism conducive to terrorism
have also evolved to include individuals or groups that
commit violence motivated by racism, intolerance,
misogyny, anti-Semitism or Islamophobia.

Member States continue to face complex challenges
in responding to the threat of terrorism and I wish to
briefly highlight a few of those.

First, the past six months have seen an escalation of
violence against soft targets and places of worship, not
limited to any one denomination or faith, including in
Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger, New Zealand, Sri Lanka
and the United States.

Secondly, the evolving threat posed by terrorists
and by foreign terrorist fighter returnees, relocators
and their family members is a further major challenge,
which requires a holistic approach in the light of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
enhanced use of international tools and measures to
detect and prevent their travel and to stop them from
committing crimes.

Thirdly, terrorist groups, including ISIL and its
affiliates, as well as lone actors, have consistently
demonstrated their intent and ability to exploit
new technologies.

Finally, States are increasingly concerned about the
use of improvised explosive devices in terrorist attacks
around the world.

To support Member States in overcoming the
challenges that I have mentioned above, the Committee
has been undertaking several activities with the
support of CTED. The assessment of the performance
and implementation efforts of Member States continues
to be the central task of the Committee and CTED,
pursuant to the relevant Council resolutions. Such
assessment visits have enabled the Committee to engage
in in-depth dialogue with visited States, identifying
progress, strengths, gaps, technical assistance needs
and effective practices in the various implementation
measures under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and have provided such States with a road
map for the implementation of those recommendations.
In February, the Committee adopted a list of
country visits for 2019. Since our last joint briefing,
CTED has conducted five assessment visits on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and we have
received consent from a further 10 Member States to
receive visits this year.

In my capacity as Chair of the Committee, I
encourage Member States that have not yet done so
to consider providing their consent. I would also like
to recall that the Committee and CTED have been
working closely with the Visited Member States to
encourage them to share their respective assessments
with other partners within the United Nations system
and beyond. Since our previous joint briefing, we have
received approval from Switzerland to share its entire
assessment, including on steps taken to implement the
Committee's visit recommendations, not only with
our partners but also with interested Member States
upon request.

The Committee continues to undertake review
and stocktaking of Member States' implementation
efforts through its assessment tools - the overview
of implementation assessment and the detailed
implementation survey - which help CTED monitor
and promote the implementation by Member States
of all the relevant resolutions, based on its working
method of thoroughness, consistency, transparency and
even-handedness.

Among other activities, in my capacity as a Chair, I

have participated in high-level consultations with Spain
and NATO to identify possible areas of cooperation in
areas of common interest. The Committee organized an
open briefing on the connection between terrorism and
organized crime in October 2018 and, more recently,
a joint special meeting to exchange views on the
regional aspects of that issue. In February 2019, CTED
issued a report entitled Identifying and Exploring the
Nexus between Human Trafi'icking, Terrorism and
Terrorism Financing, on the correlation of those three
elements. CTED will continue to devote its attention
to the organized crime and terrorism linkages in its
engagement with Member States, including in the
context of the country visits conducted on behalf of
the Committee.

The Committee welcomes the adoption of resolution
2462 (2019) - the first Security Council resolution
to focus on preventing and suppressing terrorism
financing - and highlights the adoption of the 2018
addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles on
foreign terrorist fighters, which provides guidance to
Member States on effective responses to the evolving
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. The CTC and
CTED are working closely with Member States to
promote their effective implementation.

I also wish to give a few examples of our
collaborative efforts to support Member States in
countering the continued threat posed by ISIL. CTED
has been working with other United Nations entities,
including the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT), to finalize guidelines to facilitate the use
and admissibility as evidence of information preserved,
collected and shared by the military. CTED has also
actively promoted the United Nations compendium
of recommended practices for the responsible use
and sharing of biometrics in counter-terrorism. As
terrorists also continue to exploit the Internet and
social media, CTED continues to promote public-
private partnerships to support Member States and
the technology industry. It has also been providing
strategic support for the design of follow-up actions
by the Emergency Task Force on Burkina Faso, in line
with the Committee's recommendations.

CTED, together with UNOCT, INTERPOL and
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities, has drafted the compendium of good practices
on the protection of critical infrastructure, pursuant
to resolution 2341 (2017). The Executive Directorate
is also one of the core partners in the United Nations
Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, which was
launched on 7 May in the presence of the Secretary-
General. The Programme aims to build Member States'
capacities to implement advance passenger information
and passenger name record systems in accordance with
resolution 2396 (2017). In the area of digital evidence,
CTED, together with the International Association of
Prosecutors and UNODC, launched the Practical Guide

for Requesting Electronic Evidence across Borders in
February 2019.

Through its dialogue with Member States and its
relationships with, inter alia, academia and think tanks,
including members of its global research network and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
CTED has continued to analyse emerging threats,
trends and developments. In all our activities, respect
for human rights is of course essential to effectively
countering the terrorism threat. In that regard, the
Committee continues to take careful account of human
rights and rule-of-law issues relevant to counter-
terrorism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Committee also continues to
stress the need to promote whole-of-society approaches
to countering terrorism and violent extremism that is
conducive to terrorism, including by encouraging the
participation of civil society organizations, women's
groups, youth, religious leaders and other actors
concerned. One area in which that is crucial is in
countering terrorist narratives in accordance with the
guidelines set out in resolution 2354 (2017).

The Committee continues to integrate gender
as a cross-cutting issue throughout its activities, in
accordance with resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2395
(2017) and other relevant Security Council resolutions.
As the Council is aware, cooperation with, and among,
international and regional organizations and among the
relevant United Nations entities is essential. Pursuant
to resolution 2349 (2017), CTED recently took part in
a joint high-level mission of the United Nations and
the European Union to Chad to support Member States
and relevant subregional and regional organizations in
the Lake Chad basin region to address the effects of
violence perpetrated by Boko Haram and the Islamic
State's West African Province.

Where needed, we have continued to support
Member States' capacities to address new threats and
challenges, in close cooperation with our partners,
including UNOCT, and we shall continue to work with
our implementing partners to deliver as one United
Nations to match the needs and recommendations set
forth in our visit reports with the appropriate technical
assistance. Technical assistance should of course not
be considered as an alternative to Member States'
fulfilment of their own obligations under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the determination
of the Committee to develop and implement
comprehensive responses to the evolving threat of
terrorism, in close cooperation with its implementing
partners and the relevant stakeholders.

