Mr. Ngundze (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in congratulating Ambassador Djani in his
capacity as the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the
fact that we have the coordinator of the Non-Aligned
Movement Working Group on Disarmament leading
the Committee, and I want to assure Ambassador Djani
of my delegation's support and cooperation. Likewise,
we thank Ambassador Djani for his comprehensive
briefing on the work of the Committee over the past
three months.

Indeed, resolution 1540 (2004) is still one of the
most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors
from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,

transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. South
Africa expresses grave concerns about the catastrophic
consequences of the use or threat of use of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDS), particularly by non-State
actors. South Africa reaffirms that no cause could ever
justify the use of WMDs anywhere, by anyone or under
any circumstances.

In that context, since the dawn of our democracy
in 1994, South Africa has remained steadfast in its
commitment to multilateralism in addressing peace
and security challenges facing the global community,
including the horizontal and vertical proliferation
of WMDs and their means of delivery. South Africa
wishes to reiterate its view that given the existential
threats I have described, the only guarantee that WMDs
will never be used by anyone is their total elimination.

As regards the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), South Africa welcomes the significant progress
made towards its effective implementation, and we
renew our commitment to working with other members
of the Council to address the challenges that remain,
not least in terms of national implementation and
assistance. Furthermore, in dealing with the challenges
of WMDs, it is imperative that no unwarranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
Member States, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that context, the opportunities
provided by nuclear technologies, for example, in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly in the areas of food security,
public health technologies and clean energy, cannot
be overlooked.
South Africa has, over the years, strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focusing on WMDs and their
means of delivery, which included the establishment
of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction, the role of which is to coordinate
the national implementation of our international WMD
obligations and regulations and monitor compliance
across all stakeholders. The Council has also played
an invaluable role in assisting countries in our region
and beyond in strengthening their national controls,
legislation and capacities over sensitive items that may
contribute to the development of WMDs.
South Africa's experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that
the challenges of WMD proliferation can be
overcome by strengthening national legislation and
implementation capabilities, including export controls;
strengthening international cooperation with other
related international organizations and agencies; and
strengthening cooperation with regional organizations,
such as the African Union, as they play a critical role in
the implementation and coordination of resolution 1540
(2004).

Finally, financial and technical assistance is
critically needed to ensure that developing countries
are able to fully implement the resolution, especially on
the continent, where greatest attention is still devoted to
issues of poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment.

In conclusion, the challenges and threats posed
by WMD proliferation and the possible use of them
by non-State actors require the increased cooperation
of the international community. Equally important
is the strengthening and increased capacity of the
relevant multilateral institutions and instruments.
Non-proliferation is not an ultimate goal in itself,
but only a means towards a world free of WMDs and
their means of delivery. Selective and discriminatory
practices will therefore not serve our collective interest
in strengthening peace and security. What is needed is a
balanced implementation of the various legally binding
international instruments, including those covered by
resolution 1540 (2004).

