Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): In recent months, we have witnessed the
development of what we believe to be a new and
important doctrinal approach on the part of the Council
with respect to the concept of threats to international
peace and security and also to questions relating to
peacekeeping operations. Along these lines, we would like
to highlight the case of the multinational force for
Albania that was authorized by the Council in March of
this year. That multinational force was authorized outside
of the traditional framework of United Nations operations,
but it was clearly in conformity with the principles and
objectives of the Charter as regards peacekeeping. We
also should recall that the Council approved the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti, replacing the United
Nations Support Mission in Haiti, in July 1997.

The draft resolution before us today is part of this
new approach. In the past, the Council might have
interpreted the case of the Central African Republic as

 

being a matter of internal jurisdiction, and therefore would
not have been seized of it.

Nonetheless, the situation of the Central African
Republic is a vivid example of an internal problem with
international implications. Everyone here is aware of the
complex circumstances in the southern African region and
of the precarious situation, which could deteriorate even
further if the crisis in that country were to intensify.

The case of the Central African Republic is also an
example of the new resolve and commitment on the part of
African countries collectively to tackle and resolve their
own issues.

The work of the countries participating in the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) is clear evidence of joint,
responsible and united action by the African countries. It
brings to mind other recent cases that have come to the
attention of the Council and that have become links in a
chain of peace operations promoted, financed and directed
by the Africans themselves within the framework of the
mechanisms for political agreement that already exist on
that continent.

Costa Rica believes that this constructive and
responsible attitude deserves international support and, of
course, the support of the United Nations, because we are
convinced that the best solutions always come from the
interested parties themselves, particularly if they are geared
towards the establishment of democracy and respect for
human rights throughout Africa. Along these lines, we wish
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
attitude of the countries outside the region that have links
and interests in Africa and that are providing indispensable
logistical support for the success of these peacekeeping
operations.

During the conflict in the former Zaire - today the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - Costa Rica expressed
on various occasions its opinion that a solution to the
problems of southern Africa should necessarily include
economic, social and humanitarian components. Poverty and
injustice are at the root of the political and the security
conflicts of that region and of the developing world in
general.

In the View of my delegation, it is necessary to stress
this aspect on every relevant occasion. International
intervention to maintain the peace in those countries will
not amount to much unless it is accompanied by clear and
resolute actions to promote economic progress, justice and
equality within the framework of respect for the rule of
law and the enforcement of human rights. In this
connection, we believe that this is a timely occasion to
recall the Secretary-General's proposal to hold an
international conference for the reconstruction and
development of southern Africa. This wise proposal
remains fully valid, and we take this opportunity to
encourage the Secretary-General to deploy the necessary
efforts for its prompt implementation.

I should like to conclude this statement by
expressing the strong support of Costa Rica for the
adoption of the draft resolution before us. We are
convinced and trust that today's approval of MISAB will
be developed in keeping with the relevant internationally
recognized principles, and in particular with respect to the
observance of human rights.

