Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President, the United Kingdom Ambassador,
who co-led the mission, and all the members of the
Security Council. On behalf of my Government and on
my own behalf, I thank the Council for having gone to
my country to see first hand what is taking place, to
be informed by the "prime movers of Colombia" - to
quote Ambassador Rosselli - by the State, by civil
society, by ex-combatants, who, as we build peace
through the implementation of the Agreement, need
to be increasingly united. That was also the perceived
goal of the visit and of the Council's message to
Colombia - one of unity and of seizing the enormous
opportunity of having reached a negotiated rather than
elusive peace.

The Council vote of confidence in the peace process
will bear fruit despite the specific difficulties that have
been voiced in the Chamber. We are at a crucial stage
in the peacebuilding process, one in which the support
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General
have been unwavering and, in which my Government
has asked that the process be verified and monitored
through this tripartite mechanism. We are faced with the
formidable challenge of maintaining the methodology
of work on three fronts, which must now transition to
a new process aimed at ensuring the economic, social
and political reintegration of ex-combatants.

I think that this stage of the implementation of
the political mission of the tripartite monitoring and
verification mechanism to ensure the ceasefire and
disarmament timetable has been critical. I will employ
the metaphor used by Ambassador Rycroft, that the
peace process is not longer the bus stuck in the mud but
rather a venture with tangible results. Considering that
the past eight months have resulted in no conflict-related
deaths, no wounded, no attacks on national structures
and no abductions, 2,670 lives have been saved by the
Peace Agreement - as President Santos Calderon
pointed out. Meanwhile, we continue the process of
providing reparations to the victims, which has been
a core issue since the beginning of the negotiations,
as well as land restitution. The degree to which the
victims feel compensated and taken into account will
determine how successfully the deep wounds left by the
protracted Colombian conflict will heal.

The Council's visit to Vista Hermosa showed them
the progress in the laying down of arms, the ceasefire
and the monitoring of such activities. There will,
undoubtedly, be setbacks but we are confident that the

process will proceed according to the agreed timetable,
despite the enormous challenges it entails.

I want to share with the Council another major piece
of news that we heard about yesterday: that another
area in the Andes, in the department of Antioquia, El
Orejon, which over past decades experienced what may
be one of the worst wars ever and was infamous for
being the most heavily mined Colombian municipality,
was visited yesterday by the Foreign Minister and
representatives of the international community, who
certified it as being free of landmines, free of illegal
crops and free of clashes involving the F uerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo.

This model, in which agencies of the Colombian
Government, coordinated in the framework of the border
plan of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
complemented by 17 social and infrastructure projects,
made it possible to deliver results to a community that
include what we hope will be Day D+181, namely, the
first 100 days post-conflict and of the laying down
of arms; to continue the task of rebuilding the first
50 municipalities with respect to their social fabric,
through reconciliation and the strengthening of the
security mechanisms that, as the Council has noted,
are of concern to many people; and to bring to all
Colombians - why not? - that rural prosperity that
has eluded them until now.

Finally, the goals and challenges involved are many.
We acknowledge the Council's concern over the murders
of certain social leaders and human rights defenders, as
reported in recent months. All of the relevant bodies of
the Colombian Government are working to investigate,
capture and bring those responsible to justice. The
authorities have noted that although some cases involve
killings associated with the defence of human rights,
the Government is aware of the damaging presence
of other factors outside the law. They are advancing
negotiations in the area of public security, an area that
we also have to address.

Lastly, as Ambassador Sacha would say, the
Council's support is extraordinary. Truly, on behalf of all
Colombians, I want to say that it was extremely moving
to see its commitment, dedication and determination to
ensure that this exercise was a positive one. I should
like also to thank the Secretariat for all its work, and we
hope that this positive news will continue at this second
stage we as Colombians are beginning, with the support
of the Council.

