I thank the briefers for their briefings. As always, a discussion of Abyei cannot take place without referring to developments in both the Sudan and South Sudan. The transitions taking place in both countries can positively influence efforts to resolve the question of Abyei. We welcome the positive steps taken in the past months. We understand also that these transitions, alongside with dealing with the human and economic impact of the coronavirus disease crisis, require the full attention of both Governments. However, we urge them to keep the matter on their agendas in order to reach a final settlement on the status of Abyei. The full and complete commitment of both Governments is required for a sustainable peace in the area to be reached. This includes creating the conditions for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to carry out its mandate. We note that the security situation remains fragile, with some tragic outbursts of violence having taken place. We call on the parties to bring the perpetrators to justice. We agree with the Secretary-General that UNISFA continues to play a crucial role in curbing violence and increasing crime and in protecting civilians, including through the mitigation of intercommunity tensions. We also welcome UNISFA's efforts to foster peace, dialogue and conflict resolution, including by supporting the African Union High-level Implementation Panel. UNISFA cannot be an open-ended substitute for the normal administrative and public services that the population of Abyei is entitled to receive. This is why a solution through political dialogue is needed. We call on all parties to remain engaged to that end and seize the momentum of transition. Pending a final settlement on the status of Abyei, a responsible exit of the mission is difficult to envisage. Finally, previous Security Council resolutions must be implemented, in particular by appointing a civilian deputy head of UNISFA and by increasing the police component of the mission. We look forward to greater progress in this regard.
