Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Permit me, on behalf of the
delegation of Nigeria, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Your well-known diplomatic skills and sense of humour
assure my delegation that the conduct of the business of the
Council is in good hands.

I should like to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Madeleine Albright, the Permanent Representative of the
United States, for her gracious and effective stewardship
last month.

We have read with interest the latest report on
Burundi, and commend the Secretary-General on his bold
and imaginative efforts in presenting the current state of
play in that country. Our delegation, as a member of the
Council for the past two years, was privileged to participate
in two missions at Burundi. On the basis both of our
experience on the ground during the two missions and of
the available literature on the subject, we cannot but share
the concerns and frustrations expressed in the
Secretary-General' s report.

But, more importantly, we must draw attention to the
overriding need to do something promptly and in a
preventive manner to stop Burundi slipping further into
violence and bloodshed. While there has been general
concern about the events in Burundi, it has not been
possible for the international community to match this
concern with concrete action. My delegation agrees with the
observation that any solution to the crisis in Burundi will
depend on the combined political will of the parties in
conflict and the willingness of the international community.
Furthermore, any action that is contemplated in this regard
must have the support of the people of Burundi if it is to
succeed.

Nevertheless, we should not allow the international
community to be held hostage to a veto from or, the
sensitivities of any particular group in Burundi. The
majority of the people in Burundi desire peace and are
prepared to live with one another in peace. Experience has
shown that, whenever the Security Council speaks with one
voice, the majority of the people in Burundi do listen. As
we see it, it is high time that something concrete was done
by the international community to strengthen the hands of
all the moderate forces in Burundi. Already, the increased
attention being paid to Burundi by the international
community has somewhat stabilized the situation there in
recent weeks. We need to build on that.

The nature of assistance to Burundi must be
multidimensional, socio-economic, technical and
diplomatic, and must involve efforts at the national,
subregional and international levels, all working in
tandem.

In this regard, the efforts of the Government of
Burundi to promote dialogue are crucial. The improved
coordination and cooperation between the President and
the Prime Minister is a good development in that
direction. Closely related to this is the proposal to hold a
Regional Conference for Peace, Security and
Development in the Great Lakes Region to address the
issues of political and economic stability as well as peace
and security in the Great Lakes States. We hope it will be
possible to find a mutually acceptable basis for such a
vital meeting between the countries of the region.

At the continental level, we would like to commend
the contributions of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), in particular that of its Observer Mission. The
enormous sacrifice made by the OAU to help arrest the
situation in Burundi needs to be strengthened by financial
and logistical support from members of the international
community. It would be unfortunate if this important
instrument of preventive action were not sustained due to
lack of resources.

My delegation therefore hopes that the Security
Council will give serious consideration to steps that
should be taken in a preventive manner to supplement and
strengthen the various initiatives and diplomatic efforts.
We also hope that the donor countries will help address
the socio-economic difficulties of the people of Burundi.

With regard to the draft resolution the Security
Council is about to adopt, we believe it is a balanced text
in that it recognizes the primacy of dialogue and
painstaking negotiations in trying to resolve the serious
socio-political problems in Burundi. It also expresses the
intention of the Security Council to support those
processes and maintain a hands-on policy on
developments in Burundi, including contingency planning
for possible humanitarian intervention, should that become
necessary. My delegation would, however, like to sound
a note of caution: any such efforts or preparations must
respect the sovereignty of Burundi and the expressed wish
of its Government. Any initiative that attempts to sidestep

 

this condition carries with it serious difficulties and could,
in the end, be counterproductive.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the appeals that have
been made to all the forces and political groups in Burundi
to give peace a chance and cooperate with the Organization
of African Unity, the United Nations, its agencies and
bodies and all other personalities engaged in seeking a
solution to the crisis in Burundi and in assisting the people
to live in peace.

