Mr. Ozawa (Japan): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this very timely public
meeting as Timor-Leste makes the transition from the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), a peacekeeping operation, to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), a special
political mission focusing on peacebuilding.

At the outset, we note with satisfaction the
tangible achievements and progress made during
UNMISET's so-called final consolidation phase over
the past year, especially the improvements seen in the
security situation, State institutions and capacities and
in the promotion of democracy and human rights. The
recent peaceful resolution of the demonstrations
initiated by church leaders, as described in the
Secretary-General's report (8/2005/310), exemplifies
the consolidation of democracy in Timor-Leste. We
also highly commend the recent strengthening of
Timor-Leste's relations with neighbouring countries,
including Indonesia.

Recognizing the continuing need for assistance
from the international community for institutional
capacity-building in Timor-Leste, including in the
areas of the judiciary and the police, my Government
welcomes the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1599 (2005), authorizing the
establishment of UNOTIL.

We would like to express our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and his staff in UNMISET for
their unstinting efforts to assist the Government and
the people of Timor-Leste in moving the peace and
development process forward. We expect that the
United Nations, other international organizations and
Member States will continue to provide assistance for
nation-building in Timor-Leste for the remaining one-
year period, with UNOTIL at the centre. The coming
year will represent the final demonstration of the direct
contribution of the United Nations to Timor-Leste. In
order to make that effort a success, Japan will provide
strong and sustained support in Timor-Leste. UN OTIL,
in our view, should fulfil a coordinating role in order to
effectively combine all bilateral and multilateral
assistance for the future sustainable development of
Timor-Leste.

Japan, as a friend in Asia, has participated
substantively in the efforts to assist Timor-Leste in its
process of maintaining peace and consolidating the
gains of peace, through UNMISET and other
multilateral and bilateral frameworks. At the Timor-
Leste and development partners meeting held in Dili in
April, Japan pledged to continue and strengthen, our
bilateral support to Timor-Leste, which has included
dispatching experts for human-resources training and
institutional capacity-building.

Finally, my Government believes that
peacekeeping operations must have clear completion
strategies. Recipient countries of such operations
should keep that point in mind and make the utmost
effort to attain self-sufficiency. In that regard, Timor-
Leste offers a significant example of a country in
which the completion strategy is being accomplished
through the tireless efforts of the United Nations and
the recipient country. Japan hopes to see other
peacekeeping operations redouble their efforts to fulfil
their mandates in accordance with completion
strategies appropriate to the specific situations on the
ground.

