Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I want to echo the sentiments of my
colleagues by conveying the solidarity of Bolivia
with the Government and the people of the Republic
of Colombia for the hundreds of people killed, injured
or affected by flooding, overflowing of rivers and
landslides in Mocoa, Putumayo.

As my Government has expressed, we are naturally
at the disposal of our brothers and sisters in Colombia
to provide needed help in this difficult time. We
welcome the distinguished Permanent Representative
of Colombia, Ambassador Mariana Mejia. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for having shared the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/252) with the
Security Council, as well as for his efforts and capable
leadership in this delicate matter.

In the period Mr. Arnault spoke of, we witnessed
historic moments for the world and particularly for
Latin America and the Caribbean, in the framework
of the peace process between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP).
The first days of February, we saw more than 6,000
FARC-EP guerillas mobilizing towards the zones and
points - when we witnessed the imminent beginning
of the path towards peace, which Colombia has sought
for almost five decades.
One month later, the FARC-EP began to surrender
their weapons. To date, one thousand weapons have been
turned in and nearly all of the weapons in the zones have
been registered and marked by the United Nations. We
are currently in one of the most complicated phases of
the peace process - which requires the understanding
of the parties in addressing unforeseen problems that
may arise - but there is no doubt that the Colombian
Government and the FARC-EP are committed to the
peace process. I recall the words of President Evo
Morales, who stated that,

"everyone knows that this peace process has not
been easy and maintaining it will require just as
much effort as it took to achieve it".

In that regard, we welcome the communique issued by
the Government and the FARC-EP, following the joint
meeting held on 26 March, during which the first 100
days following the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement were assessed. Six key points, which should
be highlighted here today, were raised at that meeting.

First, with regard to prioritizing the standards
required for the implementation of the final agreement,
we would like to highlight efforts to promote the
enactment of a comprehensive rural development
law, which would address one of the root causes of
conflict by eradicating abject poverty in rural areas,
ensuring the protection of land and property rights and
promoting quality, inter alia. The second point refers
to the implementation of a national political pact that
would ban the use of weapons in the political arena.
The third point relates to transforming the FARC-EP
into a legal political party, including militias. The
fourth point covers the implementation of an amnesty
law, which is a key issue, as well as reintegration with
a View to providing economic and social security for
members of the FARC, once the legalization process
has been concluded. We believe that that is a vital point
in the peace process. We encourage the implementation
of projects that would allow FARC members to return to
civilian life. The fifth point relates to the Government's
commitment to ensuring the return of all infrastructure
to the veredas by the end of this month, such as basic
services, medical equipment and ambulances for each
area. The sixth and final point references adhering to
the timeline for the laying down of weapons.

We welcome the establishment of the national
commission on security guarantees. We hope that it
will greatly assist in reducing the number of violent acts
committed against civil society and community leaders
in affected areas. We call for the redoubling of efforts
to ensure their personal safety and the full enjoyment
of their civil and political rights. Similarly, we welcome
the signature of decrees to establish a committee for
truth and unity in the quest for missing persons.

We also welcome the appointment of former
Presidents Jose' Alberto "Pepe" Mujica Cordano
and Felipe Gonzalez Marquez as supervisors of the
international component of the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. In line with
those parameters, we would like to convey to the
Security Council and the United Nations Mission in
Colombia our ongoing support for the commitments
made by the parties. We would like to highlight the
support provided by the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States to the sister Republic of Colombia
and to the United Nations Mission, which Bolivia
proudly assists with a large number of observers.

We note the observations made by the Secretary-
General in his report. We acknowledge the important
work the United Nations conducts in the country.
As mentioned earlier, there are some logistical and
administrative challenges, which we are sure will
be overcome gradually. In that regard, we thank the
United Nations Mission team for its support, as well
as the United Nations Development Programme in
Colombia. We eagerly await the Security Council's visit
to Colombia in May.

Once again, as has been done so often in the
Chamber while addressing this very important topic,
I would like to pay tribute to a man who described
himself as someone who conspired for peace in
Colombia 4 renowned author Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
As he received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1982,
he stated that neither floods nor plagues, famines
nor cataclysms, nor even the eternal wars of century
upon century, have been able to subdue the persistent
advantage of life over death.

