Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Before I begin
my statement, let me, like you, Mr. President, on behalf
of the Government and the people of Bangladesh,
express deep condolences to our neighbours, India and
Pakistan, for the loss of life and property suffered in
today's devastating earthquake.

This morning, we listened with keen interest to
the important statements from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), Sergio Vieira de Mello, and from
the United Nations Development Programme,
Administrator Mark Malloch Brown. We thank the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund
representatives for their statements outlining the
involvement of their institutions in East Timor. We
heard very significant statements this morning from the
President of the General Assembly, Harri Holkeri, and,
ifI may use this title, from the Foreign Minister of East
Timor, Jose Ramos-Horta. They have provided the
Council with useful perspectives on the prevailing
situation in East Timor - on developments so far and,
more importantly, on the future of East Timor.

We particularly appreciate the kind presence of
General Assembly President Holkeri among us, as his
views, enriched by his recent visit to East Timor and
Indonesia, offer us important inputs for the Council's
future course of action as well as that of the broader
international community. His underscoring of the
fundamental question of justice versus reconciliation,
in the context of East Timorese society, carries an
important message. Mr. Ramos-Horta's perceptive and
important first statement before the Council is very
much welcomed by my delegation.

It is useful that the Council is reviewing the
situation in East Timor again after two months. During
this time a lot has happened, as the Special
Representative outlined. In particular, there have been
concerted efforts during the last six months to
accelerate the transfer of authority to the Timorese
people through a determined and innovative approach,
as articulated in paragraphs 47 and 48 of the report of
the Secretary-General.

After more than a year of UNTAET's operation in
the territory, a road map to East Timor's independence
is now emerging quietly but surely. The Secretary-
General's present report attests to that. Bangladesh is
especially encouraged by the steps being taken for the
efficient holding of free and democratic elections early
in the second half ofthis year.

However, for East Timor's successful transition
to independence, a few important building blocks
remain to be put in place. The first is to continue the
efforts to establish peace and security. This is crucial
not only for long-term reconstruction and development,
but also for the return and settlement of refugees. As
the Secretary-General reports, there has been
improvement in the security situation. Although militia
movements remain a source of concern, we are happy
to hear from the Secretary-General's Special
Representative that such movement has fallen off.
Thanks largely to the robust and decisive action of
United Nations peacekeepers, the militia Violence has
been curbed. In this regard, we expect an early
conclusion of the trial, which began in a Jakarta court
this month, ofthe suspects in the September killing.

The second element is the safe return of refugees.
In this regard, we appreciate the concerted efforts made
by the Indonesian Government to work closely with the
relevant agencies, especially the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration. The recent
assurances of cooperation and determination given to
the President of the General Assembly during his visit
to Jakarta will, we hope, facilitate and speed up all
efforts aimed at the safe return of refugees to East
Timor.

We welcome the meeting between UNTAET and
the Indonesian authorities in West Timor last week.
The last of the "come and see" visits by the East
Timorese refugees on 19 January demonstrated the
positive collaboration among all concerned.

The third element is effective donor support.
Bilateral donors, international financial institutions and
United Nations funds and programmes should all fulfil
their pledges to the Trust Fund at an early date. We
hope that the donors' meeting next June in Canberra
will produce results in this regard; it is critical for
capacity-building in East Timor, particularly in the
areas of governance, the judiciary and basic social
services. The Secretary-General's report details those
well. In that regard, Bangladesh would like to
emphasize the need to pay attention to providing
indigenous solutions to Timorese development
problems. For Bangladesh's part, we are expecting a
Grameen Bank mission to visit East Timor next month
to assist the Timorese in initiating micro-credit
programmes for poverty eradication and the
empowerment of women.

Finally, by the same token, there is a need for
ongoing commitment by the international community
in post-independence East Timor. As all speakers have
emphasized, this is absolutely necessary for effective
Timorization to take root. Last November, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, confirmed in this Chamber - and the
Secretary-General's report also brought this out - that
there will be a need for an international presence in the
early years of East Timor's independence. The
Secretary-General underlined areas such as the
judiciary, defence and police forces, where continued
international financial and technical assistance will be
needed. Bangladesh will continue to offer its humble
contribution in these areas as part of the broader
international support.

Effective support for the process of Timorization
is a major responsibility of the United Nations, as East
Timor comes out of conflict and engages in
reconstruction and development as an independent
State. As a member of the Council, Bangladesh will
continue to contribute to this process.

