Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

We welcome the initiative of the Pakistani
presidency to hold today's open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping. The debate is also an expression
of the traditionally strong commitment of Pakistan
to United Nations peacekeeping. We welcome the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping, focusing
in particular on the important linkages between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as to note
with satisfaction the adoption of resolution 2086 (2013).

Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations and is therefore a crucial tool paving way for
the longer-term stability and development of countries
emerging from a crisis. The important work that
all actors are doing in partnership within the United
Nations represents a tremendous effort that may not
always be given due recognition. Recognizing the
demanding conditions in which peacekeepers carry
out their work, we deeply appreciate the sacrifices
they make. Indeed, I would like to express our deep
appreciation and respect for those who have lost their
lives in line of duty.

The European Union and its member States
make an important contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, and we have a great interest in making
United Nations peacekeeping even more efficient.
Welcoming the increased attention given to the role of

regional organizations in peacekeeping, the European
Union will continue to look for ways to enhance its
own support for United Nations peacekeeping. As a
recent example, we were pleased to be able to provide
timely and useful support for the rapid setting up of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We stand ready to act in a similar fashion in
the future.

The next session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is approaching, and we have
a keen interest in ensuring that that forum can continue
to provide relevant and meaningful consensus-based
guidance on peacekeeping. We must make the Special
Committee's report more focused and ensure the timely
implementation of its recommendations. That is all the
more important in the times of austerity, when we need
to optimize the use of scarce resources.

As the Secretary-General has stated, peacekeepers
are peacebuilders, and they must seize the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of a conflict.
They are the first to set priorities, they have a unique
mix of capabilities and they have to get it right from the
very start.

The representative of Indonesia referred to the
nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
which has been examined closely in recent years. The
European Union and its member States welcome the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/ Department of
Field Support strategy on that topic, and we encourage
the further development and updating of the strategy, as
well as planning and carrying out effective training and
exercises to enhance its implementation.

Recently, the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
addressed the challenge of that nexus as well, by
stressing inclusivity and institution-building, in
which peacekeeping operations have an important
role to play with a view to building more resilient
States and sustainable peace. Institution-building in
the fields of security and justice, for instance, is key
to the capacity of the host State to move on. In that
context, the strengthening of the rule of law should be
an overarching objective.

In a similar vein, the civilian capacity initiative
promotes enhancing the ability of peacekeeping
operations to contribute to that aim by expanding
the pool of relevant civilian experts suitable for
peacekeeping operations in a post-conflict situation.
Equally, the United Nations system-wide policy on
transitions demonstrates the close links those different
activities have, with the aim of producing a positive
outcome in post-crisis situations.

All of the recent reports and initiatives I have
mentioned point in the same direction: the key for
ensuring positive sustainable development is to start
as early as possible and in as comprehensive manner
as needed. In View of the longer-term perspective,
a coordinated strategic assessment to ensure an
integrated and coherent approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding and sustainable peace is a crucial
starting point. Concerted action from a wide range of
interested stakeholders is required in order to ensure
mutually reinforcing activities.

Peacekeeping operations need to be planned
and conducted in such a manner as to facilitate
post-conflict peacebuilding and progress towards
sustainable peace and development. Peacekeeping
operations with multidimensional tasks and mandates
should incorporate a peacebuilding perspective. The
implementation of those activities requires close
coordination among peacekeeping operations and
United Nations country teams and developments
actors. Peacekeeping operations have a role to play
in both supporting critical tasks and enabling others,
through providing support for countries, in developing
critical peacebuilding priorities and strategies, creating
an enabling environment in which national and
international actors can undertake their efforts, and
by implementing certain early peacebuilding tasks
themselves.

Taking into account the contribution of various
actors and the key principle of national ownership
and priorities, an integrated approach to early
peacebuilding is successful if every actor is clear as
to their contribution. That will make the comparative
advantage and the added value of each actor clearer.
Despite good progress, there continues to be a need to
identify additional competencies and to further clarify
everyone's role and responsibility.

Ensuring coordination and coherence is key. That
necessitates system-wide support within the United
Nations. There has certainly been further progress in
that respect, but the efforts to enhance coordination
need to continue, including as regards the Peacebuilding
Commission, where coordination with other United
Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council,
should be further improved.

Partnerships are increasingly important across the
board. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and their growing link with regional and subregional
organizations and international financial institutions
need to explore partnership opportunities that support
peacekeeping operations in their peacebuilding tasks.
The Peacebuilding Fund is an integral part of the
United Nations peacebuilding structure. It is a nimble
funding mechanism that is also very relevant for the
peacebuilding tasks within peacekeeping operations.

With respect to future models of cooperation, the
civilian capacity initiative provides a good example. As
the report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/645) states, the
initiative will apply across the various responses of the
United Nations system. We encourage the elements of
the United Nations system to continue to work together
in finding optimal ways to be more responsive and
innovative in post-conflict situations.

Countries emerging from a post-conflict situation
continue to run the risk of a recurrence of armed
conflict. Peacekeeping operations have an important
role to play in preventing that. We need to do our utmost
to prevent such a development.

Peacekeeping operations also set the scene for
initiatives in institution-building. It is therefore
important to optimize the way peacekeeping operations
contribute to early peacebuilding and State-building,
guaranteeing a comprehensive start from the beginning
and a smooth transition to greater stability.

