Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We have taken note of the content of her briefing on the
twenty-eighth report of the ICC concerning the Sudan.

The Security Council must deal with the issue of
Darfur in a consistent and comprehensive manner,
particularly in the light of the progress that has been
made there. Darfur province has just emerged from
a phase of conflict and is entering a peacebuilding
phase. In a presidential statement three days ago
(S/PRST/2018/l9), among other things the Council
welcomed the improvement of the security situation
in Darfur and the settlement of conflicts between
tribes, thanks to the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. The Council encouraged States to
contribute to the transition process for peacebuilding
in Darfur. We hope that the ICC's proceedings will not
hinder peace efforts in the Sudan.

The ICC proceedings attempt to set a legal
precedent for a President who is still in office and
enjoys immunity under international law, and the
Court's decision concerning the President of the
Sudan does not have the agreement of the international
organizations of which the Sudan is a member, including
the League of Arab States, the African Union and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, all of which
belong to international and regional partnerships of the
United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
want to once again recall resolution 514 of the twenty-
second Arab Summit, adopted in Sirte in 2010, which
represents the Arab position on the ICC proceedings
against the President of the Sudan and which rejects
the politicization of the principles of international
justice and infringements on the sovereignty, unity and
stability of States.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
respecting the principles of international law, including
the sovereignty of States. We reiterate the importance
of respecting the sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan.

