Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me also thank
the Lithuanian presidency for the initiative of convening
this timely open debate and for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/75, annex). I should also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.

I give credit to the holding of open debates as a
measure of greater transparency and for the inclusion
of the broader United Nations membership in the issues
discussed by the Council, and I recommend that every
presidency follow suit.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. The longer version of our statement
will be distributed.

The rule of law is a core principle of governance that
ensures justice and fairness and in which all persons,
as well as the State itself, are accountable to laws that
are equally enforced and independently adjudicated.
Adherence to the rule of law at home makes it more
probable that we will also follow the principle in our
interactions abroad. At the international level, the rule
of law accords predictability and legitimacy to the
actions of States and forms a fundamental framework
for the conduct of relations among them.

The rule of law provides keys to conflict prevention.

It is also an important element of peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Following
the rule of law and delivering justice builds public
trust in national Government institutions, which is
essential for developing a safe environment for us to
live in. Moreover, the preventative nature of strong and
consistent rule-of-law institutions helps to reduce the
risk of further conflicts. Therefore, Estonia welcomes
the approach of the Security Council in identifying the
strengthening of rule-of-law institutions as an integral
part of the United Nations mission mandates designated
for the upkeep of peace and security.

Justice is necessary for sustainable development
and security in any post-conflict society. Impunity
provides fertile ground for the recurrence of conflicts
and breeds instability. Consistent prosecution, either
domestically or internationally, is a most effective tool
to combat international crimes. I therefore welcome
that the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/341) on
the strengthening of the rule of law also reflects
the important role of international criminal justice
and emphasizes the necessity to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

I should like to reiterate Estonia's call upon all
countries that have not yet done so to join the Rome
Statute system, and I would likewise urge States parties
to join in the ratification of the Kampala amendments.
The universality of international law and adherence by
all to the same principles are essential to improving
the world in which we live. In that regard, countries,
whether they have joined the Rome Statute or not, must
set an example of non-aggression, self-restraint and
respect for the rule of law.

I commend the continued cooperation of the
United Nations with the ICC, particularly in the
provision of logistical support for field operations and
the submission of documents to the Prosecutor and
defence counsel. Nevertheless, we should continue to
improve that relationship to enhance the legitimacy
and success of the Court. In that regard, States parties,
as well as non-States parties on the Security Council
who contribute to referring situations to the ICC,
should ensure that adequate cooperation is consistently
provided to the ICC.

However, States must also acknowledge that it
is first and foremost their responsibility to develop
national capacities to investigate and prosecute serious
international crimes. As the concept note for this open
debate rightly describes, the development of national
capacity should include a comprehensive legislative

framework to ensure the investigation and prosecution
of crimes and the incorporation of Rome Statute crimes
into domestic criminal codes and should ensure robust
witness protection programmes, so that those who are
brave enough to come forward are safe enough to do so.

Estonia firmly believes that commitment to
fighting impunity at all levels is the only way to
deter those who might commit crimes in future. The
enforcement of sentences of the respective international
courts and tribunals is vital for international criminal
law to have a deterrent effect. To help to sustain that
effect and in coherence with the principles of rule of
law, Estonia signed an agreement on the enforcement of
sentences with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, which allows persons convicted
before the Tribunal to serve their sentences in prisons
within Estonia. In the most recent example, just two
weeks ago, on 10 February, a third person convicted of
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws and
customs of war committed in the former Yugoslavia
was transferred to Estonia to serve his sentence.

Of course, it must be stressed that supporting and
developing the rule of law is not just about international
criminal law; it is about all sectors of national and
international governance. To ensure the effectiveness of
rule-of-law efforts they must be better coordinated at the
international level. Estonia agrees, as also recognized
by the High-Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development
Agenda, that responsive institutions promoting the
rule of law and access to justice are necessary for
transformative shifts enabling development and for
building peace and effective open and accountable
institutions for all. We strongly believe that good
governance, democracy and the rule of law must be
emphasized in the future sustainable development
agenda among the sustainable development goals.

Estonia also fully supports the initiative for
rule-of-law pledges launched at the General Assembly's
2012 High-level Meeting by the Heads of State and
Government. States should recognize their role and
commitment to contribute towards reaching more
inclusive, transparent and empowering societies in
which everyone can enjoy human rights and in which
men and women are treated equally. State and civil
society partnerships and the inclusion of the private
sector are more successful if we act in this systematic
and coordinated manner.

Estonia has completed two out of our four pledges
for ratifying the Kampala amendments to the Rome
Statute and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

