Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On this very
special day for you and for the Security Council, I
would first like to join other colleagues in thanking and
congratulating you, Mr. President, on the way you have
conducted the work of the Council. In the past six
months, I have greatly appreciated your outstanding
professionalism, shrewdness and what I would call the
Tacitus-like concision of your statements before the
Council. I should also like to say that we greatly
appreciated your continued insistence on the need for
transparency in the work of the Council. We join others
in wishing you all the best in your future endeavours.

Moving on to the item under discussion today, I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kai Eide for the frank assessment that he has
given us today of the current situation and the
challenges ahead, as well as for his continued
dedication and commitment. I also wish to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, who is seated at this table.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
that supporting free, fair and credible elections is
essential. The legitimacy of democratic institutions and
the credibility of the international community in
Afghanistan would be greatly enhanced in the eyes of
the Afghan population by elections that are perceived
as having been free and fair. We welcome the fact that,
to date, the Independent Election Commission has
adhered successfully to its timetable for the first
Afghan-led election process. At the same time, we
encourage the Commission to continue working closely
with international experts.
Austria greatly appreciates the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support and promote a credible election
process. In this context, we welcome the establishment
of the Political Rights monitoring programme, in
partnership with the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, as an important step forward. We
wish to commend, in particular, UNAMA's successful
efforts to encourage women to register as candidates
for provincial council seats and its focus on factors that
constrain the ability of women to exercise their
political rights in full. At the same time, we view with
some concern trends of increased violence against
women and the recent introduction of draft legislation
of a discriminatory nature.

Austria welcomes decisions by the European
Union (EU) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to send election
monitoring teams. We will participate in the proposed
EU election observation mission, and will also make a
financial contribution to the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights election
support team. At the same time, we view the
deployment of domestic observers as crucial in
ensuring that a larger percentage of polling stations is
covered.

At this juncture, the preparation for and
organization of the first round of the elections on
20 August deserves priority attention. However - and
this is sometimes forgotten - we believe that it is also
essential to prepare carefully for the possibility of a
second round of presidential elections in the fall of this
year.

The provision of security in the course of the
coming months, and in particular during the elections,
will represent a great challenge. We share the concerns
expressed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General regarding the deterioration of the
security situation, including the high toll of civilian
casualties, which threatens to overshadow many
positive achievements. While recognizing the
complexity of the fight against the insurgency, we
share the view of the Secretary-General that it is
critical to avoid a situation where more troops lead to
more civilian casualties and to behaviour that offends
the population.

We are encouraged by the recent statements made
by General McChrystal noting the absolute priority of
avoiding civilian casualties. The Afghanization of
relevant operations and, in more general terms, the
ongoing reform and strengthening of the Afghan
National Army and the Afghan National Police is of
great relevance in this context.

Austria is currently examining the possibility of a
contribution to EU and United Nations programmes
focused on police and rule-of-law training activities.

We are strong supporters of demining activities and
have made a financial contribution towards that,
allowing the deployment of three mine-clearance
teams, which together are projected to clear high-
priority mine-contaminated land in the central and
northern regions of Afghanistan.

Afghan ownership is also of critical importance
in the civilian field. We welcome the formulation by
the Afghan Government of a comprehensive plan for
the implementation of the civilian surge in follow-up to
the Hague Conference. Investment in capacity-
building, in the creation of sustainable jobs and
incomes and in a lasting expansion of Government
presence is essential in achieving sustainable progress
for the benefit of the people of Afghanistan and the
whole region. We are encouraged by the new
mechanisms developed by the Afghan Ministry of
Agriculture, which can help to increase aid
effectiveness. Furthermore, the new Comprehensive
Agriculture and Rural Development facility, which
aims at increasing incentives for the cultivation of
alternatives to poppy production, is a promising
instrument.

Regional cooperation and coordination in the
fight against illicit drug trafficking and supply is of
great importance. As the recently published United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) World
Drug Report 2009 has highlighted, the decline of
global opium poppy cultivation in 2008 was largely a
result of a decrease in Afghanistan's cultivation area.
Austria is currently supporting three UNODC projects
in Afghanistan aimed at strengthening Afghanistan-Iran
border controls, at capacity-building in the area of
criminal justice and at fighting corruption. Austria is
also a long-time supporter of the UNODC Terrorism
Prevention Branch, which conducts several
programmes aimed at capacity-building in Afghanistan
and in the region.

In closing, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his efforts to develop benchmarks in close
consultation with the Afghan Government. We look
forward to his report in September. In order to support
the positive developments occurring in Afghanistan,
we must not lose focus, and I also say this against the
background of other regional developments. We must
abide by the commitments and priorities set in Paris in
June 2008, and reaffirmed at The Hague this year.

