Ms. Graham (New Zealand): First, I join others
in paying tribute to the memory of Sergio Vieira de
Mello and other United Nations staff members who so
tragically lost their lives in Baghdad five years ago.

New Zealand welcomes this debate on the
situation in Timor-Leste. May I thank Foreign Minister
Da Costa and Special Representative Khare for their
presentations. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the situation in Timor-Leste.

New Zealand is a regional partner and friend of
Timor-Leste. We are committed to assisting its
Government and people through multilateral and
bilateral mechanisms. We strongly support the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) and the need for a sustained United
Nations presence to help Timor-Leste. There are long-
term challenges to Timor-Leste, and the United Nations
is uniquely placed to assist it to stand on its own and to
ensure that precious gains are not lost.

A great deal of work remains to be done, but we
are encouraged by the progress being achieved in
Timor-Leste following the elections last year. As
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, there have
been a number of positive developments over the past
six months. We congratulate the Government and
people on their effective response to the crisis created
by the assassination attempt on the leadership in
February.

The Secretary-General's report does, however,
touch on areas of immediate concern to New Zealand.
First, in the area of policing, we acknowledge the
importance of the process of progressively handing
over responsibilities from United Nations police back
to the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL). The
criteria used to assess the PNTL's state of readiness
should help ensure that it is ready. The criteria should
also help to identify areas where further support from
UNMIT and others may be needed to strengthen PNTL
capabilities. Given the critical importance of that
process, it should not be rushed. Very careful attention
is needed in setting criteria that are appropriate and
measurable.

We also believe that the area of police training
needs similar attention in order to be sure that United
Nations and bilateral assistance is coordinated and
coherent. As a starting point, a single policing model
needs to be agreed. Those issues will warrant the
special attention of the new Police Commissioner when
he or she is appointed.

Another area of concern relates to the national
army's involvement in maintaining public security. We
see risks associated with that, especially while the
security institutions are still developing. Furthermore,
potentially positive contributions by the army can be
seriously undermined by allegations of human rights
violations and a perceived lack of accountability. We
are particularly concerned about references in the
Secretary-General's report to threatening behaviour by
army personnel directed at United Nations personnel,
as well as reports of excessive force and intimidation
during arrests by members of the Joint Command. We
emphasize to the military and police leadership and the
Timor-Leste Government the importance of promoting
and protecting human rights, and of ensuring that
violations are dealt with appropriately. Every effort
needs to be made to counter perceptions of impunity. I
particularly welcome Minister Da Costa's comments in
that regard.

We also hope to see progress on the security
sector review and continue to believe that it is essential
to ensuring long-term stability in Timor-Leste. We
encourage the Government and UNMIT to continue to
intensify their efforts in that regard.

The Secretary-General has outlined plans to
provide in his next report a medium-term strategy to be
agreed with the Government of Timor-Leste,
containing benchmarks and indicators for UNMIT's
mandate. That will assist all stakeholders to better
assess UNMIT's performance and will inform
decisions about future changes in its mandate.

In conclusion, we continue to offer our support
and encouragement to the leaders and people of Timor-
Leste, as well as to Mr. Khare and the UNMIT team.
We look forward to the visit to New Zealand later this
month by Prime Minister Gusmao, Minister Da Costa
and other ministers. We also thank the Security Council
for its ongoing support for Timor-Leste and are
grateful in particular for the leadership of South Africa
in that respect.

