Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset,
allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting, and to express my appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
briefing on the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The week-long Israeli military operation in the
occupied Palestinian territory - ostensibly to stop the
firing of rockets into Israel - has, like other similar
incursions, resulted in casualties among the Palestinian

population. In the latest attack, carried out on
Wednesday, 8 November, 18 Palestinians, including
8 children and 7 women, were reported killed, with as
many as 40 persons wounded in Beit Hanoun, in the
northern Gaza Strip. We condemn that attack and
express our profound shock at the loss of life and
damage to property. We extend our heartfelt
sympathies and condolences to President Abbas, the
Palestinian Authority and the bereaved families of the
victims.

The disastrous outcome of that latest military
operation, and others in the past, has shown that it is
impossible to conduct such attacks in a populated area
like Gaza without causing death and injury to innocent
civilians and collateral damage to property. We have
taken note of the regret expressed by the Israeli
Government over the incident and look forward to the
early release of the findings of the investigations
promised by the Israeli Government into this tragedy.

Attacks of this nature have in the past led to
reprisals that have caused more havoc and fuelled the
conflict between Palestine and Israel, without an end to
the provocative cycle of violence that persists in the
region. We would, therefore, like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the Palestinian people to
exercise maximum restraint and to avoid any revenge
attacks against Israel.

It should now be apparent to both Palestine and
Israel that the firing of rockets and the execution of
military operations have not achieved the desired
objective of preventing further attacks into one
another's territory. Those actions have further escalated
hostilities and worsened the plight of their people. In
that regard, my delegation wishes to remind both sides
of their obligations under international humanitarian
law regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Given the highly charged atmosphere in the
Middle East, the Security Council must act with
dispatch and request the cessation of Israeli military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory. In that
respect, we also expect the Council to call on
Palestinians to halt the firing of rockets against Israeli
targets, which invariably attracts military strikes.

We share the view that violence is not a solution
to the conflict in the Middle East, at the heart of which
is the Palestinian question. Effective action by the
Security Council to achieve the immediate cessation of
hostilities will be an important step in the search for a
solution to this problem. We do not believe that the
international community has devoted enough attention
of late to this long-festering conflict. The Security
Council must henceforth resolve to work assiduously
towards the resolution of the Palestinian question on
the basis of its own resolutions and in accordance with
the Road Map and the Arab peace initiative and to
implement the two-State solution that entails an
independent Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel within internationally recognized borders.

