Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
hold this timely and much needed debate. The presence
of the Slovak Foreign Minister and the Secretary-
General underlines the importance of this issue. I
should also like to thank the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and
the Chairman of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their contributions.

On l6 February, I had the privilege of presiding
over an Arria-style meeting in preparation for today's
debate. It was a very useful occasion, and I will attach
to the written copy of my present intervention my
summing up of those discussions.

I align myself with the statement to be made by
my German colleague on behalf of the European
Union. Security sector reform is an issue in which the
Union and its member States are intimately involved in
many countries around the world. I would, however,
now like to make a few observations based on the
United Kingdom's own experience.

Security is a basic human need and a basic human
right, and without security, economic development and

poverty reduction cannot progress. Security
institutions - the police, judiciary, military and penal
systems - should ensure security and justice for all

sectors of the population, regardless of ethnic or
religious affiliation, gender, wealth, status or political
allegiance. And we must ensure particular focus at the
community level. If security institutions fail to provide
security and justice equally and fairly for all people
within a community, there is an increased risk of
instability and insecurity, or even of insurgency or, still
worse, civil war.

We have seen a huge demand for United Nations
peacekeeping forces over the last decade, most of
which have been based in countries emerging from
civil war. We have to recognize that security sector
reform is an essential step in preventing conflict and
conflict relapse; it needs to be taken seriously at all
stages of the conflict cycle.

Strong, fair and effective security and justice
institutions prevent instability and reduce the risk of
conflict becoming violent. The re-establishment of
security and mechanisms for resolving crimes and
disputes are a necessary component of stabilization,
conflict transformation and resolution, and the re-
establishment of capable, accountable, responsive and
sustainable security and justice institutions is a critical
component of post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding.

Security sector reform is a national responsibility.
It should be defined and owned by national
stakeholders, informed by the best international
standards and practices, and then supported by the
international community. Effective security sector
reform requires a comprehensive approach, particularly
in post-conflict environments, where the problems are
many, complex and interrelated. A single, nationally-
owned, agreed and driven strategic plan, around which
international partners coordinate their support, is
needed.

The United Nations should be willing and able to
play a key role in coordination of that support by
facilitating the work of the national stakeholders in
three key areas: first, shared analysis of what needs to
be done, when and to what extent; secondly,
development of a clear strategic implementation plan;
and thirdly, establishment of a mechanism for the
management, monitoring and evaluation of that
implementation.

In those very difficult situations, the
establishment or re-establishment of capable,
accountable, responsive and sustainable security and
justice institutions will require strong political support,
technical expertise, and human and financial resources.
No one international partner or national Government
has all of those capabilities. A combined effort is
needed. It will also require that most precious of
commodities: time. International partners must plan to
support security sector reform programmes for years,
even decades, until national institutions are fully
functioning.
Before I conclude, let me be a little more specific
about the measures that we believe would strengthen
the United Nations work on security sector reform. We
believe that there are four main areas. First, the United
Nations system needs to further refine the roles and
responsibilities of its different departments, agencies,
funds and programmes on security sector reform. We
welcome the work undertaken on that so far, but
believe that it now needs to be worked out in practice

on the ground and carried further forward. Secondly,
there should be a clear strategic lead on security sector
reform within the United Nations system, coordinating
the work and giving oversight to the whole process.
Where it sits is less important; that it should exist is
very important. Thirdly, the United Nations should
define system-wide core principles on security sector
reform, drawing on its own lessons learned and on
established best practice, such as the work of the
Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in that area. Fourthly, between us all, we
should do our utmost to ensure that security sector
reform happens, and that nation States, regional
organizations and the United Nations all contribute to
the work that needs to be done, and that it is therefore
done in a coherent fashion.

We believe that those measures would help the
United Nations to play its pivotal supporting role on
security sector reform in the countries that need it the
most. We welcome the acknowledgement in the
presidential statement of the need for a comprehensive
report on United Nations approaches to security sector
reform, and we look forward to the detailed
recommendations of that report on how the United
Nations can help to ensure security and justice for all.

