Mr. Brammertz: Once again, I would like to
thank the Council for the opportunity to brief it on the
progress made by the Independent International
Investigation Commission. The Commission's latest
report covers activities in the last three months.

As outlined in previous reports, the Commission
remains mindful of its obligation to maintain the
confidentiality of its investigations in order to protect
both the integrity of the legal process and individuals
who cooperate with the Commission.

Since the last briefing to the Council, the
Commission has continued to enjoy productive
cooperation with the Lebanese authorities in all areas
of its work. The Commission meets regularly with the
Prosecutor General of Lebanon and senior members of
his office and with magistrates assigned to the various
cases. In addition, the Commission is grateful to the
Lebanese security forces, who have continued to spare
no effort in meeting its security needs.

The Commission's main area of focus remains the
investigation into the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others on 14 February
2005. In the last quarter, the Commission has made
significant progress in several areas by further
developing crime-scene leads, expanding the forms of
evidence relating to the perpetrators and building the
linkage and context aspects of the case. The
Commission conducted 42 interviews linked to the
Hariri case during this reporting period.

Results from seismological and scaling explosion
experiments confirm the likelihood, as said in previous
reports, that a single blast was detonated above the
ground. Ongoing analysis of vehicle parts found at the
crime scene appears to confirm also that the device is
likely to have been detonated from within a Mitsubishi
van. Investigations are ongoing into the acquisition,
storage and preparation of the van.

The issue of alleged tampering with the crime
scene and obstruction of the investigation remains
under scrutiny, and the Commission continues to work
07-27703
to determine if there was deliberate intent in this
matter. Efforts to determine the geographic origin of
the bomber, based on isotope data, are also making
good progress. In order to test this hypothesis, the
Commission has collected samples from 28 locations in
Syria and Lebanon and plans to extend its collection of
samples to other countries in the near future.

The Commission also continues to investigate
issues relating to Ahmed Abu Adass, the man who
claimed responsibility for the assassination of Hariri in
a video message. The Commission is aware that he was
associated with a number of individuals linked with
extremist groups. Those individuals, who operated in
Lebanon and beyond, may have been involved in the
production of the Ahmed Abu Adass tape and possibly
other aspects of the crime in more than one context. In
connection with this information, the Commission has
undertaken a number of missions outside Lebanon,
conducted 23 interviews to date and researched over
200 gigabytes of data.

Since the last briefing to the Council, the
Commission has significantly narrowed down its
enquiries into the motive to kill Rafik Hariri to those
linked to his political activities. A number of factors
shaped Hariri's environment in the period leading up to
14 February 2005. These factors include the inception
of resolution 1559 (2004) and the implications of its
implementation; the extension of the term of President
Lahoud; the dynamics between Hariri and other
political parties and leaders in Lebanon, Syria and
other countries; and preparation ahead of the
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2005. The
Commission believes it is likely that a combination of
these factors created the environment in which the
intent to kill Rafik Hariri arose.

As requested by the Council, the Commission
continues to provide technical assistance to the
Lebanese authorities regarding 16 other cases,
including the assassination of Minister Pierre Gemayel,
and, most recently, the bombings of two buses in the
village of Am Alaq, near Beirut, which resulted in the
death of three people and injuries to 20 others on 13
February 2007.

The Commission is mindful of the balance that
needs to be struck between the Hariri case and the
provision of support in the 16 other cases. That
equation changes over time, but the Commission
strives to use methods that add to all the cases while
07-27703

making the best use of available resources. In this
reporting period, the Commission conducted 17
interviews related to the six attacks targeting specific
persons, and it has almost concluded its interviews
with the surviving victims of those attacks and with the
victims' families and close associates. Various leads
have emerged from those interviews, and those leads
will be pursued in the coming weeks and months.

The Commission has also conducted analysis of
communications and of parts of possible improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicles used in the
attacks. It continues to examine potential linkages
within and between those cases and the Hariri case.
These activities will continue in the next reporting
period.

Forensic experts who examined the scene where
Gebran Tueni was killed have collected and analysed
over 190 exhibits and submitted their findings to the
Commission.

Investigations into the eight attacks in which no
specific individual appears to have been targeted are
also ongoing. The objective is to conduct individual
case analyses and to make suggestions for further
investigative steps that may be taken by the Lebanese
authorities. In the Gemayel case, the Commission
continues to provide support to the Lebanese
authorities, as requested by the Council, by conducting
interviews, analysing witness statements, performing
forensic work, conducting communications analysis
and reconstructing crime scene events.

The Commission has conducted a detailed
ballistics analysis on the cartridge cases and bullets
found at the crime scene. It can now conclude that a
minimum of five different weapons were used by the
perpetrators. Sketches of the alleged assassins provided
by the Commission to the Lebanese authorities were
recently publicized, and they will form part of a
broader sketch database to be developed during the
next reporting period.

The Commission also supports the Lebanese
authorities in their investigations into the Ain Alaq
bombings. A team of experts conducted forensic and
ballistic examinations on the crime scene, including on
the Mitsubishi and Kia buses that were bombed.
Several individuals were arrested last week by the
Lebanese authorities in connection with the Ain Alaq
bombings.
3
The Commission's cooperation with the Syrian
Arab Republic remains generally satisfactory.
Following its requests for assistance, the Commission
has undertaken a number of investigative activities in
Syria. The Commission conducted three interviews
with Syrian officials in relation to the location of parts
of the archive brought back from Lebanon at the time
of the Syrian withdrawal in 2005.

Following those interviews, two missions were
organized to gain access to relevant documents. They
were undertaken in conjunction with the Syrian
authorities and have elicited useful results. The
Commission is grateful for the professional and well-
organized support of the Syrian authorities in arranging
those meetings.

The Commission continues to rely on the
willingness of all States to provide information and
expertise and to facilitate its work on their territories
when required. During the reporting period, a total of
40 new requests for assistance were sent to 23 different
States, in addition to the requests addressed to the
Syrian and Lebanese authorities.

In its most recent report, the Commission noted
that responses to requests from 10 Member States were
overdue. The Commission has followed up on all
requests, and held a series of meetings with relevant
ambassadors to address pending issues. Almost all
outstanding matters were resolved to the Commission's
satisfaction.

During the past three months, the Commission
has taken measures to improve its support operations
and to fill vacant posts. Thirty-five international and
five national staff have been recruited during this
period, with the assistance of the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

As of now, the investigation division has 41 staff
and consultants, as compared with 29 at the time of the
previous briefing to the Council. Additional analysts,
investigators, legal officers and forensic experts are
currently being recruited. These efforts will be
maintained until the Commission has reached a
satisfactory level of staffing.

The Commission continues to face problems
recruiting and retaining Arabic language interpreters,
translators and transcribers. So far, only three of 27
language posts have been filled, creating significant
delays in investigative activities. The Commission is
again currently undertaking recruitment initiatives
aimed at attracting qualified language staff.

In the light of current and planned investigative
activities outlined in the report, it is unlikely that the
Commission will complete its work before its current
mandate expires in June 2007. In anticipation of the
creation of a special tribunal for Lebanon, the
Commission welcomes the request by the Government
of Lebanon for an extension of its mandate beyond that
date.

