Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor. Allow me to
congratulate you on presiding over this meeting.

Uganda has been a proponent of identifying the
causes of underage children finding their way into
armed forces, in order to find a sustainable solution to
the problem. We were quick to point out that even
though the recruitment of children into our army was
not institutionalized, we were not oblivious to the fact
that some children, owing to the breakdown in
institutional, social, economic and cultural values,
managed to circumvent the system, present false
information as to their age and be recruited. In most
cases, the abject poverty in those areas led the parents
to get their children employed in the armed forces by
overstating their ages.

That was an issue that was, in the end,
acknowledged by the Task Force on Monitoring and
Reporting and by the Secretary-General in his seventh
report to the Security Council on children and armed
conflict.
08-42816

The International Criminal Court (ICC) was
established with the determination to put an end to
impunity for perpetrators of the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community as a whole and
contribute to the prevention of such crimes. The parties
to the Rome Statute were also mindful of the millions
of children, women and men who had been Victims of
unimaginable atrocities that deeply shock the
conscience of humanity. Article 6 (e) of the Statute
recognizes that forcibly transferring children of a
national, ethnic, racial or religious group to another
group with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, the
first group constitutes genocide. Uganda holds in the
highest regard the mandate of the ICC to fight against
impunity. It is with that in mind that Uganda was the
first to make a referral.

In that same spirit of cooperation, the Ugandan
Government has been engaged in various initiatives
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
put an end to the practice wherever it has been
identified and to ensure the delistment of the Uganda
People's Defence Forces (UPDF) and Local Defence
Units (LDUs) - which have now been disbanded -
from annex II of resolution 1612 (2005). In this regard,
I am happy to report that the Ugandan Government and
the Uganda Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting
have vowed to start negotiations to iron out the few
hitches inhibiting the finalization of the action plan.
This will soon be completed.

We believe that, as far as Government
cooperation goes, Uganda has exhibited an undeniable
spirit of partnership in the implementation of
resolution 1612 (2005), regardless of the circumstances
under which UPDF and LDU were included in Annex
II to the resolution.

With regard to the sanctions or punishment
regime, if it is to be believed that the motive for
punitive measures against States accused of recruiting
children into armed forces is actually to help the
children, then a different approach, in my View, may
have to be adopted. Demonizing countries and
condemning Member States, even with the objective of
ending impunity, will only delay and may derail an
otherwise noble initiative.

Uganda is of the View that the fastest and most
sustainable avenue for solving a problem is not by
placing emphasis on punishment, but by engaging the
3
parties involved in dialogue. Sanctions only punish the
most vulnerable of society and, as history will show,
only serve to harden an accused State's resolve.

In conclusion, there can be no durable solution to
a problem whose root causes have not been identified
or contextualized or are ignored when they are pointed
out. Issues like poverty, lack of vocational skills or
even the total absence of registration systems for births
in conflict areas are too serious to be pushed aside. I
would like to reiterate that Uganda remains committed
to the protection of the world's children who are
affected by armed conflict, and to ensuring respect for
international norms and standards for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict.

