Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): An unprovoked military action has been
undertaken, in violation of international law and in
circumvention of the Charter, against Iraq, a sovereign
State and Member of the United Nations. The toll of
casualties and destruction is growing. There is a
looming threat of a humanitarian, economic and
ecological disaster. The negative consequences of this
illegal military action are already having an impact on
other countries of the region, the Muslim world and the
overall state of international relations.

Russia, together with other States, made vigorous
efforts to prevent war and achieve a political settlement
of the Iraq problem. The unanimous adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002), together with all other
measures of exerting pressure on Baghdad, provided a
realistic way to disarm Iraq through peaceful means in
full keeping with the decisions of the United Nations.

To our profound regret, that possibility was
thwarted precisely at a time when Iraq was more
actively cooperating with inspectors and when the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency had submitted their work programmes to the
Council. The implementation of those programmes
would have made it possible to provide a final and
objective answer to the question of whether Iraq
possessed weapons of mass destruction.

The military action undertaken by the United
States and the United Kingdom just at that moment -
in violation of Security Council resolutions - cannot
be justified in any way. In fact, those countries were
unable to provide any proof to support their allegations
regarding Iraq's possession of weapons of mass
destruction and Baghdad's support for international
terrorism - or with regard to a threat to the countries
of the region or to international security emanating
from Iraq. I would also like to note that no proof has
been found in the course of the ongoing military action
to support such accusations.

It is clear to everyone that the use of force against
Iraq in an effort to change the political regime of a
sovereign State runs totally counter to the fundamental
principles contained in the Charter of the United
Nations. The entire course of events bears out the
Russian Government's assessment of the war in Iraq as
a serious political mistake. The military action has
already gone beyond the local context. It is not only the
population of Iraq that is suffering, so too are the
peoples of neighbouring countries. That action has
become a potential source of destabilization for the
situation in the Middle East, as well as for the world as
a whole.

We are also seriously alarmed at the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. We support the efforts being made by
the Secretary-General, in cooperation with United
Nations programmes and funds, to mobilize voluntary
contributions to meet the needs of the Iraqi people.
Russia is contributing to those efforts, in cooperation
with the Governments of the appropriate countries, in
particular with those of Iran and Turkey, as well as
with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees. Steps are being taken to provide
humanitarian assistance to Iraqi refugees. In particular,
a hospital capable of accommodating 5,000 patients
will be set up in Iran. Thereafter, another two hospitals
will be set up, as well as a refugee camp. In addition,
plans are being made to establish refugee camps in
Turkey.

I would like in particular to emphasize the need
for full compliance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Under the Convention, the forces
occupying Iraq's territory bear responsibility for
resolving the humanitarian problems of its people. Of
course, all parties must comply with all other norms of
international humanitarian law, particularly as they
pertain to the treatment of wounded persons and
prisoners of war, the protection of civilians and of
facilities vital to the population and to preventing the
use of excessively injurious materiel.

Bearing in mind the exceptional circumstances in
which the Iraqi population finds itself, we are also
prepared, along with other members of the Security
Council, to resolve the issue of temporary amendments
to the procedures followed in the oil for food
programme in order to meet the humanitarian needs of
Iraqis, given that the programme's international
personnel have been evacuated due to the war.
However, we will not support the proposal to
restructure the mechanism for this humanitarian
programme in the light of the military scenario. That is
not a technical matter.

While humanitarian issues are important, there is
no more urgent task at the moment than to try to halt
the war and to return to the path of a political
settlement within the context of the Security Council.
The overwhelming majority of participants in our
debate have spoken out in favour of that. To that end,
we will continue to oppose both direct and indirect
attempts to legitimize the use of force against Iraq or to
shift the responsibility for that action to the
international community through the United Nations.
That will be our approach to any effort made by the
Council with regard to settling the question of Iraq.
The fundamental principles that must underpin those
efforts were formulated yesterday by the Secretary-
General. They include respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Iraq and the
inalienable right of the Iraqi people to determine their
political future for themselves and to exercise control
over their natural resources. I am convinced that no
member of the Security Council would really object to
those principles.

Russia's leaders are pursuing intensive contacts
with a broad range of States, including members of the
Security Council, in order to find a political solution to
the crisis. Objective conditions to that end still exist.
The potential of the United Nations is far from being
exhausted, a fact that even those who support the use
of force have recognized. We are open to engaging in a
dialogue with everyone. We are convinced that
differences with regard to the problem of Iraq should
not become a pretext to rush to confrontation in world
affairs.

However the situation concerning Iraq evolves,
we cannot escape the need to search together for
effective answers to new threats and challenges and to
strengthen the mechanisms of the United Nations that
are necessary to do so. The goal of the international
community to find mutually advantageous collective
solutions to global problems cannot become hostage to
the situation in Iraq. However, the extent to which we
can all resolve this problem together, pooling our
efforts to minimize the damage caused by that crisis,
will directly determine the kind of world in which we
shall live in the future - be it a world based on the
supremacy of international law or one in which chaos
and the arbitrary use of military might prevail. I hope
we will all recognize our responsibility vis-a-vis that
matter.

