The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to join others in
thanking the Secretary-General for participating in
today's debate. His remarks and his presence are a
strong signal of the engagement of the United Nations
in the debate on climate change and its security
implications. Let me also join my colleagues in
thanking the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his insightful
and very instructive briefing.

Over one year ago, the Pacific small island States
urged the Security Council to consider the security

implications of climate change. They appealed to the
Security Council to fulfil its mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
reason why those countries urged the Security Council
to act is clear: already today they suffer from the
security implications of climate change. They have to
deal with rising sea levels, loss of land and increasing
scarcity of resources. The Governments of those
countries have to resettle their people and ensure that
the distribution of basic commodities does not turn into
violent fights for survival. For them the security
dimension of climate change is crystal clear. It is their
daily challenge.

The situation of the small island States is a
compelling reason in and of itself to discuss today's
matter in the Security Council. At this point, it might
be useful to remember that the United Nations has
always drawn its unique legitimacy from the equality
of States. Big or small, rich or poor, each State has the
same right for its existential fears and threats to be
addressed.

There is, however, even more reason for the
Council to debate the security dimension of climate
change, because what happens to some small island
States today might well happen to other countries
tomorrow. Most national security establishments
consider the threat of global warming as one of the
biggest challenges of the twenty-first century. If we
take a look at the conflicts on the agenda of the
Council, we will easily see that quite a few of these
conflicts are, already today, driven by desertification,
lack of water and increased trans-border migration. We
have no doubt that the environmental degradation due
to climate change very often acts as a driver of
conflict. We all know that conflicts of this sort do not
remain isolated within a single country but, on the
contrary, tend to destabilize whole regions. We should
also keep in mind that not all States and societies have
the same capacity to adapt to the dramatic changes in
their environment.
The mandate of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are convinced that it is the Council's duty to act with
foresight and to do its best to prevent crises before they
become acute. We therefore welcome the fact that the
Council has successfully debated structural aspects of
conflicts before, such as the interrelatedness of
development or HIV/AIDS with security.

Keeping in mind the mandate of the Security
Council, we suggested that today's debate be focussed
strictly on the security implications of climate change.
Let me be very clear: Germany does not want the
Council to infringe upon the competences of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change or
other United Nations organs. We did not, and do not,
intend to advance any kind of encroachment.

We regret that it was not possible, at least up to
now, to find agreement on an outcome document for
today's meeting. I would like to reiterate that Germany
has a keen interest in a Security Council that rises
beyond the day-to-day management of acute crises but
takes into consideration the underlying causes of
conflict. It was our intention to ask the
Secretary-General for a sound basis for these
discussions. While we would have preferred, and still
prefer, that the Council find common ground on this
request, the strong interest of the membership in
today's debate makes one thing clear, namely, that the
Members want to see this topic on the agenda of the
Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the Republic of
Nauru, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru.


