Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Ambassador
Apakan and Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for their
very useful briefings.

As today's briefings have reminded us, the conflict
in Donbas has now been ongoing for almost three years.
Each day that it continues to simmer without a solution
results in more deaths and injuries, as well as fear and
uncertainty for civilians. The humanitarian fallout of
the current deterioration in the region is particularly
alarming. Access to basic needs, including water,
electricity and heating, has been interrupted. Sixteen
thousand people are acutely affected, with reports of
2,000 children in need of assistance in Avdiivka.

We call on all parties to ensure that civilians are
protected in line with international humanitarian law.
Humanitarian actors must have access to the entirety
of the Ukranian territory, including the zones outside
the control of the Ukranian Government. The recent
escalation in violence is a clear breach of the first point
of the Minsk agreements, which call for an immediate
and full ceasefire. A cessation of hostilities is essential
for security, which, in turn, is a basic prerequisite for
finding a sustainable political solution to the conflict.
In that regard, we fully support the efforts of the
Organizaion for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the difficult work of its Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Safe, full and unhindered access for its
monitors must be guaranteed.

As a small country committed to a rules-based
international order, Sweden relies upon strict adherence
to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for international law. Violation of
those core principles and commitments poses a threat
to the European security order, and are therefore a
fundamental concern for all of us.

Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity
must be fully respected, as underlined by all of us in
the Security Council press statement of 31 January
(SC/12700). Let us not lose sight of who is the
aggressor and who is the victim in this conflict. We
highlight Russia's particular responsibility in that
regard, and stress that Russia can bring its influence
to bear to end the violence, should it wish to do so. In
that connection, we should not forget Russia's illegal
annexation of Crimea and Sebastopol, in clear violation
of international law, including the rules and principles
of the United Nations Charter.

In line with consistent appeals from the
European Union, Sweden calls for an immediate and
lasting ceasefire. We reiterate our call for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Sanctions
against Russia must remain in place until the Minsk
agreements are fully implemented. We commend and
support the efforts of France and Germany in the
Normandy format. Finally, we call for the rules and
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law, to be fully respected.

