Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
deliver a statement on behalf of the current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity, His Excellency
President Robert Mugabe of the Republic of Zimbabwe.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting to allow the Security Council and interested
delegations to consider the Secretary-General's report
entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa".

When the Security Council met in a special
ministerial meeting on 25 September 1997, a new
partnership was launched between the OAU and the
United Nations, between Africa and the international
community. We are deeply grateful to the Secretary-
General for his objective and comprehensive report,
which, in our View, constitutes the first effort at giving
content to this partnership. The wide spectrum of issues
covered in the Secretary-General's report clearly reflects
the complexity of the African agenda and the need for it
to be adopted most urgently as an international agenda.
For Africa is the world's poorest region, has been
disproportionately afflicted by intra-State conflicts, and
therefore merits the special attention of the United
Nations in particular and the international community in
general.

Over the past few months we have witnessed a
dramatic broadening of the horizons of peace and stability
in Africa. The return of peace and democracy in Liberia

 

and Sierra Leone as well as the significant strides towards
peace in Angola bear ample testimony to Africa's renewed
quest for democracy, peace and stability. Despite Africa's
resolve and determination to take greater responsibility for
the resolution of African crises, including armed conflict,
we wish to support the Secretary-General's perception, and
to reiterate our full cognizance, of the fact that there can
never be an exclusively African agenda for peace: it will
always be a United Nations agenda to which the entire
international community must subscribe and lend its
support. The presence on 25 September 1997 of the OAU
Chairman and the OAU Secretary-General at the special
ministerial meeting emphasized the continent's desire for
special treatment by the United Nations in general and by
the Security Council in particular.

We therefore call upon the international community
not only to put its full weight behind Africa's peace
initiatives, but also to assess and buttress the OAU's
institutional and operational capacity in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in Africa. Let me
recall and emphasize here that the Cairo Declaration of
1993 stipulated that the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution would have as its
primary objective "the anticipation and prevention of
conflicts" [A/48/322, annex II, AHG/DECL.3 (XXIX) Rev.I,
para. I 5]. Accordingly, we would have wanted the report
to give greater emphasis to conflict prevention, which is the
chief plank in the OAU doctrine on Africa's conflicts.

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes the need
for concrete action. In this regard we call upon the
Secretary-General to send a team to OAU headquarters to:
take measures to speed up the establishment of an early
warning system there; provide technical assistance and
training of personnel, including a staff exchange
programme; institutionalize the exchange and coordination
of information between the respective early warning
systems of the OAU and the United Nations; provide
needed logistical support; and mobilize financial support for
the OAU Peace Fund.

Africa fully supports the Secretary-General's
perception, and is fully cognizant, of the fact that early
detection of incipient conflict is not enough to ensure peace
and stability. This is why African countries are keen to
address the equally important matter of building capacities
for early and effective responses to conflict on the political
and diplomatic front, as well as rapid and effective
deployment of peacekeepers on the military front. That was
the collective decision of the OAU Assembly of Heads of
State and Government when it issued its Addis Ababa
Declaration in June 1995. Since then, there has been a
proliferation of initiatives on capacity-building in Africa
in the realm of rapid deployment and peacekeeping. I
wish to reiterate Africa's desire that such efforts, if well-
intentioned and properly coordinated by channelling them
through the OAU or its subregional organizations, could
greatly supplement Africa's own efforts at ensuring peace
and stability on the continent.

Of late there has been talk of an African renaissance.
News of renewed economic growth in Africa has for the
most part been communicated to the international
community in terms of statistical figures such as
percentages of gross domestic product, reduced budget
deficits and curtailed public expenditure, as well as lower
inflation rates. However, such statistics are largely silent
on what is really happening to the African people at large.
Whereas the structural adjustment programmes prescribed
for many African countries by the Bretton Woods
institutions have often reflected impressive figures, they
have also had a very severe and adverse impact on
African societies in terms of curtailed social spending,
particularly on health and education facilities, and in
terms of growing unemployment. As a result, we have on
our hands cases of African countries whose economic
statistics are improving, and are even impressive, but are
not matched by an improvement in the conditions of
living of the bulk of the African people. Some of those
countries are actually de-industrializing, and are no nearer
to eradicating absolute poverty among the generality of
their people. Many African countries continue to spend
more on debt servicing than they do an education or
health, or on education and health combined in some
cases. We cannot have economic development without an
impact on poverty alleviation. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's perception that economic
development must manifest itself in the quality of life and
the standard of living of the African people.

As we lay the foundations of the new partnership I
talked about earlier, it is Africa's hope that the
international community will go beyond facts and figures
and be more human and personal, rather than statistical,
in its dealings with Africa. I wish to recall the words of
the President of Zimbabwe, who said in his address
before this Council on 25 September 1997,

"we strongly believe that the peace and security that
we so ardently seek to achieve cannot be attained in
the conditions of abject poverty that are prevalent in
Africa today. We are convinced that a politically
stable, prosperous and vibrant Africa is the best

 

place to contribute to greater global peace and
security." [S/PV.3819, p. 3]

We commend the Secretary-General's perception that there
is an intrinsic link between development, peace and
security.

Peace and stability are predicated not just on economic
and social development and the elimination of absolute
poverty. Africa has been seriously addressing the issue of
good governance, particularly the enhancement of human
rights and further democratization of the continent, as spelt
out in the OAU's Addis Ababa Declaration. African leaders
have endeavoured to do this collectively through the
instrumentality of the OAU.
The OAU has monitored no fewer than 40 multi-party
elections and referendums so far in this decade alone. But
democratic elections alone are not the sum total of
democracy. Africa has embarked on the protracted process
of building the institutions of democracy and instilling and
nurturing a culture of democracy where once there was that
of autocracy and military rule. But it is also true that the
seed of democracy cannot germinate, let alone thrive, in
the soil of mass poverty, illiteracy, hunger and disease.
We therefore appeal to the international community to
come to Africa's assistance by supportng that continent's
own efforts, which stem from a recognition of the need
for accelerated human resources training, technology
transfer, debt remission, capital investment and access to
international markets on the basis of equitable terms of
trade. We agree entirely with the report of the Secretary-
General on these important matters.

Finally, at this stage, no one can claim to be
ignorant of Africa's special situation or of the fact that as
a region it requires special attention. More than further
studies and analysis, Africa longs to see the translation of
plans and programmes from the drawing boards to the
implementation stage. The United Nations Programme for
Africa's Economic Recovery and Development and the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s, and now the United Nations Special
Initiative on Africa, were all seminal documents. Like the
Secretary-General, we appeal for the political will of the
United Nations in particular and the international
community in general, to give a new momentum to
Africa's push for peace and development. Accordingly,
we support the Secretary-General's proposals on follow-
up activity by the Security Council at the ministerial
level. Africa will not be found wanting in political will
and commitment to seize the opportunities that may be
presented, for Africans have stated on several occasions
that the development and welfare of Africa are primarily
the responsibility of the Africans themselves.

