Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this Security Council meeting, which is
taking place at an appropriate time. Indeed, for us, it
means considering the manifold issues related to
peacekeeping operations.

I also wish to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; and Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for
their extremely important briefings this morning.

My delegation welcomes the Franco-British
initiative, which has provided us with a concept paper
that cites a great many noteworthy ideas and
guidelines. In addition, Jordan associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

My country, Jordan, is participating in this debate
to reaffirm its commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to express its
desire to contribute to the creation of a positive
environment of peace. As a troop- and police-
contributing country, we are also keen to see
cooperation among all parties involved in
peacekeeping operations in the three areas referred to
in the concept paper: strategic and effective oversight,
overcoming resource constraints, and drawing on
lessons learned. Furthermore, my delegation intends to
participate seriously in the follow-up to this debate.

I believe that the Security Council must take
three important decisions before it decides to establish
a peacekeeping force. First, the Council must
determine the nature, scope, intensity and scale of
threats to international peace and security. That
preliminary and essential decision will serve to guide
the Council in making choices and adopting
implementation mechanisms, thus ensuring the success
of its subsequent decisions. When a decision is taken
as part of an effective and in-depth strategy, the
available options are appropriate, sound and far-
reaching. To that end, decisions must be based on
thorough analysis and appreciation of the threat. Thus,
the threat should be addressed as part of a strategic
approach with a regional and international dimension.

In order to do that, the Security Council may
utilize analyses by regional organizations, as well as
the expertise within the United Nations system as a
whole. In addition, an early warning system should be
developed to detect signs of regional or international
crises that could pose threats to international peace and
security, thus providing the Council with a continuous
overview of such threats and perhaps enabling it to
prevent conflict. That would be a much more effective
tool than intervention following the outbreak of a
conflict.

The second decision concerns involvement and is
highly strategic, involving not only resources and the
peacekeeping budget, but also security and political
strategies for the whole conflict zone. A conflict may
spread to other regions and affect millions of people.
Therefore, this decision must be based on an analysis
of possible choices and repercussions, which would
help the Council in achieving the desired results in the
conflict zone.

The third decision deals with mandates. Mandates
are essential in the life cycle of peacekeeping
operations, because they act as a vehicle for the
realization of objectives and determine both the
structures and resources necessary to meet expectations
regarding troop-contributing countries and the quality
of the contributions. Mandates also determine a force's
operational level of performance.

It is not possible to assess objectively all these
elements without first engaging in a comprehensive
strategic study. Unfortunately, it is the mandate which
gives the forces their legal and political legitimacy, and
which can guarantee the potential for success.
Therefore, there is a need for the Council to work
together with the Secretariat to adopt a graduated and
systematic approach that would include all elements of
a mandate to achieve a coherent, solid and integrated
strategy.

It is not possible to achieve success of this kind
without an overall integrated strategic assessment. The
United Nations gives nearly total responsibility for
strategic planning to the Secretariat, but we believe
that this is an extremely sensitive area in which politics
is intertwined with strategy. That is why there is a need
to go well beyond present efforts. There needs to be an
effort to create a comprehensive and complete strategy.
Member States must work together with the Secretariat
to draw up such a strategy and outline it for the
Security Council, showing the available military,
political, financial and geographic options and the
options regarding resources. Those are the elements
that the Security Council must consider before
conducting its assessment.
Therefore, there is a need for greater interaction
between the strategic and the political facets. The
Secretariat should provide brief and clear statements
during the planning stage, which could make it
possible to sketch out the political, security and human
rights situation in and around the conflict zone, in
order to identify the major priorities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
approach would make it possible to answer two
important questions we find in the non-paper.

The first question relates both to Member States
receiving detailed and coherent military analysis from
the Council and to enhancing the dialogue between the
Council and the Secretariat regarding military
operations. If cooperation is carried out in an open
manner that makes provision for the participation of
the troop-contributing countries together with regional
organizations and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations, then there will be better possibilities in
the long run for achieving mature decisions that will
make it possible to achieve the Council's strategic
objectives.

The troop-contributing countries should
participate in that evaluation. That will not only serve
the strategic objectives of the Council but will also
help the States themselves in their own internal
assessments to better understand the political and
military situation of a conflict on the ground. That will
ensure coherence between military resources and the
overall objectives of the mission. Effectiveness in the
field necessarily hinges on the symbiosis between
objectives and allocated resources. In the fuel analysis,
the result can only be favourable and will provide
valuable assistance to troops on the ground, in line
with the standards set out in the concept document.

These steps can form the substance of an
integrated strategy which could result in maximum
efficiency for peacekeeping operations. Missions then
would be in a position to meet the needs and
developments of the present, as well as the growing
need for peacekeeping missions. When I commanded
the Jordanian observers in the first United Nations
Angola Verification Mission between 1989 and 1991, I
had hoped to see a Security Council delegation visit
our mission to discuss our mandate, resources and
implementation mechanisms. I noted that there was a
very significant gap within the mandate between
operational and human needs and military resources, in
particular regarding the protection of women and
children.

I continue to think this gap is still there and does
not allow for effective protection. I think that the
Security Council should organize annual visits to the
field to allow for a proper assessment of the
relationship and interaction between the command and
operation in the field, as shown in the concept paper. I
think the participation of the troop-contributing
countries would provide valuable assistance there.

In conclusion, political and strategic guidance by
the Council and a system of strategic planning within
the Secretariat cannot replace logistical or operational
planning. There must be a pragmatic and systematic
approach in the field, which must be carried out in
consultation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

The environment in which peacekeeping missions
work is tense, volatile, multidimensional, chaotic and
violent. There can be total anarchy or lack of
discipline. The number-one objective of the military
command of these missions is to ensure a forceful
presence on the ground, control hostile acts and
develop trust between parties to the conflict. Such
implicit operational duties are generated by
commanders and are not found in Security Council or
Secretariat documents. We must ensure that these are
included in the operational planning process so that the
work of the mission in the field is in full harmony with
and complements the planning operation, be it political
or strategic.

If the Security Council is to achieve its political
and strategic objectives at the operational level, it must
review its entire operational planning process. We can
only benefit thereby, with a minimum use of resources.
An interactive debate must be held at the political,
strategic and operational levels before troops are
dispatched. That will ensure that the operation can
continue and have a lasting peacekeeping effect.

I reaffirm my delegation's gratitude to you once
again, Sir, for your initiative and for the background
concept paper, and its readiness to continue to work on
this important process.

