Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
its statement this morning, a certain country mentioned
changed status quo and land reclamation. The Charter
of the United Nations and the provisions of international
law speak very clearly to this question. If a country
illegally occupies another country's territory and
engages in large-scale construction, then that status
quo is in violation of the Charter and international law,
and is illegal. With regard to that illegal status quo,
not only should it not it be accepted, it should also be
stopped, and the status that existed prior to the illegal
occupation restored.

If a country engages in construction on its own
territorial islands and complies with the requirements
of international law, such as environmental protection,
then such construction and changed status quo fall
within the sovereignty of the country, and are in
line with the Charter and international law. They are
therefore beyond reproach. The Nansha islands are
Chinese territories. The so-called status created by
other countries illegally occupying China's Nansha
islands is in violation of China's legitimate rights and
interests. It is therefore illegal and invalid.

The construction on China's Nansha islands is
within China's sovereignty. It is not targeted at any
country. It does not affect the freedom of navigation
or flights over the South China Sea. It will not damage
the ecological environment of the South China Sea.
It is therefore legitimate, just, reasonable and beyond
reproach.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, China has every right to
maintain its sovereignty, rights and interests. We have
every right to stop any illegal activity that encroaches
upon our legitimate rights and interests.

Maintaining peace and stability within our territory
is in China's interest. China would never want to see
any chaos created in the South China Sea, and we will
never take the initiative in creating chaos.

While maintaining our territorial sovereignty and
rights on the high seas, we will continue to maintain
peace and stability in the South China Sea. We will
continue using talks and negotiation as the fundamental
paths towards resolving the relevant issues. We will
adhere to the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea. We will promote the drafting of
guidelines regarding the South China Sea as the toolkit
to manage disputes.

We will adhere to the practice ofjoint exploration
and development and cooperation on the sea. This
policy of China will never change.

The meeting rose at 6.50 pm.
