Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and its excellent initiative of convening
this open debate, which allows us to discuss the central
issue of the training and capacity-building of staff
within peace operations.

Allow me also to acknowledge the brilliant
briefings delivered this morning by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues
Martins Filho, Force Commander ofthe United Nations
Organization Stabilization in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg, Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat.
Today's open debate is in line with our common
desire, reaffirmed unequivocally in support ofthe Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, to place the performance
of peace operations at the centre of our concerns. That
very commendable ambition necessarily reflects the
need to dedicate to such operations well-trained and
well-equipped troops, with sufficient training in the
basics of humanitarian law.

Today's exercise is all the more timely as
Blue Helmets now work in very complex security
environments, marked by an unprecedented level
of violence, exacerbated by asymmetrical threats,
endangering their own lives and those of the people
they are mandated to protect. Only with high-quality
operational readiness can peacekeepers properly
address such vulnerabilities and maintain moral
authority over negative forces. As a major contributor
country, Senegal has made a paradigm of that priority.
I would like to briefly share some of its good practices
in that regard.

First of all, the training of units in Senegal is
aimed at meeting the requirements for permanence,
comprehensiveness and adaptation to threats. The
methods are regularly evaluated and updated. Indeed,
the operational conditioning of units is systematic.
At the individual level, it allows for the maintenance
and consolidation of the specific capacities of core
activities. Collectively, the intrinsic value of the units
is assessed annually on the basis of strictly objective
criteria, taking into account, among other things, the
cohesion of units, their ability to serve, maintain their
equipment and build resilience to adversity. For peace
operations, therefore, regardless of the environment or
context of engagement, Senegal always has a wide range
of eligible units. Those selected to form contingents
are trained for at least four months in one of the five
tactical training centres located in Senegal, which best
reflects the conditions in the deployment mission.

The preparation of contingents is completed with
modules familiarizing them with the United Nations
standards of conduct, cross-cutting issues related to
gender, sexual abuse and exploitation, the customs and
habits of the host country and so on. Senegal's tactical
training centres allow units to be trained for various
types of environments. The infrastructure currently
available is sufficient for meeting the needs of our
military and police units alone. However, an ambitious
project is under way to increase their number, which
could eventually open them up to friendly contributing
countries in our subregion or elsewhere.

Lastly, the training modules are managed in a
dynamic process, as they are constantly enriched by
feedback from returning and readjusted contingents.
We take this opportunity to thank the Policy, Evaluation
and Training Division of the Department of Peace
Operations and all partners who work tirelessly to
build capacity through the many training programmes
they offer to contributing countries. However, while
the challenge of performance-oriented training remains
well understood, the Department of Peace Operations
nonetheless loses a key lever for quality control
of the troops at its disposal, by leaving the entire
training and certification process for contingents to
contributing countries.

The Department of Peace Operations may be
aware of that shortcoming as it now requires, prior to
deployment, a written document in which contributing
countries certify that all members of the contingent have
received adequate training and that none are subject to
allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation or ongoing
legal proceedings. However, that formal document
commits the contributing countries only in theory, as
it neither guarantees the contingent's ability to cope on
the ground nor provides assurance that its members will
comply with the United Nations standards of conduct
during their stay in the mission.

To ensure better quality control of the operational
preparedness of contingents, it is essential that the
Department of Peace Operations be more involved in
the process by agreeing with the contributing countries
on the various training programmes, taking into
account the specificities of the area concerned and the
prerequisites for the unit and by ultimately confirming
the suitability of the contingent through a systematic
predeployment validation inspection, on the basis of
criteria agreed with the Member States.

In the same vein, we must consider the use of
modern technologies, where necessary. The experiences
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic have shown that the
responsible use of such tools has a positive impact.
For its part, Senegal remains ready to share its
unique experience in the area of peacekeeping, including
through South-South and triangular cooperation. It
remains convinced that it is also essential to increase
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). In addition,
taking into account the growing commitment and
quality of French-speaking countries in peacekeeping
operations, as well as the establishment of such
missions in that group of countries, primarily in
Africa, my delegation reaffirms the need to promote
multilingualism in the context of the missions.

In conclusion, as a major troop- and
police-contributing country, Senegal welcomes
the continued concern among actors, including
the Council, in the spirit of triangular dialogue, to
make peacekeeping operations more effective and
capable of meeting pressing current and future needs
and challenges.

