I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. Viet Nam would like to express our condolences to the Government and the people of Palestine for the passing of Mr. Saeb Erekat, Palestinian Chief Negotiator and Secretary-General of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization. We highly value the contributions made by Mr. Erekat to the struggle for independence of the Palestinian people and the search for a just and long-lasting solution for the Middle East Peace Process. We welcome the recent statement of the Palestinian Authority that it was willing to return to negotiations with the Israeli Government on the basis of United Nations resolutions and international laws. Viet Nam hopes that the long-stalled negotiations will be resumed soon. The Security Council and the wider international community should create all favourable conditions for the negotiations to be successful. We are encouraged by the recent easing of tensions among countries of the region, as well as measures and initiatives conducive to promoting regional peace and security. We also welcome all initiatives for international cooperation that may help achieve a just, sustainable and long-lasting solution to the Middle East peace process on the basis of international law and relevant resolutions of the United Nations. In this connection, we note the Secretary-General's response to the call for an international conference for peace in the Middle East by President Mahmoud Abbas and look forward to working with him on this matter. While welcoming the recent positive dynamics in the region, we are concerned about continued violence in many places, which causes civilian casualties and widens the gap between the parties. Israel's continued expansion of settlements in the West Bank and its demolitions of Palestinian houses remain a major obstacle to finding a lasting and sustainable solution. Recently, the high rate of demolitions of Palestine structures in the West Bank are particularly worrying. These acts violate international law and weaken the prospects for the realization of the two-State solution. We therefore call upon the parties to refrain from taking actions and making statements that could complicate the situation and make it more difficult for negotiation and dialogue. All acts of violence and hostile rhetoric must cease. We remain concerned about the grave humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories due to the coronavirus disease pandemic and worsening economic recession. We reiterate our calls for the lifting of the Gaza blockade so as to ensure access to basic services and humanitarian aid. We also call for an end to the restrictions, attacks and intimidation aimed at Palestinian farmers during the olive harvest season. Those acts continue to be a major source of violence and put more pressure on the economic challenges of the Palestinians. We also hope that the two sides can reach an agreement to resolve the tax withholding issue in the face of the humanitarian and financial crises. In this regard, we would like to commend the role of agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), in alleviating the plight of the Palestine people. In light of UNRWA's continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community to provide UNRWA with the funding necessary to ensure the continuity of its indispensable operations. To conclude, we would like to reaffirm our solidarity with and consistent support for the just struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights, as well as the two-State solution for the establishment of an independent State of Palestine coexisting in peace with the State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
