Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation too would like to thank the President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, as well as the
Prosecutor, for having taken the initiative to come to
the Council to brief us on the work of the Court. It is
legitimate that the Security Council, which endorsed
the Court's creation, should be kept informed of the
progress of an institution that is essential for justice
and reconciliation.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
presence at this debate of Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, the
Deputy Secretary-General.

Since our previous meeting devoted to the work
of the Court two years ago (see S/PV.5185), a major
event has occurred - one which France welcomed and
to which the Council contributed: the arrest of Charles
Taylor, his transfer to The Hague in accordance with
resolution 1688 (2006) and, a few days ago, the start of
his trial. A former head of State answering before a
criminal court for atrocities which he encouraged and
supported sends a very strong message which, beyond
Sierra Leone and the region, is universal in scope. It is
a message of hope for the victims of the most serious

crimes and for all those who are combating impunity.
The phase of the presentation of evidence, which will
soon begin, will be crucial in that respect. It is also a
warning for those responsible for such crimes wherever
they may be. Progress in international criminal justice,
and in particular the creation of the International
Criminal Court, must prevent such persons from
escaping justice, and the Security Council must support
that progress.

It is important for the Security Council to be able
to follow the Court's implementation of its recently
revised completion strategy. Since the Court started
functioning nearly five years ago, much has been
achieved. France welcomes, in particular, the fact that
three trials involving the various factions that
participated in the conflict which tore Sierra Leone
apart have concluded or are coming to an end. France
notes that work should finish by the end of 2008 in
Freetown and by the end of 2009 in The Hague.

The Court recently established a budget covering
the period of the remaining work. It is certainly a
useful tool which will make it possible to better assess
the financial effort expected of us. The transfer of the
Charles Taylor trial to The Hague has naturally had a
major impact on the budget, but, in our view, the
security considerations that justified the transfer
remain completely valid.

For France, which has been contributing to the
financing of the Court for several years, it is essential
that the accomplishments of the first years of work not
be jeopardized by a shortage of resources. In that spirit,
we will consider the appeal for new contributions.
Indeed, we want the Court to be successful, not only
for justice and peace in Sierra Leone and the
subregion, but also for international justice.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is the
first mixed tribunal created with the assistance of the
United Nations, has been a model that has inspired
other jurisdictions, in particular the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon whose establishment has just been
sanctioned by the Council. It has broken new ground in
several areas, in particular through its communications
strategy, as well as through its coordination with the
United Nations Mission in Liberia and, in the Taylor
trial, its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court. That progress, together with its judgements, will
be part of the Court's legacy to us.
9

The Court has also started to reflect upon residual
activities after the end of the trials. The Security
Council, which is beginning its work on the legacy and
residual activities of the international criminal
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda,
must take those reflections into account. Having
approved the creation of the Court, it must also
concern itself with its legacy.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm here that France
fully supports the fight against impunity and the work
for justice being carried out by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone.

