Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Koenigs for his briefing
and to commend him for the remarkable work that he
has accomplished over the past two years in a difficult
context.

France fully subscribes to the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.

The situation described by Mr. Koenigs gives us
reasons both for hope and for concern. We have
reasons for hope when we assess the progress made
since beginning of the Bonn process: central Afghan
institutions are functioning; administration is being
strengthened in a number of provinces; the economy is
growing; civil society is active; as has been stated,
school is being attended by many boys and girls; the
infant mortality rate is declining; there is broad

participation by women in the formulation of the
National Development Strategy; and the country is
already preparing for the 2009 parliamentary and
presidential elections.

But there is uncertainty with regard to the future
of the process begun in Bonn in 2001, first because the
success achieved by the Afghan National Army on the
ground with the support of international forces has not
yet translated into a marked weakening of the insurgent
groups, which do not hesitate to resort to terrorist
tactics. The Afghan Government is also having
difficulty establishing the rule of law in many parts of
the country. Too often, illegal armed groups, drug
traffickers and local warlords take advantage of the
weakness of State institutions and the corruption of
some authorities to assert their own interests, to the
detriment of the most basic rights of the population.
That situation provides the Taliban and other extremist
groups with a breeding ground.

The deterioration of the human rights situation,
already mentioned here, is to be deplored. Beyond the
disappearances and cases of torture mentioned by
Mr. Koenigs, virulent attacks by some Afghan
politicians, notably members of Parliament, against the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission is of
great concern. We reaffirm our support for the work of
the Commission and ask the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to be very vigilant.

France and the European Union were profoundly
saddened to hear the announcement of the execution on
7 October of 15 persons who had been condemned to
death. France reiterates the call of the European Union
urging the Afghan authorities to reinstate as soon as
possible the moratorium on executions. France also
notes that the lack of due process in the trials of the
persons concerned and the secrecy of the executions
are not in compliance with international human rights
standards.

In order to consolidate the advances of the last
six years, the Afghan authorities and the international
community must ensure reform of the security and
justice sector. The Afghan Government needs to show
the necessary political will through compliance with its
commitments under the Afghanistan Compact of 2006.

We have confidence in President Karzai, but that
political will cannot be translated into reality on the
ground unless the international community and in
particular neighbouring countries mobilize their full

and unambiguous support. In that vein, France is
pleased to see the developments in the relations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan since the peace jirga
held in August 2007. Afghanistan needs to play a
greater role in regional affairs.

France will increase its effort both at the military
level, stressing operational training of the Afghan
army, and in civil reconstruction, so that the Afghan
people can harvest the fruits of a return to peace and
security.

Military success can achieve long-term effects
only if it is part of a global political strategy. Clearly,
UNAMA has a central role to play in the revitalization
of the international presence in Afghanistan. Only the
United Nations has the legitimacy - because of its
recognized impartiality - and the necessary expertise
to develop a global approach to consolidating the
democratic transition process in support of the Afghan
Government. There has been significant strengthening
of the presence of UNAMA in Afghanistan over the
past months and we welcome the extension of that
presence while noting any security concerns. France
also calls upon other actors in the area, in particular the
International Security Assistance Force and the
provincial reconstruction teams, to ensure that
UNAMA is well integrated into their efforts.

Finally, we must give the United Nations the
necessary support so that it may fully carry out its role
in spurring political and strategic action in
Afghanistan. In that spirit, France has announced its
interest in the appointment of a leading political figure
who would be able to ensure better coordination of
international civilian and military activities. It seems to
us that it is urgent that the United Nations become the
voice of the international community with regard to the
Afghan people.

