Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Terrorism, in whatever
place or form, deserves our strongest condemnation. We
believe that those who commit acts of terrorism should be
held accountable and should not escape severe punishment.
It is for this reason that we have studied carefully the
problems connected with the extradition of the three
suspects accused of the assassination attempt against
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt on 26 June 1995.

Poland, along with other members of the international
community, has followed the matter with great concern and
attention. The magnitude of the deplorable event that took
place in Addis Ababa at the opening of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) summit on 26 June 1995 by far
exceeds national dimensions. The tragedy at the
Organization of African Unity summit could have had grave
consequences for regional peace and security. It is also for
this reason that the search for the perpetrators and
ultimately bringing them to justice constitute a very
important factor in the maintenance of trust and stability
among the countries of the region.

It is important to note that the Ethiopian authorities
undertook legal measures and subsequently handed the
matter over to the attention of the regional organization. In
spite of the efforts of the Organization of African Unity, a
satisfactory solution has not been found. In the light of
the futility of both bilateral and regional efforts to resolve
the issue, the Security Council, acting upon a request
from the Ethiopian Government, deemed it necessary to
put the matter on its agenda. The extensive discussions
held in the Council have proved that all its members
share the view that efforts undertaken by the Organization
of African Unity must be supported and enhanced, by
means of the draft resolution before us.

The Polish delegation fully associates itself with the
contents of the draft resolution and will therefore vote in
favour of it. We expect that the Government of the Sudan
will promptly undertake effective measures to comply
with the decision of the Organization of African Unity
and thus with the draft resolution before the Security
Council.

