I thank the briefers for their comprehensive overviews, and the South African presidency for organizing today's debate. Over the years, the United Nations and Member States' approach to security sector reform (SSR) has been increasingly linked to a wider peacebuilding, sustaining peace and prevention agenda. There is a growing understanding that the SSR dialogue does not reach its full potential and effectiveness if it is limited only to the post-conflict realm; rather, there needs to be a holistic view to SSR throughout the entire cycle of conflict. Estonia is of the view that early capacity-building can prevent countries and communities from relapsing into violence after an active phase of conflict has ended. Having a whole-of-society and whole-of-system view of SSR is indispensable. The reform of security institutions, as well as security providers, needs to take into account the local sensitivities, the context and the relevant actors on the ground. That can be achieved only through local, national and regional ownership of the reform process. In that context, we commend the role that the African Union has played as a mediator and facilitator in negotiations on the specific SSR provisions in political and peace processes. Moreover, we are encouraged to see progress in the SSR field at the country level. Somalia, for example, has made considerable inroads with regard to security sector reform with help from both the United Nations as well as the African Union. The Joint Security Sector Governance Programme is aimed at increasing civilian oversight of security sector reforms. Importantly, the Programme also supports the engagement of civil society, with a focus on women and youth-based organizations, in the SSR process. One of the key gaps identified by the United Nations in SSR processes has been the lack of inclusion of women in security-sector and institution- building processes, as well as in the dialogues leading to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. It is important not only to include women in the formal processes and official bodies related to the security sector, but also to ensure that SSR is designed to be gender-responsive. That includes ensuring a gender-sensitive humanitarian response. It is essential to have clear guidelines on how to include more women from all aspects of society into the SSR process, the judicial reforms and political dialogue on peacebuilding and on sustaining peace. Unfortunately, it is often women and girls that are disproportionately affected by an armed conflict, and it is therefore extremely important to make their voices heard. A crucial aspect of reforming and governing the security sector is the question of accountability and respect for human rights. There needs to be a greater focus on the human rights-based approaches to SSR. It is an important aspect in the overall aim to resolve the root causes of conflict. Effectively addressing human rights violations and abuses by building accountability into the security sector is key to restoring trust between the people and the State, which is so often lacking in conflict- ridden societies. Making sure that all perpetrators of crimes against civilians are held accountable and rooting out a culture of impunity need to be part of a holistic approach to healing societies and creating conditions for sustainable peace. Finally, Estonia fully supports the efforts of the United Nations in improving the effectiveness of peace operations. In that context, it is essential to continue to find better and more efficient ways to design and implement international coordination mechanisms that would support SSR processes.
