Ms. Robinson: I am honoured to speak to the
Security Council on this important occasion. I, too, thank
the United States for convening this ministerial-level
meeting, and Secretary of State John Kerry for presiding
and for providing a strong statement as President
(S/PRST/2013/ll). Let me reiterate my congratulations
to Senator Russ Feingold on his appointment as the
United States Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I look forward to working very closely with him.
I also welcome the Secretary-General's appointment of
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), Mr. Martin Kobler, with whom I
have established a very good working relationship.

As we have heard, this high-level meeting on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes takes place at a difficult time for the people
in the region. The latest round of fighting in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has had
devastating consequences yet again on the civilian
population, both for those living in and around Goma
as well as for the host communities and Governments
of the neighbouring countries. Many cases of death,
injuries, sexual violence against women and massive
displacements of population are still being reported.
That cannot be allowed to continue. The fighting must
stop immediately, and all parties should exert maximum
restraint to avoid a further escalation of the conflict.

As the Council is aware, I have now served as
Special Envoy for four months. Not a day goes by
without reports of killings, rape, sexual assault and
the displacement of people in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The reports are in the dry prose
of the code cables or the slightly more descriptive
style of journalists filing their copy. What strikes me
is the lack of outrage and horror at the daily toll. It
has become the accepted normal. But it is not normal
and not acceptable. We committed to zero-tolerance
to gender-based violence. Zero-tolerance needs to be
implemented as a fundamental value of the Framework
for Peace, Security and Cooperation for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Like President
Yong Kim of the World Bank, I remember the rows of
people in Goma who lined the road holding pieces of
paper, mainly in French, which said: "No impunity",
"Peace now", "The fighting must stop". That, in
essence, is the promise of the Framework, a promise of
peace, security, cooperation and development.

Sadly, there are credible reports of some activities in
support of armed groups by different signatory parties
to the Framework, which are contrary to the spirit and
intent of the Framework. As the Secretary-General
said, the Force Intervention Brigade, once it becomes
operative, will be an important tool with a robust
mandate, but it is only one part of a comprehensive
approach that embraces security and development.

The stark reality is that those who suffer the
most from the endless conflict and its atrocities are,
and always have been, the civilian population first,
particularly women, children and even babies.
As the Secretary-General said in his remarks, hopes
were high when the 11 countries and four important
regional and international institutions signed the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, on 24 February,
and when the members of the Security Council adopted
resolution 2098 (2013), in March. The Framework
clearly gives the ownership and the responsibility
to the leaders who signed it. I am personally very
encouraged to see that their commitment to it is strong
and resolute. If fully implemented, both the Framework
and resolution 2098 (2013) would help stabilize the
situation on the ground and, more importantly, would
pave the way to address the fundamental causes of the
cycle of conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes.

That is why I strongly believe that the signatories
and guarantors of the Framework and the international
community as a whole need to work intensively together
to accompany the leaders and the people of the Great
Lakes to transform what I call the "framework of hope"
into a tangible reality.

Despite the security and humanitarian challenges
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region are facing at the moment, I am
encouraged by the initial progress in several areas
and by the strong will demonstrated by the signatory
countries to contribute to the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Allow
me to share some of the positive political steps that
the signatories of the Framework and key international
institutions have taken since February.

At the national level, in May President Kabila
established the national oversight mechanism, which
will oversee the implementation of the commitments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
Framework. I very much hope - and I made this
clear to President Kabila - that the national oversight
mechanism will include a large cross-section of civil
society in carrying out its mandate. At the same time,
national reforms that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has agreed to implement under the Framework
need to begin in earnest, and be supported by the
international community.

I would like to welcome the recent initiative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to
launch a mineral certification programme in an effort
to stop the illegal exploitation of minerals and prevent
armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo from benefiting from it. This is an important
first step, which deserves the full support of the
international community.

At the regional level, the first meeting ofthe regional
oversight mechanism took place in Addis Ababa on
26 May and established a technical support committee
mandated to develop the benchmarks and indicators of
progress for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, among other tasks. The
committee is made up of senior representatives of the
signatory countries of the Framework, who have met
twice so far, on 24 June and earlier this week on 22 and
23 July, under the co-chairmanship of my Special
Adviser Modibo Toure and the African Union Special
Representative for the Great Lakes, Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra. Participants also included senior
officials from ICGLR, the South African Development
Community, MONUSCO and the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs.

I am glad to report that the committee has made
solid progress in developing benchmarks and indicators
of progress. These may still be improved, but they
are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and
time-bound, with a clear indication of responsibilities.
In accordance with its immediate mandate, the
committee focused on regional benchmarks, but also
provided critical inputs for international benchmarks
and national benchmarks. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Committee
and the leaders of the region who responded positively
to my request to each to appoint one of their closest
advisors to represent them in this work.

I will present the benchmarks developed by the
committee to the leaders of the region during the next
ICGLR summit, scheduled for 31 July in Nairobi ahead
ofthe next meeting ofthe regional oversight mechanism,
which, as the Secretary-General has said, should
formally adopt them in September here in New York.
In the meantime, I will of course continue consultations
with all those involved in the implementation process of
the Framework to ensure that the proposed benchmarks
meet their concerns.

Two significant regional meetings took place
recently, with positive outcomes that I would like
to share. The first was the regional consultation on
women, peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes Region, which I organized, in collaboration with
Femmes Africa Solidarite and the ICGLR, from 9 to
11 July in Bujumbura, Burundi. More than 100 women
leaders from signatory countries of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework attended the conference,
including the Gender Ministers of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi.

Members will recall that I made it clear from
the beginning that, as Special Envoy, I intended to
implement a top-down and bottom-up comprehensive
approach, whereby I will be working, on the one
hand, with political leaders and, on the other, with the
people of the region to encourage peace, security and
development. It was important to listen to the Great
Lakes women's perspectives on the peace process, as
women represent the majority of the population of the
region and are, together with children, the first victims
of the ongoing conflict. I gave them the opportunity
to suggest possible benchmarks and indicators, which
were later submitted to the technical support committee
for consideration.

Perhaps I should explain that, not too surprisingly,
the technical support committee is entirely male in its
composition.

I will continue to encourage women-led
initiatives in the region through the establishment of
a communications platform, through which experts
and donors could provide technical advice and funds
to women's projects in support of the "framework of
hope".
As President Kim mentioned, the second meeting
took place on 18 and 19 July, in Addis Ababa. The
African Union, the World Bank and my Office organized
a ministerial meeting on regional approaches to
development in countries of the Great Lakes in support
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The meeting was attended by Ministers of Finance and
Economic Planning and Ministers of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of countries of the
Great Lakes Region, regional economic communities,
partner countries, international organizations and civil
society organizations. This proved to be a very good
forum for discussion, building on the historic joint visit
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim to the Great Lakes region in
May.

Participants noted that deepened regional
economic cooperation and integration and enhanced
regional infrastructure and trade could foster economic
inclusion and create opportunities, particularly for
disadvantaged groups, women and youth, as well as
strengthen political agreements by delivering tangible
results. They indicated a number of priority regional
interventions in energy and transport infrastructure,
agriculture, cross-border trade, economic development,
and social sectors. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Addis Ababa participants and also President
Jim Yong Kim for his commitment of $1 billion in
support of the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, which effectively turns it
into a Framework for peace, security, cooperation and
development.

All these steps, although they may appear minor
to the millions of people on the ground who are
eagerly waiting to see peace established and their lives
changing, are concrete affirmation of the determination
of the international community to try new avenues for
sustainable peace and stability and development in the
Great Lakes region.

I will soon come back to the Council with
further elements for the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, which will be
built on three critical pillars: political and security,
humanitarian and development. Elements of this
strategy will include sustained confidence-building
measures among leaders in the region, joint efforts with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for MONUSCO and international partners to support
the national dialogue process in Democratic Republic
of the Congo; cross-border development projects, with
a strong focus on civil society, youth and women's
groups; and modalities to support difficult mediation,
building on the Kampala dialogue, within the limits
of my mandate, including strict compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.

I am fully aware of the challenges that the
Governments of the region and the Security Council
face in advancing peace in the Great Lakes region. My
role, I hope, will be a modest but catalytic contribution
to helping restore peace and build hope for the future
in a complex environment. But such a strategy and the
Council's engagement with the Great Lakes region
will bear fruit only if all actors involved at the local,
national, regional and international levels push in the
same direction and if - let me reiterate - there is an
immediate cessation ofhostilities in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I believe that there is some political momentum at
the moment. We need to create and encourage space
for dialogue, and support for tough decisions. We need
to tell each other the truth, quietly when necessary but
firmly, and stick to our commitments to the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework if we are to make
a real difference this time. I have been having frank
conversations with the leaders of the region and I intend
to continue to do so in the coming months, including
next week when I meet them in Nairobi. I encourage
the members of the Security Council to keep the Great
Lakes region high on their agenda and to maintain the
current momentum, including perhaps through a visit
to the Great Lakes region in the coming months.

Let me conclude by warmly thanking the Security
Council members, the Secretary-General and my
United Nations colleagues, as well as regional and
international partners, who have continuously
expressed and provided support to my work. I know I
can count on them to try to move the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework agenda forward, and I am
really grateful for that.

