Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun and Ambassador Vieira for their briefings
today, and, although Executive Director Fedotov has
left us, we want to express appreciation for the renewed
vigour that he has to counter narcotics trafficking and
transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau. I also
join others in welcoming the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Filho, as he acquaints
himself with his new portfolio. We very much look
forward to working with him and wish to express
appreciation to his predecessor, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Modibo Toure, for his service
and passion to bring about positive change in the lives
of the people of Guinea-Bissau.

The United States is encouraged by the consensus
appointment and swearing in of Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes as well as President Vaz's renewed
commitment to implementing the Conakry Agreement.
While we are hopeful that these latest political
developments signal a positive turn for Guinea-
Bissau, past experience reminds us to remain cautious.
Vigilance is still needed from all stakeholders to ensure
fulfilment of the commitments made by the country's
leadership. The people of Guinea-Bissau deserve as
much, and the Council demands as much. We urge
President Vaz, Prime Minister Gomes, African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde leader
Pereira and others to follow through on fostering unity,
implementing the Conakry Agreement and preparing
the nation for the long-overdue parliamentary elections
this November.

Following the swift installation of an inclusive
Government, we call on its members to focus on
creating a programme of work and achieving service
delivery to show that they are serious about serving the
people who put them in power. In all these endeavours,
we encourage the inclusion of civil-society and women's
groups. We applaud the influential engagement of the
Women's Forum for Peace and the national women's
council and look forward to the national forum of
women and girls for peace, scheduled in Bissau for later
this month.

As Guinea-Bissau finally sets out towards
newly scheduled November legislative elections, we
look forward to a free, fair and transparent poll. We
encourage all of Guinea-Bissau's partners in the region
and the international community to find ways to support
the Government's efforts to prepare for and execute the
elections, including through financial support.

Narcotics trafficking and transnational organized
crime destroy lives at all ends of the geographic
spectrum. We genuinely appreciate the work that the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
has done in Guinea-Bissau, work that we perceive as
having had a positive impact, reducing drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime. The establishment
of the Transnational Crime Unit in Bissau, under the
auspices of the West Africa Coast Initiative, served as
a powerful tool integrating efforts across the region to
combat trafficking.

We were glad to learn that the 20 suspended
members of the Unit had been reinstated and were
heartened by the recent string of drug seizures at Bissau
airport in April. We hope to see more such concrete
results, with full investigations and accountability
supported by the Government and the security services,
no matter where the trail leads. However, in order to
continue to see impact, we wish to see the return of
UNODC staffto Bissau. We will work with our Council
colleagues, the Secretariat and UNODC to find a way
to make that happen.

We once again salute the activism of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
including its February imposition of sanctions on
spoilers of the Conakry Agreement and all its forward-
leaning efforts to foster enduring solutions to Guinea-
Bissau's crisis and the implementation of the remaining
provisions of the Conakry Agreement.
As I stated in February (see S/PV.8194), we
believe that the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018),
renewing the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), will bring
real improvement to the mission, allowing it to focus
on putting an end to the stalemate. Only two months
later, we have seen a concrete political process,
and we expect to see a mission focused on political
solutions and employing its good offices working in
concert with ECOWAS. We appreciate the continued
implementation of resolution 2404 (2018) as it was
adopted in determining the mission's mandated tasks,
size and budget.

We are also encouraged by the positive events of
the last month but acknowledge that Guinea-Bissau
has a long road left to travel. Its people will encounter
many challenges on that road, but obstructionist,
intransigent and selfish leaders should not be one of
them. Leaders have now shown willingness to take
some steps in seemingly good faith. We will anxiously
track their progress in the weeks and months to come as
they implement the Conakry Agreement, foster unity,
deliver services to the people of Guinea-Bissau, fight
corruption and transnational organized crime, and
prepare the nation for elections in November.

