Ms. French (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Bale and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their briefings and their work to advance
the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

A little more than a month ago, the United States
was pleased to join with fellow donors, the signatories
and the guarantors of the Framework agreement
in Addis Ababa for the fifth anniversary of that
agreement. That forum proved a useful opportunity to
take stock of the accomplishments that have occurred
under the Framework agreement, to review those
elements of the agreement that remained unfulfilled
and to discuss ways in which the Framework agreement
mechanism could be more effective and work within
the existing regional organizations. The signatories
to the Framework agreement understood that there
were inherent linkages between peace, development
and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the prospects for long-term stability across the
broader region.

That theme is also reflected in the recent report
of the Secretary-General on the Great Lakes region
(see S/2018/209). He stressed that the uncertainty
surrounding the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is compounded by the persistent
activities of armed groups in the territory. However,
we would take that point a step further. The political
impasse resulting from the delayed elections has
heightened tensions and undermined the already weak
to non-existent State authority and risks increased
violence and unrest, as it provides space for armed
groups and other malign actors to continue to operate.
We would urge the Special Envoy to focus on ensuring
that the elections go ahead and that the 31 December
agreement is fully implemented.

We agree that we must continue to urge action
against the armed groups operating in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We cannot
pretend that there is any solution to those problems
without the full implementation of the 31 December
agreement, the electoral provisions in the Constitution
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
electoral calendar.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo must hold
inclusive and credible elections in December that lead
to a peaceful democratic transfer of power. No more
delays will be tolerated. We were particularly heartened
in Addis Ababa to see consensus on the importance of
the election in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to regional stability. The continued strong leadership of
the African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region will be critical ahead of the
elections in order to ensure that the preparations
continue to move forward and that potential spoilers
are held accountable.

While we remain focused on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during this critical period, we
must not lose sight of other challenges to peace and
security in the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we are
particularly concerned about the planned constitutional
referendum in Burundi on 17 May. We have already
seen numerous reports of violence and the intimidation
and harassment of those perceived to be opponents of
the referendum. We are concerned that the referendum
will exacerbate the political tensions in Burundi and
that the development of the proposed constitutional
revisions has not been conducted in a transparent
and inclusive manner. Failure to respect the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement risks further
destabilizing Burundi with unpredictable repercussions
for both the country and the region.

As is the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the region has an important role to play in
promoting stability in Burundi. We urge the regional
stakeholders to intensify their efforts to foster dialogue
and to bring an end to the long-standing political
impasse in Burundi. The role of Special Envoy Djinnit
will be critical in working to strengthen and to support
the regional mechanisms advancing peace and security
in the Great Lakes region as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi go through this very important
period. We urge him to continue to engage with key
stakeholders in the region and to inform us of any
additional steps necessary to advance his mission.

