Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for introducing the report on the situation in Iraq
(S/2017/37l), but also for his tireless efforts for peace
and stability in that country.
With respect to the security situation in Iraq, the
delegation of Senegal welcomes the notable progress
that has been made in the fight against Da'esh,
including in the western part of Mosul. Those strides
are certainly a reflection of the courageous efforts
and the determined efforts made by the valiant Iraqi
army, with the support of local players as well as the
Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, in order to defeat the terrorist organization
while prioritizing the protection of civilians.

Along with the achievements, in particular
military, that we have seen within the framework
of the fight to eradicate that terrorist group and its
underlying ideology, my delegation is of the view
that we must take urgent and appropriate measures to
provide humanitarian assistance to the population in
need, in favour of national reconciliation and dialogue,
the fight against corruption, and for a virtuous and
inclusive Government without, of course, neglecting
the holding of credible elections, both at the provincial
and legislative levels, and accountability. Fortunately,
we are pleased to be able to point out the efforts of the
highest Iraqi authorities.

In that regard, I have primarily in mind the President
and ofthe Prime Minister, Mr. Al Abadi, and their efforts
to encourage national reconciliation and dialogue,
including visits to Iraqi Kurdistan where, besides
post-Da'esh reconstruction, important exchanges have
taken place on international and regional elections, as
well as the relations between the two Governments.
In that context, we believe it important to strengthen
cooperation, specifically within the context of the
ongoing operation in Mosul, between the Iraqi armed
forces and the Peshmerga, while continuing to place a
priority on the protection of civilians.

Furthermore, we invite the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance, primarily with respect to the financing of
the humanitarian response plan, which was launched in
Brussels in December 2016. An estimated $985 million
is needed to respond to the needs of the 6.2 million
vulnerable Iraqis, among which there are many persons
that have been displaced, in particular, since the
beginning of the operation in Mosul. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the particularly difficult fate of
children and to condemn the atrocities that terrorists
carry out, including rape, summary executions, as
well as forced conversions, in particular of Yazidis,
and the use of chemical weapons. Those actions could
constitute war crimes.
I would also like to condemn the use of civilians
as human shields, as well as the targeted killings
that Da'esh carries out, actions which go against
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The perpetrators of those crimes must, of course, be
held accountable.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
important action carried out by the United Nations
Development Programme to achieve stability and
progress in Iraq, in particular in zones that were under
the control of Da'esh. I would also like to take this
opportunity to launch an appeal for contributions for
the Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization, which
needs additional funding of $500 million. It should be
recalled that, thanks to the Facility, 500 projects are
under way, in particular in Mosul and in Ninawa.

