Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her very
informative briefing on the unrelenting tragic situation
facing the Venezuelan people.

As Venezuela undergoes the most serious
humanitarian crisis in its history and civilians,
especially women and children, are dying for lack
of access to adequate health care and basic needs,
Mr. Maduro's regime decided on 23 February to
prohibit international aid from reaching the country's
population. His forces did not hesitate to kill, and
they wounded several hundred people in clashes with
unarmed civilians on the borders. The regime resorted
to using armed militias in its pay, known for their
particular brutality. Hundreds of Venezuelan soldiers
preferred to defect rather than attack their compatriots.

Since the beginning of this crisis, France has
affirmed its unfailing support for the Venezuelan people
and their legitimate demands. We are referring to the
women and men who are suffering from shortages in
basic necessities and a health-care system in shambles;
to the women and men who have had to flee their country,
as they can no longer live in dignity and security; and
to the women and men who are calling for the return
of democracy and the rule of law in Venezuela. In that
regard, I would like to stress two points.
First, this political and humanitarian crisis did not
come about by chance. As the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, recalled on 24 February,

"The origins of the ongoing crisis in Venezuela are
political and institutional; hence, the solution can
only be a political one".

Accordingly, the crisis is the result of the regime's
multiple violations of the rule of law and the Venezuelan
Constitution, which, on 20 May 2018, culminated in the
holding of presidential elections lacking in transparency
and credibility and held in oppressive circumstances.
Nicolas Maduro, who claimed to be the winner, enjoys
no legitimacy based on that claim. Many countries,
including France and its European partners, drew the
necessary conclusions. The President of the National
Assembly, Juan Guaido, became interim President,
not propped up by foreign support but through respect
for the Constitution of Venezuela, in order to organize
the holding of new, free, credible and transparent
presidential elections.

Although the situation seems at a stalemate,
the European Union and Uruguay have launched an
international contact group in which France is taking
part. The group has two clear goals, which France shares.
The first is to encourage a negotiated and peaceful exit
out of the crisis, as the use of force and violence must
be avoided in Venezuela. France especially stresses the
latter point. There can only be a political and peaceful
solution to the crisis, and such a solution involves the
holding of democratic presidential elections as soon
as possible. The second goal is to allow the delivery
of international aid, in accordance with international
humanitarian principles, so as to meet the urgent needs
of the Venezuelan people.

In blocking humanitarian aid in the middle of an
unprecedented crisis the regime is acting disgracefully
in the eyes of the international community and its own
people. For several years now, millions of Venezuelans
have faced the greatest challenges in terms of providing
food and caring for themselves, as victims ofa severely
corrupt system. In its national capacity and under the
aegis of the European Union, France is committed to
helping those women and men who are in desperate need.
We will pursue our efforts in close cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies, with full respect
for the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. In particular, we must collectively
increase our efforts to help international, governmental
and non-governmental organizations meet the needs of
refugees and migrants from Venezuela.

We call on the Venezuelan regime to demonstrate
humanity and facilitate access for United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations to carry
out their activities in the country aimed at alleviating
the suffering of the Venezuelan people. It is a question
of life or death for thousands of people; each minute
we lose represents lives lost. I commend once again the
courage of those Venezuelans who have stood ready for
several years now to help their fellow citizens. They
deserve our unreserved admiration and full support.

Allow me to conclude by underscoring the
following point. Although today Venezuela is on
the edge of the precipice, our responsibility is not to
substitute ourselves for the Venezuelan people. It is to
provide them once again with a voice and allow them
to express themselves freely to reclaim their destiny
through the restoration of democracy and the rule of
law in Venezuela. That is the direction in which France
is working.

