Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Wittig, the former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his briefing and for the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2011/4l). His work at
the helm of the Commission is worthy of praise and
recognition. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Gasana, the current Chair, and to wish him the greatest
success.

The activities of the Peacebuilding Commission
during this past year and a half show the important
progress it has made in fulfilling its mandate and the
need to take comprehensive steps to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council regarding the recommendations that emerged
from the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

The various actors involved in peacebuilding
highlight the ongoing need to identify areas for joint
work, cooperation and coordination so as to avoid
duplication of efforts, enhance synergies and make the
best possible use of available resources. In that respect,
we underscore the leadership role played by the
Commission in making maximum use of the capacities
available in the United Nations, the international
financial institutions and the donor community, and in
forming partnerships and improving coordination with
the entities participating in those initiatives. We
therefore place a high value on cooperation between
the Commission and regional organizations and
international financial institutions, especially the
African Union, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.

With the recent addition of Liberia and Guinea to
the Commission's agenda, the pressing need for
national ownership is clearer than ever, given that the
role of the international community is to help create a
national process based on the needs identified by the
particular country. An important step forward in the
implementation of that principle came with the
statement of mutual commitment in Liberia. We
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to continue
to focus its activities on such initiatives.

A central aspect of the review of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission was its institutional
relationship with the main organs of the United
Nations, especially the Security Council. Within the
Council, there should be increased efforts to seek the
participation of the configuration Chairs in those
meetings at which we consider the peacebuilding status
in the respective countries so as to coordinate the work
of United Nations agencies on the ground, improve
planning and clearly establish actions to be undertaken
for early peacebuilding components of peacekeeping
operations.

We welcome the Commission's intention to
submit more analytical reports, addressing matters such
as the use and fostering of national capacities and the
sustainability of resources. The assessment of these
and other matters should be undertaken in cross-cutting
manner by the configurations so as to promote
evaluation of the activities within the jurisdictions
delineated in their mandates.

Lastly, allow me to underscore the need to
increase our political, economic and technical
commitment to the Commission. It is only with
determined support that we will be able to develop the
Commission's full potential and grant it its proper role
in preventing relapses into conflict.

