Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I thank the
Council for the opportunity to present the report of the
Secretary-General (8/2015/37) on recent developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Since the most recent update of the Secretary-
General to the Council (8/2014/805), some noteworthy
developments have been observed, including the
holding of a summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Abuja, on 15 December 2014, where it
was decided that the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) would be extended in its
current configuration for six months, which could be
renewed.
Regarding the reform of the defence and security
forces, the incumbent Minister of that sector has
introduced new amendments to the legislation on the
creation of the special pension fund. She has also
presented the Prime Minister with a list of personnel
eligible for demobilization and retirement, which is
being analysed.

In January, the Minister of Justice led the review
and validation of the proposed programme of reform of
the judiciary. The validated document will incorporate
all the proposals to be submitted by the Government to
the round table of international partners, scheduled for
25 March in Brussels. That will be another important
step towards the establishment of an accessible,
transparent and credible system of justice in Guinea-
Bissau.

Also in January, the Human Rights Council
undertook the second universal periodic review of
Guinea-Bissau. It made recommendations, particularly
in terms of strengthening the protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity and human rights
violations committed in the past. It also recommended
the country's accession to a number of legal instruments
and the ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

On the social front, the Government has been able
to continue providing basic services to the population
and to ensure an acceptable level of prevention against
the Ebola outbreak. Overall, the actions and decisions
taken indicate that neither the desire for change nor the
support of partners has wavered.

Let me draw the Council's attention to the
direction in which the Government intends to move. In
accordance with its programme for the next four years,
unanimously approved by the National Assembly, the
Government has defined a strategy and priorities for the
Brussels round table, which is of special importance to
UNIOGBIS. As for the first goal - the consolidation of
the rule of law, promoting good governance and reform
of State institutions - there has been encouraging
progress in strategic planning and the drafting of
legislation, particularly in the fields of defence, security
and justice. With a View to strengthening national unity,
the National Assembly has reactivated the commission
to promote national dialogue and established the
structures necessary to do so.

Despite these efforts, the situation remains fragile
because, as the Secretary-General often says, there
can be no lasting peace without development and no
development without lasting peace. It is certain that
there Will be neither one nor the other without the
primacy of the rule of law and respect for human rights.
In this regard, the United Nations system in Guinea-
Bissau welcomes the adoption by the Government of
an integrated approach ensuring the complementarity
of efforts towards poverty eradication and economic
development with good governance, thereby creating
the potential for the promotion of social progress.

The priorities announced by the Government to
the strategic assessment mission show that the return
to constitutional order, as positive as it has been, has
not yet made it possible to address the root causes
of instability in Guinea-Bissau. This means that the
socio-political environment is characterized by a
climate in which hope for a future free of uncertainty
coexists with a sense ofstability that remains precarious.
Guinea-Bissau continues to need support, including in
strengthening democratic institutions, restructuring
the defence and security sector, strengthening the
judicial system, improving the functioning of the public
administration, and increasing its capacity to fight
impunity and transnational crime, among others.

Accordingly, the Secretary-General recommends
the strengthening of the good offices of his Special
Representative in order to contribute to the promotion
of an environment of peace and stability while
encouraging dialogue towards national reconciliation.
Trust among the political leaders of the country remains
unquestionably an essential element of stability.
Similarly, UNIOGBIS should continue to promote
the strengthening of cooperation between Guinea-
Bissau and its international partners by providing a
coordinated response to the country's reform efforts. In
that respect, special attention must be paid to deepening
the partnership with ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union, given the regional, continental,
international and cultural dimensions of the issue of
development in Guinea-Bissau.

Let me stress a third aspect by reaffirming that
Guinea-Bissau needs ECOMIB and that ECOMIB
needs the support of the international community and
in particular the Security Council. The deployment
of a regional force is an exceptional measure taken
by ECOWAS, whose primary task as a regional
economic community is to promote the socioeconomic
development of its member States with a view to short-,
medium- and long-term integration.

It is clear that the assistance provided by the
international community to Guinea-Bissau cannot last
forever. In this perspective, the philosophy that must
inspire the strategy of partnership between the country
and the international community in the context of
development assistance must seek to create, both for
the people of Guinea-Bissau and for their partners,
conditions that will allow Guinea-Bissau to do without
international assistance. The United Nations is striving
for that objective by taking initiatives and promoting
actions to arrive at the point at which the country will
no longer need either a political mission or a foreign
military force on its soil.

The challenges are vast, numerous and complex,
but they are not insurmountable. The consolidation of
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau, a prerequisite
for development, requires joint efforts, patience and
perseverance. In this context, the commitment of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole to that country has never been more necessary,
important and urgent in ensuring that the achievements
won to date are consolidated and the excesses of the
past are forever consigned to history.

