Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Kalomoh for his
briefing. My delegation agrees with its main
conclusions.

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the European Union.

This week, the Middle East experienced two
major developments. In the Palestinian territories, the
Government of Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh -
composed exclusively of Ministers who are close to or
members of Hamas - was given a vote of confidence
by the parliament. In Israel, the elections to the
Knesset saw the victory of the new Kadima party of
Acting Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, whom we
congratulate on his success and who will be called
upon to form the next coalition Government. It is
undoubtedly too soon to speculate as to the
consequences of those events for the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process. Today, I shall limit myself to recalling
the principles to which France attaches importance.

The Palestinian and Israeli peoples freely
expressed themselves during the recent elections. We
respect their choices. The Palestinian and Israeli
leaders now bear a heavy responsibility: they must
respond with concrete measures to the aspirations of
the majority of their fellow citizens to peace and
security.

In that regard, we welcome the respective
positions taken by President Mahmoud Abbas and
Acting Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in favour of a
resumption of negotiations. Indeed, France is
convinced that unilateral approaches cannot replace a
negotiated process, which alone can lead to a lasting
peace. The international community - first and
foremost, the Quartet and the countries of the region -
must now support that willingness by helping the
parties to get back on the path of dialogue and to think
about conditions for a resumption of the peace process.

The new Palestinian Government will be judged
on its actions. We deplore the fact that the Prime
Minister, in his inaugural speech to the Legislative
Council, did not formally endorse the fundamental
principles of the peace process recalled by the Quartet:
renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel and
recognition of the agreements concluded between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Once again, we call on that Government to accept and
implement those principles. We have noted the similar
appeal made by President Abbas, whose resolute
actions at the head of the Palestinian Authority we
support.

Above and beyond the political developments and
the hope for an early relaunching of the peace process,
France remains concerned at the fragile situation on the
ground. The security situation is still precarious, as
illustrated by the grave consequences of the Israeli
military operation against the Jericho prison on
14 March. We call on all the parties to show the
greatest possible restraint. The Palestinian Authority
must strengthen its fight against terrorism, in particular
by halting the firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip.
The recent firing of a Katyusha-type rocket from Gaza
towards Israeli territory is a very worrisome
development in that regard. The Palestinian Authority
must also enforce the law and re-establish public order
in the territories under its control.

Israel, for its part, must put an end to its military
activities that are contrary to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, particularly extrajudicial assassinations,
which cause civilian casualties and fuel the cycle of
violence. We call on the parties to implement without
delay the arrangements concluded last year at the
Sharm el-Sheikh summit.

The deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
the Palestinian territories, recently emphasized once
again by United Nations agencies, is a source of
concern for us. France calls for full compliance with
and swift implementation of all provisions of the
Agreement on Movement and Access, concluded last
November. We have also expressed our concern that
the Palestinian people should not be punished and that
the institutional gains of the past decade must not be
sacrificed. In addition to increased support for the
activities of United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations on the ground, France is in
favour of maintaining international aid through reliable
and transparent channels, including those placed under
the supervision of the President of the Palestinian
Authority.

Finally, we remain very concerned about the
continued Israeli settlement in occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and about the route
of the separation wall, which contravenes the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice and
General Assembly resolution ES/10-15. Once again,
we call upon Israel to put an end to the unilateral and
illegal measures that threaten the viability of the future
Palestinian State and to comply with its obligations
under international law. The initiatives that Israel could
take in the West Bank must be the subject of an
agreement with the PLO.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country's
deep attachment to the creation of a viable, sovereign
and democratic Palestinian State living side by side
with Israel in peace and security. I also wish to
reaffirm the importance that France accords to the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the principle of
land for peace and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

