Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
begin by expressing our pleasure at seeing the sisterly
State of Kuwait presiding over the Security Council
this month.

I would like to make the following remarks.

First, the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and as Council
members are aware, the Court is not an organ of the
United Nations. Despite the change in the political
situation in the Sudan, the Court remains unchanged in
terms of statutes and practices. Our position therefore
has not changed. We have no commitments to the Court
and our statement is addressed to the members of the
Council. However, we note that the report's reference
to the issue of complementarity, albeit late, is positive.
Secondly, since December 2018 the Sudan has
witnessed notable positive developments that provide
for a new political reality which will undoubtedly lead
to the establishment of a regime in which the values
of freedom, justice and the rule of law will prevail.
We have already begun a serious process to establish
sustained civilian democratic rule in which there will
be no place for impunity. In that regard, it is necessary
to emphasize the professionalism, independence and
competence of the Sudanese judiciary and its ability
to achieve justice under national law, international
criminal law and international humanitarian law.

The public prosecutor in the Sudan has begun
investigations in the case of the detained former
President Omer Al-Bashir, as well as Abdel Rahim
Mohammed Hussein and Ahmad Harun. Former
President Omer Al-Bashir will receive a fair trial before
the national judiciary. As announced, the trial will
begin next week, thereby underscoring the willingness
and competence of the national judiciary to bring about
justice and combat impunity.

Thirdly, although the report acknowledges the
continued improvement of the situation in Darfur, it
neverthelesscontainsinconsistenciesandcontradictions.
Proof of that is the incorrect information, numbers and
events included in it. In paragraphs 25 through 31 of
the report, events are mentioned that either did not take
place or were exaggerated.

Such information contradicts the reports of
the Secretary-General and the last report of the
strategic review team, which confirmed the continued
improvement of the situation in Darfur. As a result of
that improvement, the report, which was endorsed by
the African Union Peace and Security Council as well
as the Secretary-General, recommended the continued
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) within the agreed time
frame. I would also like to mention the valuable and
updated input of the UNAMID Force Commander of
in the Council's meeting yesterday on the measures
that have been taken to implement the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and achieving stability
in Darfur (see S/PV.8552).

Fourthly, the judgment of the ICC Appeals Chamber
in the case of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, as
indicated in the report, was based on political more
than legal interpretations. The judgment violates many
well-established international treaties. It even violates
article 10 of the Rome Statute itself, which states that
"Nothing in this Part shall be interpreted
as limiting or prejudicing in any way existing or
developing rules of international law ..."

The judgment furthermore violates international
customary law, as the judges of the Court opted for
what suited their interests only. A significant number
of legal experts believe that resolution 1593 (2005)
does not provide for an exemption of being committed
to the principle of respecting immunity. In accordance
with international law and international jurisprudence,
immunity in this case is a right of the State, and not the
individual with immunity. Nobody may act on behalf
of the State in that matter. The person targeted by such
judgments in that case remains entitled to immunity and
can invoke it before the Court. Any attempt to interpret
otherwise would be an evident error and misjudgement
by the Appeals Chamber judges.

In conclusion, we emphasize that fighting impunity
is a noble cause ofjustice. It is not a subject ofcontention,
and it falls primarily within the responsibilities of the
relevant national investigative and judicial institutions,
in line with their competencies as stipulated in the
national legislation.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.
