Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing. Japan supports the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) to promote peace and stability
in Libya. I would like to thank also Olof Skoog for
his briefing on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

More than a year has passed since the signing of
the Libyan Political Agreement, and we have seen little
progress. The political situation remains fluid, but there
is an emerging trend, as we have heard today, namely,
a broad consensus among the Libyans to amend certain
elements of the Agreement.

In this regard, the agreement in principle between
the House of Representatives and the High State
Council to form a joint committee to work together to
amend the Agreement by consensus is a noteworthy
development. Japan believes that a Libyan-led process
that ensures broad, inclusive and genuine consultations
among the Libyan people is a prerequisite for achieving
enduring peace. Japan looks forward to seeing the joint
committee formed in that spirit.

The Libyan Political Agreement has now been
given another chance, and we must make the utmost
effort to support the Libyan parties in setting the course
for progress. In this regard, Japan appreciates the
continued engagement of the relevant parties, including
both regional and international parties.

Japan is concerned about the deterioration of the
human rights and humanitarian situation in Libya. This
is the cost of the political stalemate. The international
community cannot leave 1.3 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance suffering from unmet basic
requirements such as medicine, water and food. To
alleviate the suffering of the people, Japan will restart
its economic assistance to Libya for the first time in
three years. We will provide more than $4 million,
including $1.4 million to the Stabilization Facility
for Libya.

We also encourage the financial institutions in
Libya to redouble their efforts to tackle the issue of
funding and liquidity, so that the necessary services
can be provided to the people in need.

The security situation remains precarious. The
escalation of violence in Tripoli and the oil crescent
is another cause of the political stalemate. The recent
escalation in the southern region is of particular
concern. It should be stressed that violence does not
bring peace any closer. Japan urges the relevant parties
to immediately stop acts of violence.

Japan continues to support the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Accord as the legitimate
authority under the Libyan Political Agreement.
The Agreement is the key instrument in moving the
process forward, and its framework should be upheld.
Japan encourages UNSMIL to make further efforts
to facilitate the Libyan-led process to implement the
Agreement, in accordance with its mediation and good-
offices mandate under resolution 2323 (2016). Japan,
for its part, will continue to engage constructively
in order to support the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement and alleviate the suffering of the
Libyan people.

