Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the situation in
Idlib. We express our appreciation and gratitude to all
humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts. Those
unsung heroes provide lifeline services to millions of
Syrians in need.

Let me repeat what has been said many times in
the Chamber: a large-scale military assault on Idlib
would cause a major humanitarian catastrophe. So
far, we have been able to avoid a major tragedy thanks
to the Idlib memorandum of 17 September 2018. It
ensured relative calm in the governorate. It is extremely
important for the millions of people in Idlib that that
remains the case. However, the significant increase in
ceasefire violations by the regime, with their number
exceeding 600 since the last days of April, is deeply
alarming. We are faced with a disaster in the making.
The recent aggression of the regime might displace an
additional hundreds of thousands of people. It entails
serious humanitarian and security risks for Turkey, the
rest of Europe and beyond.

The civilian casualties caused by those
indiscriminate attacks have surpassed more than 500
in number. There has been yet again an intense use of
barrel bombs. The regime deliberately targets civilians,
schools and hospitals with complete disregard for
human life. Some 243,000 people have already been
displaced, and a trend of migration towards the north
is on the rise.

On 4 May, an observation post of the Turkish
armed forces was attacked and two of our personnel
were injured. Such actions can in no way be justified
as part of the fight against terrorism. No country
appreciates the need to combat terrorism more than
Turkey. However, innocent people cannot be sacrificed
in the name of fighting terrorism. That will only create
new hotbeds of terrorism and extremism.

The Idlib memorandum has also served the
ultimate goal of accelerating the political process and
finding a negotiated resolution to the crisis in Syria. It
provides the oxygen for the political efforts. The recent
belligerence of the regime risks disrupting the political
process at a time when we are at the final stages of
forming the constitutional committee.

We continue to coordinate with Russia to preserve
the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area and end the
regime's violations. President Erdogan and President
Putin are in close contact to discuss the measures to
be taken to address the current situation on the ground.
The Turkish and Russian Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and Ministers of Defence maintain an exchange of
views on a regular basis. As a result of contacts at
the highest level, a Turkish-Russian working group
convened in Ankara in the past two days in order to
bring the situation in the de-escalation zone of Idlib
under control.

The rest of the international community must also
make every effort to ensure that the regime respects
the ceasefire. The regime has frequently committed
crimes against humanity. Red lines have often been
crossed. We cannot repeat the same mistake again. The
consequences of inaction are immense. Shelling as well
as ground offensives must stop immediately. A return
to the status quo ante is essential.

We all agree that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria and that the only way to end the
conflict is through a United Nations-mediated political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Turkey and
neighbouring countries continue to bear the brunt of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, but our means and
capabilities are not limitless. The Council is responsible
for preventing a humanitarian catastrophe. It is time to
take action. That requires unity, courage and resilience.
We cannot and should not leave the Syrian people to the
mercy of the regime.

With regard to the statement delivered by the
regime's representative, I do not consider him as
a legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
Therefore, I will not honour him with a response.

