Mr. Shareef (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish to thank the Secretary of State of the Philippines
for convening this important session. I wish also to
thank Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea Bartoli and
Mr. Vasu Gounden for their insightful presentations.

We find the topic of today's debate useful and
relevant to that of last week's Security Council summit.
Whereas the summit focused on the role of States and
intergovernmental institutions in preventing and
resolving conflicts, today's topic on the role of civil
society in the same endeavour is a complementary
imperative.

In today's conflicts and wars and in this era of
terrorism the major victims are ordinary men, women
and children. Civil society should, therefore, have a
high stake in preventing conflicts, as they are the
immediate beneficiaries of peace and security in every
society. The role and effectiveness of civil society in
preventing conflicts and promoting peace and security
are enhanced by the extent to which civil liberties are
enjoyed in that society: by permitting freedom of
expression and association in shaping and influencing
opinion and allowing for participation in political
action on issues of conflict, peace and security at both
the national and international levels.

The primary focus for action to prevent conflicts
in a democratic society should be national parliaments.
Citizens and their organizations are the constituencies
to whom legislators are accountable. Civil society -
as individuals or community organizations, with the
help of the media - is strategically placed to influence
the policies and decisions on conflicts and peace and to
persuade or compel Governments to take timely and
appropriate action to avert impending conflicts. To that
extent, Governments should be partners with civil
society in preventing conflicts.

Civil society organizations - especially

institutions such as universities, research centres, the
media and human rights groups - should be in the
forefront in the early detection of systemic stresses and
strains on society that could be the root causes of
violent conflicts. Early warnings of impending crises
have often come from civil society. The same
organizations should generate awareness and spur early
political action nationally, regionally and
internationally to defuse and resolve problems which
could develop into violent conflicts and wars. That role
requires organization, capacity-building and
networking among civil society organizations with
different mandates.

Civil society organizations have been
instrumental in reducing or resolving conflicts between
groups and nations by maintaining informal lines of
communication to promote understanding. They have
been useful in decreasing tension, anger, fear and
misperceptions between conflicting parties. They have
also been able to facilitate and prepare the groundwork
for more formal negotiations. They should be
encouraged to use their specialized knowledge,
experience and resources in assisting conflicting
parties to resolve their differences and foster
reconciliation. Civil society organizations have the
advantage of informality and are less politically
constrained from taking action in a critical manner, but
they should also remain constructive and responsible.

At the same time, we should be on our guard and
not hesitate to take preventive action against sections
of civil society that deliberately engage in propagating,
inciting and fuelling conflicts. Only last week we were
compelled to take action in a case of incitement to
terrorism. Our memories of the virulent propaganda of
Radio Mille Collines, which spread the ideology of
genocide in Rwanda, are still fresh, and we are striving
to moderate inflammatory journalism in sections of the
media in Cote d'Ivoire to rescue the peace process
there.

While acknowledging the positive contribution of
civil society organizations in preventing and resolving
conflicts, our practical experience in the Great Lakes
region of Africa has taught us that proximity matters
when it comes to preventive action. Our specific
recommendation, then, is that civil society
organizations near conflict areas should play a
proactive role and seize the initiative to move
Governments to take action to prevent and resolve
conflicts. Other non-governmental organizations
outside the neighbourhood of the conflict should play a
complementary role.

Encouraged by Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), the role of women's organizations in conflict
resolution in the Great Lakes region has been effective
and encouraging. Women's organizations are currently
playing an active role in preparing for the next Great
Lakes region summit in Nairobi later this year.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the importance
of partnerships in conflict prevention and resolution.
We need to build an effective partnership between
States and civil society organizations so that they can
be twin pillars of conflict prevention and resolution
efforts. We should also establish a firm collaborative
partnership between States, civil society, regional
organizations and the United Nations system that can
help create a more peaceful world.

Finally, let us create meaningful partnerships
between national, regional and international civil
society organizations, including with the United
Nations, at all levels. The Security Council will be able
to make more and better informed decisions with input
from civil society, as has been aptly demonstrated
under the Arrias formula relationships.

