Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As always, it is with great pleasure and
satisfaction that we receive the briefing by Mr. Staffan
de Mistura. We wish to express our gratitude for his
efforts aimed at achieving a political and diplomatic
solution to the crisis in Syria. As the political situation
is closely linked to the humanitarian crisis prevailing
in the country, we also want to commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, under the
leadership of Mr. John Ging, for the enormous task it
has undertaken.

With regard to the recent developments in the
political process, my delegation would like to make the
following clarifications.

First, we note with great concern the escalation
of fighting in south-west Syria, especially in Dar'a
province, which, as the violence increases, is leading to
the displacement of hundreds of people and numerous
civilian victims.

It should be remembered that the south-west region
of Syria is an important strategic territory owing to
its proximity to the Jordanian border and the Golan
Heights, which is why it is necessary to guarantee and
respect the zone of detente agreed by the parties in
2017 with a view to reducing violence. In that regard,
in line with the Secretary-General's press release of
22 June (SG/SM/l9099), we call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in that part of the Syrian
territory and urge the parties concerned to respect their
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure.

In order to put an end to these military offensives,
it is essential that we pool our efforts and create
synergies so as to move forward and give priority to
the political process being facilitated by the United
Nations. In parallel with the Geneva peace talks and the
Astana challenges, the Sochi guarantors must continue
to work towards the establishment of a functioning
representative constitutional committee that brings
together members of the Government and opposition
groups, with the participation of civil society, in
particular women's organizations.

We very much welcome the meetings hosted
by Mr. Staffan de Mistura on 17, 19 and 25 June
with the Sochi guarantors and the so-called Small
Group, intended to chart a course to allow for the
implementation of the Sochi final declaration and
the establishment of the intra-Syrian constitutional
committee, facilitated by the United Nations within the
framework of the Geneva process and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

There is no time for a rhetoric of double standards
or for ambiguous or fruitless negotiations. It is time
for a frank dialogue between the parties and actors
involved, giving priority to constructive exchanges
and substantive debates, with a view to finding
common ground.

My Government continues to deplore the worsening
humanitarian crisis, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General dated 20 June (S/2018/6l9). It is vital
that the parties refrain from hindering humanitarian
access by the United Nations actors, which is key to
assessing the needs on the ground ensure the delivery
of assistance to and the protection of civilians.

We continue to call upon the parties and those who
have influence over them to allow for safe, sustained
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need,
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

To conclude, with respect to cross-border operations
carried out by the United Nations, my Government
is of the view that the provision of humanitarian
assistance on a cross-border basis is essential and
must be maintained. We support the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report on the
review of United Nations cross-border humanitarian
assistance (S/2018/617). We are convinced that the
observations of the Secretary-General can help
United Nations humanitarian entities and their partner
agencies further strengthen cross-border operations,
as underscored in the report. Close cooperation among
the various humanitarian actors is essential in order to
ensure that people in need receive such vital assistance.

