Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu. We are also grateful for the
briefing by the Head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, Mr. Edmond Mulet, and for
the letter sent by the Secretary-General (S/2017/916, annex).

Bolivia expresses once again its strong and
categorical condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons and the use of chemical substances as
weapons. It is an unjustifiable and criminal act,
regardless of where, when or by whom it is committed,
and constitutes a serious violation of international law
and a threat to international peace and security. We
agree with assertion of the Secretary-General, in his
letter of 30 October, that "[n]othing can justify their
use in any situation by any users" (5/2017/916, p. 1).
We reaffirm the need to maintain the Council's unity
to ensure that those who have used chemical weapons
are held accountable for their acts so that they do not
go unpunished.

We take note of the briefing held for State parties
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on 3 October on the alleged use of
chemicals in Hama governorate and the presence of
sarin and sarin-related substances. In that connection,
we reiterate that the OPCW, its Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism must carry
out their mandated tasks and conduct their work in
the most objective, methodical, technical, reliable,
supported and in particular depoliticized way possible
through an independent, impartial, comprehensive and
conclusive investigation.

With regard to the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, we reiterate that its investigative work
is important and that its mandate must therefore
be renewed in order to safeguard the continuity
of the investigations. There are at present 60 such
investigations and they must be carried out objectively
and impartially. Field visits to the sites Where the
incidents took place must be carried out, as long as
basic safety assurances are provided, which will make
it possible to achieve the expected results.

We believe that the renewal of the mandate
should be completely depoliticized, the integrity and
independence of the Mechanism should be maintained,
the purpose for which the Mechanism was established
must be respect to the exclusion of all others, and
a specific timeline and a clear methodology for the
Mechanism's work must be established.

Finally, Bolivia will continue to study the report
(S/2017/904, annex) and its scope. We reiterate again
the need to maintain unity in the Council to ensure the
continuity of the Mechanism's work.

