Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Government of Haiti, I should like to congratulate
the Security Council on taking the initiative to meet
in open debate, which reflects the sense of urgency
aroused by the current situation in the Middle East. I
have noted with great interest the themes addressed
in the concept note (S/2017/305, annex)of the United
States presidency of the Council for April, as well as
the very relevant points raised by the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and the speakers who
have preceded me.

From one summit to another and one conference to
another, the calls for action resound everywhere, giving
new impetus to the peace efforts in the Middle East. The
hope of a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that were raised by the
1993 Oslo accords has gradually faded over the years,
undermined by the increasing mistrust between the
parties, the temptation of fait accompli and unilaterism.
Against this backdrop - marked by the total absence
of any political and diplomatic progress, new crises,
the rise of violent extremism, civil and regional wars
with their terrible human of 500,000 deaths in Syria,
their processions of horrors and their humanitarian
challenges - the current situation on the ground is no
longer sustainable, as the Special Coordinator rightly
pointed out.

The Israeli-Palestinian peace process is clearly
at an impasse. The two-State solution appears to be
more threatened every day. In addition, from Syria to
Yemen via Iraq and Libya, the region has been plagued
by a succession of crises that, by their magnitude and
severity, have eclipsed the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and obscure the continuing threat to peace in the region
and in the world.

The Republic of Haiti, faithfulto the cardinalposition
that it has held unwaveringly since 1947, reaffirms its
support for a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, believing as it does
that the only way to achieve that goal is through a
negotiated solution, with two States living in peace
and security within secure, recognized and guaranteed
international borders. It therefore adds its voice to all
those raised in favour of innovative initiatives aimed
at placing the Israeli-Palestinian issue at the heart of
international concerns so as to allow a rapid resumption
of negotiations in the spirit of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
The purpose of this special meeting is to highlight
the fundamental issue of peace and security in the
Middle East for the entire international community.
At the same time, it also raises the question of the
capacity of the United Nations - and, consequently,
the responsibility of the Security Council, which is
the principal guarantor of international peace and
security - to ensure its preservation, particularly in
the Middle East region.

Indeed, it has become almost a commonplace
to evoke the deadlock in the Security Council, in
particular in the light of the abusive use of the right of
veto. This paralysis is often perceived as one ofthe main
institutional obstacles to international peace efforts in
the Middle East. There was a striking illustration of
this in the recent debate of the Council following the
use of chemical gases against civilian populations in
Syria (see S/PV.7922). That was further proof - if it
were still needed - ofthe need to remedy this recurring
impasse and to provide innovative solutions to the
Council's decision-making process so as to enable it
to fully undertake its mission of addressing the root
causes of conflicts, identifying potential threats and
acting expeditiously when circumstances require
urgent action.

It was in that spirit, moreover, that the Republic
of Haiti supported the recent French initiative, the
merits of which remain undeniable, aimed at limiting
the right of veto, particularly in the case of mass
atrocities. Here, we must salute the tireless efforts of
Liechtenstein and Mexico to that end, for it must be
emphasized that, beyond the privilege attached to it,
the veto imposes above all, for those who exercise it,
a duty and a special responsibility with regard to the
international community.

In the explosive current context of the Middle East,
where the suffering inflicted on the civilian population
by extremism, terrorism and civil wars has become
incommensurable, the Council cannot shirk its stark
obligation to address the root causes of the conflicts
in Syria, Yemen and Iraq, which are tearing the region
apart, decimating religious and ethnic minorities, and
threatening international peace and security. With
particular reference to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
the time has come to recapture the initiative and create
the conditions for a resumption of negotiations between
the parties in the light of the convergences emerging
from the relevant Council resolutions, and the steps
taken by various bodies, including the Quartet or the
recent Paris conference on the Middle East. The status
quo cannot take the place of a solution.

It is time to revive the peace process in the Middle
East. Everyone has responsibilities. In particular, each
member of the Security Council must rise above its own
biases and transcend its own interests in order to help
the parties concerned to resume the path of negotiation
and move forward on the road towards a sustainable
and comprehensive solution on the basis of a mutually
agreed framework.

The Republic of Haiti has always condemned the use
of war as a method of conflict resolution. It considers
that, in the face ofthe risk of heading down the slippery
slope of violence and widespread conflagration, a
dogged search for peace in the Middle East is what is
needed. The ability ofthe Council to adequately play its
role as an irreplaceable player in this process depends
strongly on the individual commitment of each of its
members to the ideals of peace, security, solidarity,
cooperation and development on which the United
Nations was built.

Today's meeting could signal a new beginning,
where the destructive dynamics prevailing on the ground
are reversed and a genuine peace process based on law,
justice, security and mutual respect is undertaken in
the Middle East. Let us seize such an opportunity.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
