Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates,
I congratulate the United States on acceding to the
presidency of the Council and appreciate its presiding
over this quarterly debate. I want to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing earlier today.

The United Arab Emirates associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. I should now like to make the following brief
points in my national capacity.

The United Arab Emirates is gravely concerned
about the violence and counter-violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and the absence of a
just solution that grants the Palestinian people their
inalienable rights. The plight of the Palestinian people
has endured for nearly seven decades, and it must stop.
To that end, we call on the international community and
the Security Council to take all measures necessary to
reach a two-State solution. Such an outcome must allow
for the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, based on the June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, pursuant to relevant resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Madrid principles.
Finding a resolution to the Palestinian question remains
a fundamental priority for the United Arab Emirates.
To that end, we echo the call in resolution 2334 (2016)
for Israel to cease its illegal settlement activities, which
pose a major obstacle to the two-State solution.

The paramount aim for the United Arab Emirates is
the promotion of security and stability in our region. In
Syria, we are particularly alarmed by the continued and
heinous use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime,
and we express our full support for the United States
military operations against military targets in Syria.
We call on all parties to work to ensure that non-State
actors and extremist militias are not in control of the
country. The international community must work
to create a space conducive for the Syrian people to
determine their own future. To that end, we urge the
United Nations-brokered peace talks to move forward
towards a positive outcome.

In Yemen, the Houthi militias are endangering not
only peace and security in the country, but also the peace
and security of the region, particularly through attacks
across Saudi Arabia's borders. The only way to resolve
the conflict in Yemen is through the United Nations-led
peace process, based on the resolutions of the Security
Council, the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council
and the outcome ofthe National Dialogue. Until lasting
peace is achieved in Yemen, ensuring humanitarian
access to civilian populations must be the priority.

The conflicts in Syria and Yemen share one
common denominator - Iran. Iran has increasingly
caused tension and instability in our region, posing
an existential threat to the Middle East through its
expansionist policies, export of its revolution to
other countries, flagrant violations of international
sovereignty and constant interference in the internal
affairs of neighboring countries. We stress that Iran is a
State sponsor of terrorism in our region, from Hizbullah
in Lebanon and Syria to the Houthi militias in Yemen,
and terrorist groups and cells in Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait,
and Saudi Arabia. The list goes on.

The United Arab Emirates offers three proposals
with the aim of promoting security throughout the
Middle East:

First, in light of Iran's rampant interference in the
region and flouting of numerous relevant resolutions, we
urge the Security Council and its sanctions committees
to pursue their best efforts to investigate, report and act
on Iran's sanctions violations.

Secondly, we call for special attention to be paid to
the plight of youth across the region as a key priority.
In the absence of economic opportunities, the young
people of the region are being exploited by terrorist
organizations. This is especially true for the youth of
Palestine, who are the future and would give new life to
the peace we all seek.

Finally, in order to build the necessary momentum
for a peace process, we call for greater engagement with
regional organizations and actors, especially through
multilateral forums, such as the United Nations. In this
regard, respect for international law is key to stability,
and we call on all Member States to comply with the
decisions of the Security Council, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations.

To conclude, the United Arab Emirates confirms
the importance of these quarterly debates and the urgent
need for efforts to drive peace in the region. I wish the
United States continued success in stewarding the work
in the Chamber for the remainder of the month.

