Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing.

08-4326]

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains the same. More than a month after
the ceasefire agreement between Palestinian factions
and the Zionist occupying forces - which came about
as a result of the efforts of Egypt and which entered
into force on 19 June - the situation at crossing points
remains one of closure and only partial opening. That
is in contravention of the occupying forces'
commitment to the declared period of calm. Israeli
forces continue to assassinate Palestinian activists in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which reflects the
persistent attempt by the occupying authorities to put
an end to this temporary ceasefire.

Such partial openings of crossing points should
not be understood as a concession by the occupying
Power: they are a commitment of the Israeli occupying
forces under international law and human rights law.
The occupying Power's policy of collective
punishment has been described in this Chamber by the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretaries-General
for Political Affairs and for Humanitarian Affairs as a
crime under international law and humanitarian law,
and it is considered to be a crime of genocide under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which the Council discussed two days ago. A
number of other international officials and
international organizations have also spoken out, most
recently the European Commission, which has called
for the siege on Gaza to be lifted.

The activities undertaken by the Israeli
authorities following the Annapolis Conference, in
particular their continued construction of settlements,
leave no doubt that they are not serious about attaining
a permanent, just and comprehensive solution to the
situation in the region. All those activities not only
impede the peace process, but also endanger the
concept of a two-State solution.

Despite all the requests, exhortations and appeals
to the occupying Power to halt the construction of
settlements, the occupying authorities continue daily to
issue new permits for the construction of new
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. They
are also entrenching the settlements by continuing to
build the apartheid separation wall, in spite the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
There is evidently international paralysis in the face of
this expansion of the settlements, which has resulted in
the seizure of 76 per cent of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
The Security Council's inability to express its
will on the settlements, which the international
community has unequivocally rejected, calls for a
review of the Council's working methods and its
machinery. It is legally and morally unacceptable for
some States to prevent the Council from shouldering its
responsibilities on this issue. There is injustice in the
unequal treatment accorded to a people under
occupation and an occupying Power that is daily
violating its obligations as an occupying Power.

For more than a month, the Arab Group has been
making intensive efforts to bring about a Security
Council resolution to address the issue of settlements
as an impediment to progress in the peace negotiations
and to address the illegal actions undertaken by the
occupying Power in contravention of all international
norms and agreements, which have been condemned by
all international and regional parties. Regrettably,
however, that endeavour has met with paralysis and
flimsy justifications and pretexts aimed at using the
Middle East problem as a way to impose a solution that
will protect the occupying Power and metes out unjust
treatment to the victim. That is not the proper stance
for an impartial mediator to take.

My delegation stresses the right of the Palestinian
people to resist occupation. That right is recognized
under all international norms and laws. My country
completely rejects any linkage between resistance to
occupation and terrorism. Real terrorism is the
confiscation of Palestinian property, the continued
killing of Palestinian leaders and activists and the siege
imposed on 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Real terrorism is more than 60 years of forced
displacement of Palestinians and of not permitting
them to return to their homes. Real terrorism is the
detention without trial of 11,000 Palestinians, some of
them children, old people, women or members of the
Palestinian Legislative Council - and when there is a
trial, it is usually unfair and a mere formality.

My delegation is astonished by the suggestion by
some that it is futile for the Council to discuss a
question as important as that of the Middle East.
Perhaps such comments will help us to understand why
the Council is unable to shoulder its responsibility on
this issue and to understand the paralysis and lack of
credibility resulting from the abuse of authority and the
double standards used in addressing the question of the
Middle East.

Turning to Lebanon, my delegation has
consistently emphasized non-intervention in Lebanese
affairs. Such intervention leads to crisis rather than
helping the Lebanese parties to achieve reconciliation.
When, in Doha, the Lebanese were offered the
opportunity, they succeeded in emerging from the
political crisis that Lebanon had faced for more than a
year and a half. We welcome the positive developments
in Lebanon following the Doha agreement, the
developments in Syrian-Lebanese relations, and the
return of Lebanese prisoners of war from Israel.

But despite those positive developments,
Lebanon still faces daily violations of its airspace and
borders. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2008/425) notes an unprecedented increase
in the number of Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace
since February, reaching 72 in a single day.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to occupy
the Shaba'a farms and the Lebanese village of
al-Ghajar. It has failed to respond to the appeals of the
Secretary-General and his representatives or to the
requests by the forces of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon to present maps showing the
locations of mines, explosive devices and cluster
munitions, which, as emphasized in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2008/425), cover 49 per cent of the
surface area of southern Lebanon. All of these acts,
including the daily violations, the continued occupation
of Lebanese territory and the non-response to efforts to
determine the locations of mines and other remnants of
war are in flagrant violation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006).

The occupied Syrian Golan continues to be
subjected to the Israeli settlements policy, which has
been in effect since 1967. Despite Syria's
announcement and emphasis on the fact that peace is
its strategic option and that it is prepared to negotiate
without conditions, and despite the many resolutions
declaring the annexation of the Golan null and void
and without any legal basis, the occupying Power
continues its expansionist settlement policy in the
occupied Syrian Golan. The recent announcement by
the Israeli Knesset that it will not give up the occupied
Syrian Golan except through a general referendum
reflects the utmost arrogance and constitutes blackmail
and the seizure of others' lands.

08-4326]

A few minutes ago, we heard the representative
of the Israeli entity present a tourism promotion in the
Security Council, as if the Council were a travel
agency. I believe that his propaganda was inspired by
what we saw a couple of days ago on television: photos
of a young Palestinian, blindfolded and handcuffed,
who had been shot by Israeli soldiers. Those photos
were actually provided by the Israeli entity. That
propaganda should make us think twice about
accepting the revolting invitation to visit the Israeli
entity. We want the representative of the Israeli entity
to respond to the appeals of the Security Council, and
those contained in the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Human Rights Council, to permit observers to see
what is actually happening in the Palestinian refugee
camps. I believe that, instead of making statements
concerning Libya's conduct, the representative should
improve the conduct of his own country, which is
based on terrorism. I do not wish to take up the
Council's time by listing the terrorist acts committed
by the State called Israel since its establishment. We
thank God that that was the last statement to be made
by the representative of that country in the Council.

