The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today. I am delighted to welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. lvica Daeic', Prime
Minister of Serbia.

The normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia is integral to both countries' European Union
(EU) accession paths. We welcome the EU-facilitated
dialogue, the success of which must be attributed to the
hard work of Cathy Ashton and the two Prime Ministers
here today.
From the perspective of sitting in the Security
Council, we are all too often able to observe how
issues remain blocked because of the absence of vision
and commitment on the part of political leaders. The
progress that has been made in the EU-facilitated
dialogue is a welcome reminder that the opposite
can also be the case - that vision, commitment and
persistence can yield tangible and effective results, and
that flexibility from one side can generate flexibility
on the other side. I offer my sincere congratulations
to Prime Minister Thaci and Prime Minister Dacie for
the leadership and courage they have demonstrated
in coming to an historic agreement that will aid the
irrevocable progress of both countries towards the
European Union.

The momentum of the past two months must be
sustained. Implementation is crucial to unlocking
progress for both Kosovo and Serbia. Belgrade must
communicate the benefits of this agreement effectively
to the local communities in northern Kosovo, and
Pristina must demonstrate its support of the rights and
culture of all its citizens and integrate Kosovo Serbs in
the north.

The continued assistance of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the implementation
of dialogue agreements will be indispensable. The
OSCE will play a crucial role in facilitating municipal
elections in the north. KFOR will help with maintaining
security and stability, and EULEX will help integrate
institutions in the north under Kosovo's jurisdiction.
The United Kingdom urges the authorities in Pristina
and Belgrade to cooperate fully with EULEX and
ensure freedom of movement for all of its personnel in
the north.

I welcome Kosovo's commitment to holding free,
fair and democratic elections. All citizens of Kosovo
must have the opportunity to take part in the elections,
and women must have an equitable role in competing
for political office. The United Kingdom is keen to see
the necessary reforms adopted without further delays.

The European Commission report of 22 April
states that Kosovo has met the short-term conditionality
set out at the December General Affairs Council for
opening negotiations on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. The United
Kingdom fully supports a stabilization and association
agreement with Kosovo.

Finally, I welcome the further progress made by
Kosovo in securing wider international recognition. In
recent weeks, the Governments of Guyana, Tanzania
and Yemen have all decided to recognize Kosovo's
independence. After only five years of independence,
Kosovo is now recognized by over half of the States
Members of the United Nations. Kosovo's independence
is a reality, it is irreversible, and we welcome the
steadily growing international recognition of that fact.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at noon.
