Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I wish to welcome you, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council today. That is of special significance,
as you yourself said, Sir, because it is the first time
that Guatemala is presiding over the Council. To
you, Sir, and to Ambassador Rosenthal and to your
entire delegation, we express our warmest and most
affectionate greetings.

I wish to thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General,
which includes many positive points and which also
draws our attention, very objectively, to the situation
(S/2012/678). The work of Mr. Fernandez Amunategui
has been extraordinary. Those who have been able to
visit Haiti in his company and to follow his guidance
know just how difficult his task is and how much
dedication and energy he has devoted to it. He has our
full gratitude and support.

When we evaluate the progress made in Haiti, in
order to make recommendations for promoting the
well-being, development and strengthening of its
institutions, there is a series of important elements we
must consider. First, we must say that we are pleased
with the stabilization process experienced in Haiti
since the coming to power of President Martelly. That
transformation, as seen in the report, has had specific
effects. It was finally possible to confirm the Prime
Minister in the Parliament, approve laws on the budget
and on banking controls, reduce some types of crime,
such as kidnapping and political violence, reduce
the number of displacements, publish constitutional
amendments, establish the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, and comply with an important quota of 30 per
cent women's representation in the Government. That
generates confidence, and it shows that recovery is
under way in Haiti.

We also wish to highlight the important role of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in maintaining an environment of
security and stability. That has been an important
element in confronting the political, economic and
social challenges in the best way. Matters such as
the increase in murders, the carrying of firearms by
unauthorized persons and the proliferation of criminal
gangs require special attention in all sectors of the
national police, with the support of MINUSTAH.

We believe that the strengthening of Haiti still
calls for the presence of MINUSTAH, especially
the essential component of its mandate, which is to
provide conditions for security, well-being and the
strengthening of institutions. That is all the more
obvious when we note the conclusion of the Secretary-
General in his report, when he states: "Although the
performance of the national police has continued to
improve, the institution is not yet in a position to assume
full responsibility for the provision of internal security
throughout the country" (S/2012/678, para. 12).

My delegation will support a resolution responding
to those challenges and to the mandates that drive the
activities of MINUSTAH, in which human security
is perceived in comprehensive terms of promoting
development, respect for human rights, peaceful
coexistence and protection for individuals and their
environment. That mandate must be interpreted in
connection with the ongoing dialogue that should exist
among the Government, civil society and international
actors.

It is necessary to expand MINUSTAH's work to
evaluate and strengthen the Haitian police. The plan
for 2012-2016 developed by the National Police and
MINUSTAH is an important tool to empower and
increase the number of police, which today consists of
10,106 officers, sub-officers and agents.

With regard to engineering, MINUSTAH is
conducting praiseworthy risk-management activities
including building police stations, road repair,
removing earthquake rubble and clearing rivers and
canals of prefabricated structures. When it comes to
criteria for reducing the military and police components
proposed by the Secretary-General, we believe that
the engineering unit should maintain a presence that
matches the challenges in that area, in accordance with
its capabilities. We call on MINUSTAH to assign the
experts in that component as effectively as possible in
a manner consistent with their abilities and areas of
knowledge.

The presence of Colombian police in the field has
been extended, as discussed at a working meeting on
integral security for cooperation between Colombia
and Haiti held in August 2012. A delegation of the
Haitian National Police visited Colombia in order to
implement the plan on cooperation in comprehensive
security. The idea was to validate the proposal with
the police authorities of Haiti, as well as the on-site
presentation of the operative, administrative and human
resources abilities of the Colombian police to train the
beneficiaries of the programme. The goal is to train 221
police officers between now and 2014, as well as 50
female police officers, in order to strengthen strategic
development and planning, and the environmental,
anti-narcotics and anti-kidnapping police.

We consider that one of the fundamental aspects of
the future of Haiti is the development of the agricultural
sector, which, we believe, should be a priority. It is
necessary to approve certain competitive factors, which
this sector of national productivity offers in the context
of a plan for rural and agricultural development. It will
include the promotion of products of the earth such as
coffee, cocoa, fruit, sugar cane and others. That could
create an important source of exports.

I cannot fail to say that in accordance with our
coffee business in Colombia and in association with the
Inter-American Development Bank, we are promoting
a project to improve coffee production in Haiti. The
idea is to establish a sustainable, inclusive coffee
chain of value, which will increase revenues for small
producers, strengthen cooperative effort and increase
exports of quality coffee. That is a project to which I
devote particular attention.

Finally, it is important to mention projects for the
recovery of communes and barrios and dwellings within
an urbanization plan in Haiti, based on the experiences
of the city of Medellin in Colombia and through
strengthening the National Institute for Professional
Training through technical exchanges with the National
Training Service of Colombia, or SENA. Those entities
have broad success in those sectors.

The political forces in Haiti must build on the
progress achieved in order to open the path to take
responsibility for their own destiny. No contribution
makes any sense without such political will. Nobody
except Haitians themselves can create that will. The
efficient coordination of international cooperation
continues to be a priority. Thus the adoption of an
integrated strategic framework for help for 2013-2016, a
strategic development plan of the Haitian Government,
is a step in the right direction.

Responding to the cholera threat is a priority. The
statistics in the Secretary-General's report call for
that. The figure of 580,947 people infected between
October 2010 and 15 July 2012 is not just worrisome.
What is much worse is that at least 7,440 people have
died because of this disease. A greater budget must be
invested in preventing cholera and in water treatment,
improving vigilance for and management of this
serious problem, and supporting the most vulnerable
communities.

International evidence shows that poverty and
unemployment are causes of evils such as cholera, but so
are institutional weaknesses that lead to malnutrition,
illiteracy and corruption. All those scourges must
be fought in a consistent fashion by developing the
policies that Haitians will adopt, giving to the creation
of local capacities and to institutional consolidation the
primary place they should have.

Another fundamental issue is that of the postponed
elections. We call on all local stakeholders to unite their
efforts so that through constructive dialogue they can
agree on prompt, transparent elections so that the 10
senators whose terms ended last 8 May can be replaced.
Financial and administrative support in this sector is
vital for strengthening the democratic process.

We are convinced that the United Nations has
an institutional duty to Haiti, and the international
community must support its management. MINUSTAH,
as the appropriate mechanism for coordination and
management, must maintain its presence in the field.
That is why we commit ourselves to supporting the
extension of itsr mandate to October 2013.

