Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): France
fully supports the statement to be made by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union.

Despite what the term "small arms" might
suggest, vast damage is caused by the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/258)
describes the long-term destabilization of societies and
the plunder of their resources, along with the thousands
of victims this trade claims, particularly in Africa. The
Secretary-General also stresses something that my
Belgian colleague has rightly emphasized and that
should be of particular concern to us: among the main
victims of arms trafficking are the most vulnerable
members of society: women and children. We must
take account of the role and views of women on this
issue; the Secretary-General's proposals are
particularly welcome in that respect.

The same holds true for children. As members
know, France has committed itself unconditionally to
working to improve the situation of children in armed
conflict and ease their suffering. In that regard
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is of the highest priority.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
organized today's debate on a theme that, in a sense, is
at the core of the Council's activities. Beyond the
damage already mentioned, the trafficking in small
arms and light weapons poses a threat to peace. These
weapons threaten the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. Their presence is often in direct
violation of embargoes imposed by the Security
Council, and this justifies the increasing degree to
which they are taken into account in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, and in programmes for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and for
security sector reform. In this area, the Secretary-
General recommends greater synergy among the
activities of the Security Council and of all others
involved in combating small arms and light weapons.
These recommendations are most welcome.

As a nation, France is deeply committed to
combating illicit trafficking, and has been for many
years. In 2002 we made an active contribution to the
drafting and adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms, and we have
continued to take action in multilateral forums, first
and foremost within the European Union, which has
adopted a Code of Conduct on Arms Exports and a
Strategy to combat illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and their ammunition, about which my
Slovenian colleague will speak.

Moreover, in the framework of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, France has
launched an international initiative to combat the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons by air. We
know that the traffic in small arms and light weapons
makes ready use of air transportation. It is well known
that traffickers outwit the vigilance of the authorities
by falsifying transport documents, flight plans and
aircraft registration, and by taking risks in the air to

elude air-traffic controllers. Our initiatives are aimed
first and foremost at enhancing the exchange of
information, focusing on control provisions and
facilitating cooperation in that sphere. Our efforts also
seek to promote partnership between air transport
companies to identify the optimum measures to be
adopted, given the economy of that sector. Finally, we
are also seeking to establish a guide of best practices.
Air transport is an essential part of that traffic and we
hope to put an end to it.

Within the United Nations, we place our hopes in
and have resolutely committed ourselves to several
initiatives to address various key facets of trafficking.
Identifying the source of small arms and light weapons
and the traceability and marking of weapons are among
the critical aspects of the fight against trafficking.
France and Switzerland therefore took the initiative of
sponsoring an international instrument adopted in
2005. We had hoped that the instrument would be
legally binding, but we welcome the first steps that it
has allowed us to take and which point the way for the
future.

A second vital target is brokers. We are actively
involved in drafting an instrument to combat illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons. We know
that brokers have become central, inescapable and
especially noxious figures in trafficking.

Thirdly, with respect to consumable items, like
the Secretary-General we wish to emphasize the
importance of keeping munitions and ammunition in
mind. We are therefore deeply involved in the group of
experts on surplus ammunition.

Finally, with respect to end-users, we welcome
the early work of experts on a treaty on the arms trade,
a major initiative that will contribute to more
responsible management of arms transfers and to
improved international cooperation.

None of those efforts should allow us to forget
the magnitude of the task ahead. Several essential
stages await us, in particular the upcoming Biennial
Meeting of the parties. We call on all States to
participate and be involved.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Secretary-
General of France's full cooperation in that field. Our
cooperation is owed to past and present victims, as is
our stability as a guarantor of international peace and
security.
