Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to convene this meeting on the situation in
Darfur. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Alain Le Roy for his briefing. We welcome the
participation in this debate of His Excellency
Mr. Mikhail Margelov, Special Representative of the
President of the Russian Federation on the Sudan.

With respect to the political process in Darfur, my
delegation would like to welcome, once again, the
signing of the Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence-
Building for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur,
which occurred in February 2009 in Doha, between the
Sudanese Government and the Justice and Equality
Movement. However, in the light of the ongoing
disagreements, there is still much to be done by the
parties to make it more effective, in creating the best
possible conditions for continuing political
negotiations.

My delegation urges the parties to work in good
faith towards a framework agreement for a complete
cessation of hostilities and the opening of substantive
negotiations to put an end to the conflict, in accordance
with the Agreement of Goodwill.

In this respect, we welcome the efforts of the
Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator to
work with the parties; these support the Qatar peace
initiative to make progress in the negotiations, and we
encourage the parties to join these efforts. We also
support the initiatives to make the political dialogue as
inclusive as possible, especially on the ground, where
the armed groups have come together and shown their
intention to join the political negotiations.
We welcome the role played by Libya in the
mediation process and the announcement made by the
leaders of several rebel groups during the 29 June 2009
Tripoli meeting to undertake a constructive dialogue
with the Sudanese Government in Doha.

We invite the international community, in
particular the members of the Security Council, to use
their influence to encourage the parties to undertake
genuine substantive political negotiations, with a view
to the signing of this agreement.

At the subregional level, continuing tension
between Chad and the Sudan, in particular the
incidents that have taken place in the past few days, as
well as the connections between rebel groups on both
sides of the borders, cannot but be a source of serious
concern. We encourage these two neighbours to
prioritize good-faith cooperation, in the framework of
the Dakar Agreement, to improve their bilateral
relations and find a solution to their differences.

We welcome the ongoing deployment of the
contingents of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). It is essential,
however, that the logistical means that the mission
needs be made available to enable it to become fully
operational and carry out its mandate. We also welcome
the good efforts of the Sudanese Government and its
commitment, in the framework of the Tripartite
Committee of the African Union, the Sudanese
Government and the United Nations, to cooperate fully
in the effective implementation of UNAMID's mandate.

With respect to the issue of the international
warrant for the arrest of President of the Sudan issued
by the International Criminal Court, my country
reiterates the call of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement for the
implementation of article 16 of the Rome Statute in
order to preserve the integrity of the political process
in Darfur and throughout the Sudan. Once again, our
position is that fighting impunity in Darfur does not
exclude the quest for peace.

We take this opportunity to welcome the
acceptance by the Governments of the South and North
Sudan of the decision of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration on settling the border dispute in the Abyei
region. We are convinced that the implementation of
this agreement in good faith by both parties will be
another element in favour of peace in Sudan.
The humanitarian situation continues to depend
on the security situation in the region, as well as on the
need for the parties to honour their commitments and
to create an environment conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

We applaud the Sudanese Government's decision
to authorize the return of some non-governmental
organizations that had been expelled. Burkina F aso
continues to try to persuade the Sudanese Government,
which bears the responsibility to protect civilians, to
pursue its efforts, together with the United Nations, to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches vulnerable
populations. We also welcome the cooperation between
the Sudanese Government and United Nations agencies
with a View to finding appropriate solutions to
humanitarian issues, and we encourage the
Government to continue its efforts.

It is also essential that humanitarian agencies
working in Darfur and the Sudanese authorities create
excellent, trusting working relations. It is also essential
that the international community, particularly the
Security Council, continue to encourage the parties to
create conditions of trust and dialogue so as not to
weaken the political process under way.

In conclusion, my delegation would once again
like to congratulate UNAMID on its tireless efforts and
commitment, and, of course, to thank the countries
contributing troops to UNAMID. We also thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for submitting the
draft resolution before us.

