Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, for her thorough briefing on the situation in
the country. On the whole, we agree with her assessment
and support the desire to continue shuttle diplomacy.
We remain of the view that seeking to resolve the
situation, including by ensuring the return of internally
displaced persons and humanitarian assistance, must be
done in a constructive and non-politicized way, above
all bilaterally between Bangladesh and Myanmar.

We note that international assistance must be
provided to both Bangladesh and Myanmar impartially,
while respecting the sovereignty of both countries. We
express the hope that dialogue will continue between
Myanmar and Bangladesh, including with the assistance
of the Special Envoy, all constructive-minded parties
and the entire United Nations system, in line with their
mandates. We note with satisfaction that the recent visit
to the region by the Special Envoy was overall carried
out constructively. Ms. Schraner Burgener is absolutely

right that it is necessary to build bridges, not burn them.
She can count on our full support in that, as well as
in building confidence and supporting direct dialogue
between Dhaka and Naypyidaw.

We welcome Myanmar's attitude to developing
constructive cooperation with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We believe that
regional organization can play a very positive role.
A delegation from ASEAN's secretariat and its
Coordination Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management visited Rakhine state at
the beginning of February. The ASEAN Emergency
Response and Assessment Team has begun its work,
and we support those efforts. The activity of the
independent commission established by Naypyidaw
to investigate human rights violations in Rakhine is
gradually gaining momentum. The foreign members
of the commission visited Myanmar again at the end
of January. We are glad that the commission has not
refused to engage in dialogue with international
bodies, as the Special Envoy just noted. The ceasefire
announced on 21 December of last year by the military
command is continuing until 30 April. As far as we
know, the authorities are willing to hold a peaceful
dialogue with the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army if
it refrains from violence and separatist demands.

Issues relating to the peaceful coexistence in
Rakhine of members of the various ethnic and religious
groups, including questions regarding the granting of
citizenship, freedom of movement, access to social
benefits and so forth, should be resolved in the spirit
of the recommendations of the Annan Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State and should also take
Myanmar's national legislation into account. For our
part, we have consistently supported taking a balanced
and non-confrontational approach to discussing
the situation in this country and finding ways to
normalize the humanitarian situation in Rakhine state,
including solving the problem of displaced persons.
We want to point out the systematic efforts that the
Myanmar authorities have made to implement the
Annan Commission's recommendations with a view
to achieving a comprehensive settlement of the crisis.
We would like to take advantage of the presence in the
Chamber today of the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh
to once again pay tribute to the hospitality and patience
of Bangladesh's authorities and ordinary Bangladeshis,
whose efforts to provide the refugees with everything
they need we should all support as actively as possible.
We greatly appreciate the steps that have been taken to
establish the infrastructure needed in Rakhine state for
receiving and accommodating future returnees.
We believe firmly that the key to resolving the
refugee issue is to be found in the relations between
the two neighbouring States involved. In our view,
the legal framework agreed on by the parties and the
existing coordination mechanisms between Myanmar
and Bangladesh enable immediate practical Steps to be
taken on the issue. In our View it is counterproductive
to delay the start of the repatriation process artificially
and we do not support attempts to politicize the subject,
which do not bring us any closer to resolving the
problem of the Rohingya's return to Myanmar. We call
on the United Nations staff on the ground to remember
this. A great deal depends on their professionalism
and impartiality.

At this point we consider it a priority to ensure
international assistance in mitigating the worst
humanitarian consequences of the crisis. We also urge
the Council to remember that the underlying problems
in Rakhine state are multifaceted and complex. They
can be resolved only through peaceful political and
diplomatic methods and by fostering a dialogue
between the Naypyidaw and Dhaka authorities and
representatives of all nationalities and faiths involved.
We are ready to continue to assist the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving the situation
regarding Rakhine in a spirit of equality and mutual
respect. We once again urge all our colleagues in the
Council and the States of the region to act responsibly
and with restraint in order to avoid relapses into an
escalation of the situation.

In conclusion, we would like to thank our friends
from Equatorial Guinea, whose presidency ends today
and who have worked very hard and productively this
month, and we wish our French friends, who will take
over tomorrow, every success.

