Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We would like
to thank the French presidency for organizing this
thematic debate on the issue of peacekeeping. This is
the fourth time in seven months that my delegation is
speaking in the Security Council on peacekeeping, a
fact that attests to the centrality of this activity in the
United Nations. I would also at the outset like to thank
the French delegation for its recent efforts, which have
led to improvements in the consultative mechanisms of
peacekeeping. My delegation appreciates the spirit
behind these initiatives.

We also note with appreciation the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
reach out to Member States in the ongoing work of
developing operational concepts. I am optimistic that
this spirit of cooperation will find reflection in the
forthcoming deliberations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

The concept paper (S/2010/67) circulated by the
French presidency for today's debate is both
comprehensive and useful. My delegation would also
like to take this opportunity to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Council today has to manage its primary
responsibility of responding to threats to international
peace and security in an environment that has changed
very substantially since 1945. The Council has to deal
with situations that have complex, multidimensional
aetiologies. They cannot be easily labeled or
categorized. They have also proved very tenacious and
have defied straightforward solutions.

We are in this situation because every so often the
Council has mandated operations without a clear
understanding of what was required. In the rush to do
something, it has got into situations where objectives
have been confused. Mandates have been unrealistic;
time frames have been too ambitious. A band-aid
approach has been used and the resources allocated to
the task - financial, logistical, and above all,
human - have been pegged at minimal levels. Our
conclusions are reinforced by the joint study by the
DPKO and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, entitled "Protecting civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping
operations", which states that "Confusion over the
Council's intent is evident in the lack of policy,
guidance, planning and preparedness". It is evident that
the Council requires a new paradigm and new
approaches if it is to discharge its responsibilities.

We first need to recognize that there are no
shortcuts to peacekeeping. We are not dealing with
classic belligerents who are looking for a quick victory.
We are dealing with forces that have a stake in
continuing instability. We are dealing with forces that
flourish in the absence of the rule of law and in the
presence of violence and intimidation. We cannot deal
with these forces unless we are committed to the long
haul. Transition and exit strategies need therefore to be
approached accordingly.

Eighty per cent of United Nations peacekeeping
resources, financial and human, are deployed in post-
colonial societies. The problems they face are not
unique and have been confronted in many nations in
Asia and Africa. It stands to reason that successful
post-colonial nation-building experience is the most
relevant to understanding how to approach the
successful management of complex peacekeeping
operations.

I am proud to represent a nation that has been an
active participant in United Nations peacekeeping
since 1956 and has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers to 40 United Nations operations. I also
speak on behalf of a country that is a well-established
and successful democratic polity that responds to the
aspirations of one of the most diverse populations of
the world and that is among the fastest growing
economies of the world. Imperialist thinking at the
height of the colonial era described all such countries
as ungovernable. Facts and history speak otherwise.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not mutually
exclusive. It is our understanding that both need to
continue simultaneously over extended periods of time.
Precipitate withdrawal of peacekeepers is a recipe for
disaster and a temptation that should be avoided at all
costs. As a peacekeeping operation gathers momentum,
it requires more resources, not fewer. The military
component will have to be supplemented, and not
supplanted, by police and rule-of-law capacity and by a
capacity for development administration. By development
administration capacity, we mean the ability to respond
8
to the basic aspirations of the people beyond law and
order.

It is also important to remember that United
Nations operations are essentially in aid of national
authorities and national capacities. National authorities
usually have a good idea of what they require. The
Council and the Secretariat must not just listen more to
national Governments; they must also listen carefully.
There is no substitute for national capacities. The only
role the United Nations can play is to help in creating
conditions where these capacities can be exercised. We
believe that support for national authorities is key in
two areas. One is security sector reform and the other
is in providing primary inputs for socio-economic
development.

Security sector reform, in particular, needs far
greater coordination, cohesiveness and unity of
purpose. The training, equipment and working methods
of national police and other rule-of-law institutions
must be structured in a manner that is consonant with
the wishes of national authorities and not the priorities
of donors. In the case of economic development,
national authorities, as the experience of the
Peacebuilding Commission indicates, are capable of
developing strategies and plans. What they need is
resources and social investment.

Peacekeeping, which is the main contribution of
the United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a budget of $7.8 billion. This is
a little more than 0.5 per cent of worldwide military
expenditures. As the concept paper circulated by the
President points out, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has a
ratio of one peacekeeper to 3,500 inhabitants. This is
also the equivalent of one peacekeeper for every 120
square kilometres. It needs very little imagination to
grasp the utter insufficiency of 17,000 peacekeepers in
the task of providing support to national authorities in
an area of responsibility roughly the size of western
Europe. It is evident that resources for peacekeeping
are utterly inadequate.

It stands to reason that an increase in the number
of quality troops is the first requirement. It also stands
to reason that troops require proper equipment and
enablers. We would like to see an increase in the
deployment of police and rule-of-law capacities. The
current composition of the DPKO as it exists today
does not have the capacity to plan for the nation-
10-23924
building activities that are central to peacebuilding.
This capacity must be developed and will require a
multidisciplinary approach involving the development
pillar of the United Nations and greater cooperation
with countries in the global South.

It is very difficult to use objective parameters to
determine an exit point from complex peacekeeping
operations. A peacekeeping operation will have
succeeded if there is durable peace. Durable peace can
follow only from a successful peace agreement. The
conditions that can lead to a successful peace
agreement are also difficult, if not impossible, to
define. Peace processes and political settlements
cannot be subjected to budgetary discipline and
evaluation by administrators. The creation of peace, as
we are all learning in many different parts of the world,
is not a business process. It is a complicated political
undertaking with many imponderables. The Security
Council is not bound by benchmarks on when and
where it decides to intervene. Each decision is unique
and subjective judgments are involved. Similar
subjective judgments will have to be involved on when
an operation can be wound up.

I would like to conclude by referring to the issue
of accountability. Should there not be an accountability
requirement for those who mandate? Surely, their
responsibility cannot end with the generation of
mandates. If unachievable mandates are generated for
political expediency or if adequate resources are not
made available, who should bear responsibility? A
deficit in the willingness and ability to enforce
mandates is leading to an erosion of the credibility of
the United Nations itself.

Let me thank you again, Sir, for organizing this
debate. India pays tribute to peacekeepers who have
fallen, most recently in Haiti, and reiterates its
commitment to contributing, through its peacekeepers
and its national capacities, to the promotion of peace
and security and to the role of the United Nations.

