Mr. Roed-Larsen: Since the last briefing to the
Security Council by Mr. Turk on 22 August, the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory has continued to deteriorate. In response to the
dramatic decline in living conditions, the Secretary-
General dispatched Ms. Catherine Bertini, his Personal
Humanitarian Envoy, to review the situation.

Until two days ago, there had been six weeks of
relative calm in Israel itself, although Israeli military
operations resulted in a number of Palestinian civilian
deaths during this time. This was strongly deplored by
the Secretary-General in his statement of 4 September.
This week, we have seen two suicide attacks inside
Israel and a bomb blast in a Palestinian school. There
have also been meetings of the Quartet. I will begin
this briefing with the Quartet's activities.

On Tuesday, 17 September, the Quartet principals
held three meetings: Quartet only, Quartet plus five
Arab ministers, and Quartet plus representatives of the
two parties, represented by Foreign Minister Shimon
Peres and Nabil Shaath, the Palestinian Minister for
Planning and International Cooperation. This was
followed by a communique, which members of the
Council will have seen.

The meetings focused on the humanitarian
situation, security issues, institutional reform and
political issues. There was a common understanding
that these issues are all closely linked and that, for
example, neither the security problem nor the
humanitarian crisis can be fully solved without a
political solution.

Members of the Quartet expressed great concern
about the humanitarian situation and the finding in Ms.
Bertini's report that the crisis might spiral out of
control within months. Fifty per cent of the population
are now dependent on food hand-outs from the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) or the World
Food Programme (WFP), while malnutrition and water-
borne diseases are spreading.

The latest socio-economic report of the Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator in the
Occupied Territories (UNSCO), which will be released
later today, shows that unemployment is now around 50
per cent; poverty levels have reached 70 per cent in
Gaza and 55 per cent in the West Bank while income
losses are estimated at $7.6 million a day, meaning a
total loss of $3.3 billion since October 2000.

On top of this, the Palestinian Authority is facing
a fiscal crisis. This month, for instance, the cost of
Palestinian Authority operations and supplies stands at
$90 million, while the total resources available are less
than $55 million.

Members of the Quartet underlined to the Israeli
delegation the problems of access and movement
within the occupied territory and, further, how closures
adversely affect Palestinian security training,
humanitarian delivery and the ability of the Palestinian
Authority and civil society to discuss and implement
reform, including the holding of elections, which the
Palestinian Authority has called for 20 January 2003. It
was also pointed out that the past six weeks had seen
noticeable quiet from the Palestinian side - this was,
of course, before the two suicide bombs of yesterday
and the day before - despite many actions undertaken
against Palestinians during the same period.

On reform, members of the Quartet agreed that
progress had been uneven at best, though there were
promising signs, especially in the area of financial
transparency. Ultimately, the credibility of reform
depends on Palestinians seeing improvement in both
living conditions and political prospects.

The Secretary-General told the parties that, in
spite of high-level assurances of increased Israeli
cooperation with humanitarian agencies, officials of
these agencies are reporting only marginal
improvements on the ground. The bottom line is that
there can be no real progress on the humanitarian front
if Israel does not alter its system of security, which,
while based on entirely legitimate and understandable
concerns, is hurting an increasingly significant portion
of the Palestinian population.

To move forward on the humanitarian and
development challenges, a United Nations mission
involving key agencies working closely with the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator in the
Occupied Territories and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
will be dispatched to the region to develop a detailed
plan. The plan will be assessed at a United Nations-
facilitated meeting involving United Nations agencies,
donors and multilateral institutions, prior to a
ministerial-level donors meeting in December.

The Secretary-General stressed to the Quartet, the
regional actors and the parties themselves that it was
important to move forward, now more than ever.
Increased tension in the region produced by the Iraq
issue increase still further the importance of rapid
positive movement on the Israeli-Palestinian track.

As expressed in the communique, members of the
Quartet were in agreement over a three-phase plan of
action or road map for achieving a two-State solution
within three years. That plan must be performance-
driven, but also hope-driven. The Palestinians need to
feel hope to make possible further progress, just as the
Israelis need to feel secure.

Since there is such a lack of confidence between
the parties, forward movement will be monitored and
assessed by a third-party mechanism to be established
by the Quartet. The Quartet principals instructed their
envoys to work on operationalizing this mechanism
and other aspects of the road map in the coming weeks.

The Quartet believes that an important step could
be a declaration of statehood with provisional borders,
should the Palestinians opt for this, as early as possible
in 2003. This would be endorsed by the Quartet,
conditional upon its assessment of the reform process.

The Quartet also intends to make it clear to the
Israelis that they must take immediate steps to allow
far greater freedom of movement for Palestinians and
goods, withdraw from self-rule areas reoccupied since
October 2000, end targeted killings and freeze
settlement activity.

All this would be followed by permanent status
negotiations in the third phase of the plan, from 2004
to mid-2005, and an international conference that
would address all tracks of the peace process for a truly
comprehensive peace. The Quartet emphasized, both to
the regional actors and to the parties, that it could not
move forward alone. As the Secretary-General told the
parties, action by both on all subjects - humanitarian,
security, reform and the political process - was
essential. The world was counting on them to take
mutual and parallel action.

Turning to the situation on the ground, members
of the Council will be aware of a deeply unfortunate
upsurge of violence in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza
in recent days.

On 17 September there was a bomb blast in a
Palestinian school near Hebron. Five pupils were
wounded, and Israeli police suspect the involvement of
Jewish extremists. This is the third incident of this
nature this year. On 18 September, two Palestinians
were killed and 21 wounded in a series of Israeli
Defence Force (IDF) operations across the West Bank
and Gaza.

In addition, a suicide bomber the previous day
blew himself up in Umm el Fahm, killing an Israeli
policeman. On 19 September, a Palestinian suicide
bomber in Tel Aviv killed five Israelis and wounded
40. These are repugnant and tragic events which the
Secretary-General has condemned unreservedly.

The past weeks also witnessed a number of IDF
operations, including widespread arrests and ongoing
assassinations, as well as a tightened closure regime
and curfews. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, these curfews
confine to their homes, on average, almost half a
million Palestinians in more than 20 cities and towns,
sometimes for days at a time. Yesterday, troops fired
into a crowd of schoolchildren protesting a curfew in
the Amari refugee camp in Ramallah, killing a 9 year-
old boy.

In the month leading up to 17 September 2002, 56
Palestinians were killed by Israelis, and five Israelis
were killed by Palestinians. Nevertheless, the period of
4 August to 18 September was the longest without a
suicide bomber since November 2000. In this time we
also saw sustained introspection on the Palestinian side
concerning the utility of violence.

Yesterday, the IDF once again encircled President
Arafat's offices in Ramallah, once more carrying out
major demolitions. The siege of his office continues
today.

The issue of reform continues to be an important
one, with progress to date especially in the financial
area. Palestinian legislators are awaiting the
appointment by President Arafat of a new cabinet,
following the resignation last week of the current
government under threat of a no-confidence vote.
Many are also calling for the appointment of a Prime
Minister. The security situation continues to undermine
reform efforts. Yesterday's incursion and the renewed
isolation of President Arafat's compound undoubtedly
weaken the position of those working for major reform.

Turning now to the issue of southern Lebanon, a
four-month period of what could be termed tense
stability was shattered on 29 August 2002 when
Hizbullah launched an attack against IDF positions in
the Sheb'a farms area, killing a soldier and wounding
two others.

More recently, tensions have been raised
considerably over a looming water crisis. Lebanon is
currently undertaking a water project to draw water
from the Wazzani springs. The Government has stated
repeatedly that it is fully entitled to draw increased
amounts of water from its own sources.

Israeli concerns have centred on what it calls the
unilateral manner in which Lebanon is undertaking the
project and on the perceived potential impact on water
flow into Israel. The absence of accurate technical data
on the nature and scope of the project has served to
heighten tension. The need to obtain independent,
technical information has been the focus of all
concerned in trying to defuse tensions surrounding this
issue.

Two United States water experts have been
dispatched on a technical, fact-finding mission to the
area, in consultation with the Israeli and Lebanese
sides. The United Nations has urging both parties to
show restraint. The Israeli Government should refrain
from the threat of force. The Government of Lebanon
has also been urged on several occasions by all
concerned, including the United Nations, to provide
promptly a detailed report on current water projects in
southern Lebanon. Thus far, no documentation has
been received.
To conclude, and returning to the subject of the
Quartet meetings, a number of steps need to be taken
by both the Israelis and the Palestinians in several
areas. Improved security performance and
humanitarian delivery are essential, but it will not be
possible to sustain progress in either field without
parallel movement in the political arena. "Security
first", as the Secretary-General has said so often, is
never going to work in the Middle East. Steps need to
be taken, not on a sequential basis, but in parallel and
with reciprocity.

The roadmap which the Quartet principals
instructed their envoys to flesh out in the coming days
needs to be based on performance, but it must also be
founded on hope. One without the other will bring
nothing but a continuation of the impasse.

