Mr. Fowler (Canada): Canada also expresses
thanks to the Secretary-General for his report and to
Mr. Annabi for his briefing this morning.

We join other members of the Council in
expressing our condolences to the family of Private
Manning and to the people of New Zealand for their
loss. Until fairly recently Canadian soldiers had the
privilege of serving with the New Zealand battalion
under their command in what remains one of the more
exposed sectors of East Timor. Our soldiers also send
their condolences to Private Manning's family and to
his colleagues who remain in East Timor. This
senseless murder reinforces the need for Indonesia to
take immediate action to disarm and stop the activities
of the militias in West Timor and improve the security
situation in the area as it has repeatedly committed
itself to do.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has felt
compelled to suspend activities in three of the largest
refugee camps in West Timor because of increasing
violence and intimidation. The continuing aggression
directed at its staff is truly deplorable. Militia leaders
must be held to their commitment not to interfere with
the safe return of refugees, and we look to the
Government of Indonesia to play a constructive role in
this regard. The recent violence directed at UNTAET
and humanitarian personnel by pro-integrationist
militias remains disturbing and suggests that Indonesia
must take urgent and more effective steps to control the
activities of these militias. Effective action by the
Indonesian Government would reinforce the
cooperation it has already demonstrated in normalizing
relations with East Timor, as evidenced by the
establishment of the Joint Border Committee and the
memorandum of understanding signed with UNTAET
in April on border security.

Canada is equally concerned about other issues
which are dissuading the refugees from returning. For
example, it is likely that few refugees will return until
issues such as civil service pensions, relocation options
and infrastructure deficiencies in East Timor are
forthrightly addressed.

Canada wishes to express its appreciation for
UNTAET's efforts to involve the East Timorese fully in
the work of administering the territory and for
working, through the creation of the National Council,
to build capacity for security and self-governance.

We are pleased to learn of, and enthusiastically
support, the Transitional Administration's efforts in the
promotion of human rights and democratic
development, state-building, gender equality and the
establishment of an integrated security sector, and also
its efforts to involve the East Timorese themselves -
as I mentioned a moment ago - in every aspect of the
territory's administration. Such efforts are fundamental
to the territory's successful entry into the international
arena. We are confident that UNTAET, under the able
leadership of Special Representative Sergio Vieira de
Mello, will guide the territory to independence with
wisdom and perseverance, and we look forward to
welcoming East Timor into the community of nations.

In closing, allow me to express my Government's
deep admiration for the continuing massive and selfless
commitment of the Government and forces of Australia
to the vital job of maintaining security and helping East
Timor to achieve a sustainable peace and effective
development in the years to come.

