Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and
the Chairman of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their very instructive
briefings. I also welcome the presence among us of
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, and thank her for her
statement.

The improvement of the overall situation in
Sierra Leone is a source of satisfaction for us, even
though there were waves of political violence and
intolerance in March and April 2009 that call for
increased vigilance by the entire political class in order
to preserve the gains of the political and the
peacebuilding processes. In that vein, we welcome the
spirit of responsibility shown by the leaders of the
party in power and the main opposition party, which
has enabled the signing of the joint communique on
2April 2009. We call upon them to respect their
commitments and to set up monitoring and early

warning mechanisms to prevent such incidents. We
also encourage the leaders of the main political parties
to continue the process of national reconciliation and
confidence-building measures and to ensure ongoing
consultation on matters of major political concern.

We wish to pay tribute to leadership of UNIPSIL,
with the help of some other countries, on the occasion
of those events and the negotiating process for the joint
communique. We hope the international community
will support the parties in the implementation of their
commitments, in particular the strengthening of
national institutions in charge of security, justice and
electoral matters, as well as the integration of
ex-combatants.

We are encouraged by the willingness of the
Government of Sierra Leone to promote the socio-
economic well-being of the people through good
political and economic governance and the fight
against corruption. From that viewpoint, we are
reassured by the statement just made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone.

Unfortunately, despite efforts by the Government
of Sierra Leone, the country still faces challenges
which could call into question the important gains
realized. Those challenges include in particular, and as
recognized by the authorities themselves in the Agenda
for Change, the vulnerability of the socio-economic
fabric of society, which has been accentuated by the
international financial crisis and the high price of basic
goods, to which is added unemployment and
underemployment of young people and renewed drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. Efforts
must therefore continue to deal with those challenges.
In particular, we encourage UNIPSIL and international
partners to support the Government's Youth
Empowerment and Employment programme.

We are confident that the good governance
policies undertaken by the authorities of Sierra Leone
enable them to mobilize the country's natural resources
to finance the development projects. We call upon the
international community to continue to support the
Government as it implements its programme of
peacebuilding, reconstruction and economic recovery.

Post-conflict Sierra Leone is on the road to
recovery. It is thus comforting to note that in the area
of peacebuilding, significant progress has been made
on the ground with the contributions of UNIPSIL, the
Peacebuilding Commission and Sierra Leone's bilateral
and multilateral partners. We encourage UNIPSIL to
continue to work in close cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, which we call upon in turn
to support implementation of the Agenda for Change.
We hope that the high-level special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission devoted to peacebuilding in
Sierra Leone, which will take place in a few days time,
on 10 June, will enable the adoption of a joint strategy.

It is fitting to welcome the significant support
from the Peacebuilding Fund, which has enabled the
implementation of various projects. We also welcome
the financial support granted to Sierra Leone in the
framework of the implementation of the joint
communique of 2 April 2009.

Special attention must be paid to the
implementation of the Agenda for Change and the Joint
Vision of the United Nations system for Sierra Leone,
which, as the Council is aware, aim to bring together
economic growth and sustainable human development.
In order for the activities to support the people of
Sierra Leone to be more effective, we stress the
importance of close cooperation between UNIPSIL and
organizations and other subregional institutions, that is,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union, international
partners and other United Nations missions in West
Africa.

We must also pay greater attention to the
following areas: support for economic recovery
programmes, strengthening the capacities of
institutions in charge of security and the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime in Sierra Leone,
implementation of the recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, in particular through
ongoing support for the compensation programme for
victims of the conflict, and support for programmes for
good governance and strengthening of democratic
institutions.

No one can deny that the peacebuilding process
in Sierra Leone is progressing satisfactorily, but those
enthusiastic national efforts must continue and the
people and authorities of Sierra Leone must remain
deeply committed to assuming their share of
responsibility. We are convinced that the international
community, in particular, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, will accompany those
developments without hesitation, as ECOWAS and the
African Union continue to do.

