Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I asked for the
floor to make a further statement in response to the
comments made by the representative of Azerbaijan, and
I refer to my earlier statement, in which I spoke about
the risks ofa resumption of conflict and the prevention
of a resumption as an equally important priority that is
of concern to us. I referred to the most recent escalation
and the most recent developments, which have been a
matter of serious concern. I also referred to the lessons
to be drawn from the most recent developments. Those
lessons are many.

First, the alternative to a peaceful settlement of
the conflict is sheer catastrophe: a return to the war,
destruction and deprivation of the 1990s. Armenia has
no interest in war, but is capable of defending peace and
determined to do so.

Secondly, genuine and lasting peace will be based
on a compromise. The proposals by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group's
co-Chairs in Kazan, Russian Federation, in 2011, which
stem from the Madrid principles and are based on the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Helsinki Final Act, particularly those pertaining to
the non-use or threat ofuse of force, territorial integrity,
equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and the
elements outlined in the statements by the Presidents
of the co-Chair countries between 2009 and 2013,
represent in their integrity a reasonable compromise
for the peaceful settlement of the conflict. They enjoy
Armenia's full support.

Thirdly, the road to peace is paved with good
will, genuine political commitment and leadership.
Confidence-building measures are essential requisites
ofa peace process at all stages. In our specific situation,
strict adherence to the terms of the 1994 ceasefire
agreement and the 1995 ceasefire strengthening
agreement, which was concluded on a trilateral basis,
the withdrawal of snipers and the implementation
of a mechanism for the investigation of incidents of
ceasefire violations along the front lines represent
credible and tangible verification measures and must
be implement without delay.

Finally, the rhetoric of war and hatred has no place
in a genuine peace process. Public figures should
refrain from resorting to hate speech and glorifying the
perpetrators ofhate crimes. Silencing the voices ofpeace
and reconciliation and stiffling efforts to promote trust
and confidence among peoples are the exact opposite
of preventing conflicts. Such deplorable measures
underscore the significance of the need to recognize
the function of protecting human rights and freedoms
as a fundamental component in a comprehensive,
structured approach to conflict prevention. Consistent
failures in human rights protection in Azerbaijan are
the underlying reasons behind the recent escalation of
tensions.

