Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Important
developments have taken place in and affecting
Afghanistan since the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, briefed the Security
Council in March (see S/PV.6735).

Significant progress was made during
two international conferences in Kabul and in
Chicago - with a third to take place next month in
Tokyo - that begin to define and shape the future of
Afghanistan as it makes its way towards self-reliance.
The Kabul ministerial conference that took place
on 14 June was an opportunity for Afghanistan to
demonstrate leadership on a process that is critical to
its future stability - building regional cooperation and
trust. Afghan-led, regionally owned and internationally
supported, the Istanbul process has made impressive
strides since its launch in November 2011, a little over
seven months ago.

In Kabul, Heart of Asia nations endorsed seven
confidence-building measures, developed through a
consultative regional process, which address common
threats and obstacles to regional stability, economic
development and humanitarian response. More such
measures are expected as the process continues. I am
pleased that they have sought out the participation of
relevant United Nations agencies, which of course will
provide technical support to each initiative.

This process is an important new
addition - particularly important because of its
Afghan leadership - to the many bilateral, trilateral
and multilateral forums already in place, including
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, and
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
It should be seen as contributing to our shared goal of
building a cooperative, stable and prosperous region.

In terms of regional initiatives of the United
Nations system, I appreciate the role played by United
Nations agencies in addressing entrenched challenges
that clearly go beyond the ability of any one country
in the region to address. First, I would like to note
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Let us recall that more
than 3 million Afghan refugees are registered in
Pakistan and Iran. That obviously has a huge impact on
not just Afghanistan but also those two host countries.
I also welcome, and urge the Council to support, the
Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees, which was
launched in Geneva in May by Afghanistan, Pakistan
and Iran, with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
members of the United Nations family, with a view
to addressing the return and reintegration of Afghan
refugees in a comprehensive and sustainable manner.

The production and trafficking of narcotics from
Afghanistan undermines the stability of the region and
affects the whole world. I am pleased that Executive
Director Yuri Fedotov, of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, is here today to brief us on the
latest developments related to counter-narcotics and
cross-border crime.

(spoke in English)

The meeting on Afghanistan that took place on
21 May as part of the NATO Summit in Chicago went a
long way towards defining the shape of, and the long-term
support to, the Afghan National Security Forces. We
saw important guarantees, both financial and technical,
as well as a reconfirmation of NATO commitments to
previously agreed timelines for transition. Providing
that level of clarity and commitment on continued
support to the security sector helps to dampen growing
anxiety, both within Afghanistan as well as among its
international partners, as to the post-2014 situation.
It also reinforces the message from the international
community that transition will not translate into an
abandonment of Afghanistan.

As the Afghan National Security Forces gradually
assume responsibility for the security of the country,
we shall continue to advocate for the strengthening
of their oversight and accountability mechanisms,
particularly within police and local police structures.
I wish to emphasize again that all parties - in
particular Afghan security forces, given their increased
responsibilities - must continue to prioritize the
protection of civilians.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/462) on
Afghanistan notes, the past three months saw a dramatic
decline in the number of security incidents over
2011. However, unfortunately, it was also marked by
large-scale incidents and an increase in the use of tactics
targeting civilians, particularly the indiscriminate use
of improvised explosive devices and the targeted killing
of civilians by anti-Government elements. Let us not
forget that it is those forces that are responsible for up
to 80 per cent of civilian casualties.

As Special Representative Kubis highlighted in
March, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has documented that 2011
marked the fifth consecutive year of increasing civilian
casualties, albeit with fewer incidents. That is simply
not acceptable. We must therefore continue to urge all
parties to the conflict to increase their efforts to protect
civilians and call for individuals responsible to be held
accountable.

On that note, I wish to make special mention of
the 12 June decision by the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), following the tragic civilian
deaths resulting from an air strike in Logar province
six days earlier, to increase restrictions on the use of
aerial munitions against civilian dwellings. Although,
as I have said, the number of incidents attributed to
pro-Government forces continues to decline, and is a
small portion of the total - and those forces, notably
ISAF, continue to vigorously adopt measures to
reduce civilian casualties - UNAMA has repeatedly
expressed concern that aerial operations have resulted
in more civilian deaths and injuries than any other
tactic used by pro-Government forces. Therefore,
let me again say that that decision by ISAF is a very
welcome development.

Security alone, however, will not bring lasting
stability and peace to Afghanistan. Just as we have seen
progress in defining long-term support to the security
side, it is equally important to see the same level of
commitment to the social-economic development
sector. We therefore very much look forward to the
upcoming Tokyo conference as an important step in that
direction. The Secretary-General will head the United
Nations delegation, which will include the UNAMA
Special Representative and myself.

We have noted concerns from all sides that the
fine words and commitments expressed during the
many conferences on Afghanistan over the past decade
be lived up to. To that end, I welcome the ongoing
development of a framework and a mechanism that will
track progress on such commitments and hold both the
Afghan Government and donors accountable for their
implementation. The mutual accountability mechanism,
which should report through the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, is expected to be agreed upon in
Tokyo and will provide a solid foundation upon which
to build long-term development support.

However, we must ensure that expectations
surrounding what Afghanistan can do over a short time
frame - given capacity and resource limitations and
given the fragility of its nascent institutions - are
realistic and do not prove self-defeating. We must keep
in mind our overall objective, namely, to see a stable,
self-reliant Afghanistan with effective institutions
delivering essential services, justice and opportunities
to its people. We will reach that goal only if we continue
to invest in Afghanistan's maturing institutions and in
the priorities Afghans themselves set.

I welcome Afghan leadership on the processes that
most affect the country and its people, starting with the
prioritization of development objectives and the Heart
of Asia process, which I mentioned earlier, but also
including reconciliation initiatives and the preparation
of upcoming elections.

The appointment of Salahuddin Rabbani to lead the
High Peace Council signals the continued engagement,
commitment and continuity on the part of the Afghan
Government. The United Nations continues to stand
ready to support the Council's efforts and looks forward
to seeing an Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process gain momentum.

The upcoming 2014 elections will be a watershed
moment, with significant impact on the consolidation
of the progress made to date and on long-term
stability. They should be held in full accord with the
Constitution, to ensure a smooth political transition and
to demonstrate Afghanistan's growing self-reliance and
sovereignty. We welcome President Karzai's statement
in Chicago in May that elections must be marked by
integrity and must be free from internal or external
interventions. By the way, we are already seeing a rise
in political activity and debate ahead of the 2014 polls.

We also welcome the constructive consultation
process on the electoral law, which the Independent
Election Commission recently completed, as well as the
decision to begin work on the voter registry, both of
which are encouraging signs of an essential ingredient
for a sound process - that is to say, inclusiveness.

In addition to the ongoing United Nations
Development Programme's second phase of its
Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow
project, which is providing electoral technical support,
Special Representative Kubis has been consulting with
the Government and relevant institutions to determine
how best the United Nations can assist the electoral
process. There are still two years to go before elections,
and it is critical that such Government decisions proceed
apace.

As our report clearly shows, humanitarian issues
continue to be a cause for concern. The spring floods
this year have been particularly severe, following the
very harsh 2011-2012 winter, and, of course, continuing
conflict exacerbates already serious displacement
issues. On her recent visit, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator highlighted the extensive humanitarian
needs, the uncertainties of the future and - I must
say - the lagging support for this year's consolidated
appeal. While we must aim over the longer term to link
humanitarian assistance with development initiatives,
we cannot neglect the urgent immediate needs right
now on the ground.

Finally, allow me to turn to developments that
more directly affect the future of the UNAMA Mission
itself. Circumstances around the world - financial
crises in major economies and competing demands
for international attention - have combined to
impact United Nations peace operations and have led
to shrinking budgets. That will also affect UNAMA.
Expectations that the Mission will be able to do more
as the transition proceeds would not be realistic in the
face of this greater fiscal austerity.

UNAMA and other special political missions must
meet targets set by the General Assembly over two-year
cycles. Of course, it is ultimately for United Nations
budgetary bodies to determine budgets and resource
requirements, but the budget we will put forward for
UNAMA for 2013 will reflect the overall need for cuts
that have been requested by Member States.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
a strategic decision has been made to reshape the
footprint of UNAMA in the provinces, in line with
recommendations from the comprehensive review
undertaken last year at the request of the Security
Council, with changes related to transition and with
the latest Security Council mandate. That decision will
certainly help to reduce costs.

Ifthe Mission is to address the significant reduction
of its budget, UNAMA will also need to review all
aspects of its substantive and support structures and to
prioritize its programming activities. Such an exercise
would necessarily have an impact on the delivery of the
mandate, the extent of which is yet to be determined and
will soon be reported to the United Nations budgetary
bodies and to the Council.

(spoke in French)

Informal discussions on the post-2014 international
framework, including the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, must take into consideration those
budgetary and programmatic constraints, along with
needs of the transition and the situation on the ground.
Such discussions must also be defined by an appropriate
consultative process, first and foremost with the Afghan
Government, so that the Council can make an informed
decision.

