Mr. Ebner (Austria): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
organize this important debate today. I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and Under-
Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for her
presentation. We commend the Office of Legal Affairs
for the preparation of the excellent report (S/2010/394)
requested by the Security Council in resolution 1918
(2010).

My delegation joins others in strongly
condemning the suicide attack in Mogadishu, Somalia
yesterday. We also strongly condemn the abhorrent
sexual crimes committed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which were referred to by the Secretary-
General today, and reaffirm our strong commitment to
the protection of civilians.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European
Union (EU) later in this meeting. Let me highlight a
few additional points.

Piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia are directly linked to the lack of stability and
disastrous economic situation in Somalia. At the same
time, piracy contributes to the deterioration of the
security, economic and humanitarian situation in
Somalia and may play a role in financing weapon
deliveries in violation of the arms embargo. A
comprehensive strategy in the Horn of Africa can be
sustainable and effective only when it also addresses
piracy's root causes on land and the situation in
Somalia. We believe that development of the rule of
law and security institutions in Somalia and the
improvement of livelihoods and education are
important factors for the durable eradication of piracy
off the coast of Somalia.

The European Union substantially engages in
training Somali security forces and supports the
African Union Mission in Somalia. In addition to these
important efforts on land, the EU's Operation Atlanta,
together with the naval engagement of other States and
organizations, has contributed to the considerable
reduction in piracy and armed robbery at sea.

The prosecution of suspected pirates apprehended
off the coast of Somalia is an important element of
effective counter-piracy measures. But it can also be a
burden for regional States, especially for Kenya and
the Seychelles. The Secretary-General's report and the
conclusions ofthe working group on legal issues of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
provide a thorough basis for further considering short-,
medium- and long-term solutions in that regard. The
full respect of all applicable norms of international law,
in particular international human rights law, including
the right to a fair trial and non-refoulement, must be a
central aspect of these considerations. The ongoing
efforts at capacity-building, referred to in option 1 in
the report of the Secretary-General, merit our special
support. In that regard, we welcome the contribution of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) to countering maritime piracy in the Horn of
Africa through a programme aimed at increasing
regional capacities to deter, arrest, prosecute and detain
pirates. That programme is supported by the European
Union. We also welcome the Contact Group's
establishment of the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives
of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which is administered by UNODC.

We stand ready to further discuss other possible
medium- and long-term solutions referred to in the
Secretary-General's report. However, there are a
number of issues that still need to be clarified. A
potential host will have to be found, and its views will
also have to be taken into account. At the same time,
arrangements for imprisonment will have to be
determined. Given the large number of suspects and
possible lengthy sentences, imprisonment arrangements
will be the heaviest long-term burden. We welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to appoint an adviser on
legal issues related to piracy off the coast of Somalia to
address these pending issues and to study the
feasibility of the options.

While we focus our attention on possible
solutions to bring suspected pirates off the coast of
Somalia to justice, we also need to pay attention to the
fight against impunity in Somalia itself. Reports
suggest that massive violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are committed in
Somalia with full impunity. The establishment of the
rule of law, accountability for crimes committed and a
judicial system in Somalia will also require our
sustained long-term efforts, especially as that needs to
go hand-in-hand with the development of the
institutions of the Transitional Federal Government.

