Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): For how long have we
sat in these halls and heard the despair of Africa. For
how long have we Viewed horrible genocide and so
much waste for so beautiful a land? For how long have
we further despaired that the world has not taken
cognizance of some of the most brutal acts that have
taken place in the history of the world?

Today I am proud to represent a Member of this
Organization, where, Madam, you as an African are the
President of the Security Council, where an African is
the President of the General Assembly and where many
very august members sitting around this table are of
that continent.

While North and Central Africa are ably
represented at the highest offices in this Council, South
Africa needs to be congratulated on holding a
tournament of international brotherhood never before
held in so significantly peaceful an atmosphere. I feel
that these reflections and the recent speech from this
very chair by my brother the Permanent Representative
of Senegal, who stated his case so eloquently, clearly
show that if anyone today believes the world has a
chance it is because here in this Security Council and
at this institution so much has been made possible by
your compatriots, Madam President. We have seen
important strides towards addressing the challenges of
peace, security and nation-building. I think the holding
of today's debate attests to the close attention that
you - and, through you, some very able leadership in
Africa - are paying to security.

In the early twentieth century, the independence
movements in India and Pakistan and the subcontinent
and the freedom struggle against colonialism in Africa
were mutually inspiring. Today, Africa's collective
endeavour towards peace and security helps us believe
and reinforces our own quest for sustainable peace in
our region and beyond. We have been a friend and
perhaps even a partner with Africa in search of peace
and stability in our own neighbourhood, and today one
is proud to say that Africa is leading the way with so
many practical examples that we indeed can learn from
it. We have seen in the recent past so many conflicts,
so many wars that were thought a decade ago to be
ones that would destroy that continent. And today we
find that wise, able leadership - including, I must add
here, that of two very able Secretaries-Generals
preceding the current one, together with our own
current Secretary-General himself - has played an
essential role in creating the preventive doctrine.
Bodies such as the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the Panel of the Wise have imparted
to Africa strengths never envisaged before. Africa has
sagaciously resorted to the vast spectrum of modalities
envisaged in Chapter VI and other relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter. These have prevented
disputes from arising and have ably laid to rest some
ongoing ones.

The United Nations has had some success in
employing the tools of preventive diplomacy in these
conflicts. However, we are not here to sit back, and
indeed we need to strengthen and make full use of
comparative advantages of Africa's regional, national
and local capacities for mediation, conflict prevention,
reconciliation and dialogue. And on the subject of
reconciliation, one cannot continue without mentioning
former President Mandela and Archbishop Tutu. They
have been much larger than life, bright illuminations in
a firmament of stars, where they have outshone all
those around the world; today they are icons of peace,
security and stability.

The Secretary-General's report of April 2009
(S/2009/ 189) on enhancing mediation and its support
activities laid emphasis on early engagement and on
processes addressing the root causes of conflict. This is

an important lesson we must learn from the past. As the
principal organ with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council also needs to make a wider and more
effective use of the procedures and means for pacific
settlement of disputes, particularly Articles 33 and 38
of the Charter.

There has been an injudicious use of Chapter VII
in certain conflict situations, and these merit due
consideration. These injudicious uses, in our view,
have damaged the efforts for pacific settlement under
Chapter VI and have created an impression that
non-Chapter VII resolutions are somehow not equally
binding. This does not augur well for international
peace. A proactive regional organization with its hands
on the local pulse can counter such a trend.

The African Union has provided strategic
coherence, leadership and on-the-ground management
in nearly all conflicts on the continent. Through close
partnership in recent years, it has added value to the
work of the United Nations, particularly that of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The African Union is also ideally placed to improve the
structure of global governance and make it more
egalitarian and just. The record of its recent review
meeting in Addis Ababa makes positive reading for the
future of Africa.

The African Union, with other regional and
subregional actors including local civil society, has
effectively worked for the cause of peace, in sectors as
diverse as the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the anti-piracy campaign off
the coast of Somalia, and in facilitating the political
processes following the recently held elections in
Burundi and in many other African States where
elections were not considered possible some years ago.
The Secretary-General's report of 21 June 2010
(S/2010/324) also notes the active role of the
Economic Community of West African States in
promoting peace and stability of West Africa.

Many speakers today have very elaborately
outlined the future challenges of peace and security in
Africa. These challenges are not confined to Africa
alone. In our view, demographic trends with high
proportion of youth population, lack of employment,
poverty, income inequalities, food and water crises and
deficits in education and health lie at the root of these
conflicts.

I would particularly like to state that the example
set by Africa in Copenhagen was indeed something that
can be emulated by many others. And, not to be
outdone, with regard to the very reform of this Council,
Africa has set, by its steadfastness and its own beliefs,
a trend which many thought could not last - and they
have been baffled by what has been achieved.

We have to move beyond security paradigms and
the traditional tools of preventive diplomacy to include
areas such as fair trade practices, food and
environmental security and investment in governance
institutions. Accordingly, the tools of preventive
diplomacy could be better optimized if used in
conjunction with rectifying measures in such areas.

Today's debate will refresh our collective
understanding of the issue of peace and security. Let
me thank you, Madam President, for this valuable
initiative of opening a debate that will prove to the
world how very important your leadership is today.

