The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.

Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Mahiga for
his exhaustive briefing and for his efforts to restore
stability and strengthen the United Nations presence in
Somalia. Once again, I welcome the Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and thank him for his
statement. I also highlight the importance of the
participation of Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative of the African Union Commission for
Somalia.

We express our deep concern about the worsening
of the humanitarian situation in the Horn of Africa,
particularly in Somalia, due to the drought and famine
that have beset the country. We insist on humanitarian
action being continued, with the involvement of all
Somali stakeholders, so as to provide humanitarian aid
to all those in need. We welcome the pledges of aid
made by donor countries. Lebanon has made its own
modest contribution and calls on other States to
increase their contributions in order to alleviate the
crisis and meet humanitarian needs.

In a country where, because of the war and
famine, half the population is in urgent need of
humanitarian aid, we must not settle for temporary
approaches to the security and humanitarian situations
that would fail to stabilize the situation in the long
term. Somalia needs a comprehensive strategy to
strengthen its unity and State institutions and to
revitalize its economy. We note the momentum in the
Djibouti peace process, especially with the signing of
the Kampala Accord, and we are pleased that the
consultative meeting held from 4 to 6 September led to
a road map defining the transition tasks to be
accomplished.

We highlight yet again the importance of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), including the

l 1-49644

new Government, implementing those tasks in
accordance with the timeline set out and engaging with
local administrations as well as opposition parties to
accomplish those tasks. Along those lines, we
encourage the administration to cooperate with the
TFIs. In particular, we call on donor States to
strengthen the central role of the Institutions so as to
promote cohesion in Somalia and prevent
fragmentation of international aid.

Allow me to turn now to the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu. We welcome that
development and call on the Government, with the
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to implement a plan to stabilize the city.
We urge parties to fill the vacuum, prevent the
proliferation of militias, and bolster support for
civilians by providing increased public services.

We condemn piracy and armed robbery and call
on the African Union to respond to this global issue by
addressing the root causes of the problem. In the
absence of an international peace force, Lebanon
echoes the Secretary-General's call for donor States to
give AMISOM. the same support given to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We call on the
Council to seriously consider the proposals contained
in the communique issued yesterday by the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

We call on stakeholders and donors to step up
their contributions to covering the costs incurred by
AMISOM. and to remove the reservations related to
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of AMISOM. We particularly welcome the
roles played by Uganda and Burundi in helping to
strengthen stability and security in Somalia by sending
additional troops to reinforce AMISOM.

I now resume my functions President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Serrano.

