Mr. Emvula (Namibia): It is a pleasure to see you,
Sir, presiding over the Council for the month of July. I
wish to thank you for organizing this very important
debate at this crucial moment, which affords the broader
United Nations membership an opportunity to address
the challenges facing the Middle East, particularly the
people of Palestine.

At the outset, I wish to statea that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
countries.

My delegation wishes to express concern at the
continuing turmoil and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the repressive and illegal
measures that continue to be undertaken by Israel, the
occupying Power, against the Palestinian people.

Ijoin others in condemning the latest violations,
provocation and escalation of aggressive measures
carried out by the Israeli forces aimed at collective
punishment of the Palestinian people. The Israeli
forces continue to carry out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip,
injuring more and more Palestinians and causing great
fear and distress among the population, who continue
to suffer from deplorable living conditions as a result of
Israel's inhumane and unlawful blockade.

While we condemn the indiscriminate rocket fire
emanating from Gaza and targeting Israeli cities and
civilian infrastructure, we maintain that such attacks
do not justify the disproportionate use of force and
collective punishment of 1.7 million Palestinians living
in Gaza. The death toll caused by the occupying forces
stands at significantly more than 600 Palestinians,
including the killing of innocent women and children.
Thousands of Palestinian homes continue to be
destroyed or severely damaged by the indiscriminate
Israeli air attacks, displacing thousands of Palestinians
and further destroying critical civilian infrastructure,
including waste-water treatment facilities, water
distribution networks, hospitals and schools, including
United Nations facilities, all of which should stop.

It is cynical to equally attribute blame to both parties
when one is the occupier and possesses unparalleled
military might, which it uses indiscriminately, leading
to civilian casualties. Israel, the occupying Power, must
be held accountable for all those war crimes, acts of
State terrorism and systematic human rights violations
committed against the Palestinian people. We call on
the Human Rights Council to take immediate action to
investigate the genocide against the people ofPalestine.

The Israeli actions are in clear violation of its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War to protect the civilian population
under its occupation. Israel cannot be allowed to
remain immune from the provisions of international
humanitarian and human rights law governing such
situations. If Israel continues to ignore the demands to
respect international law, measures aimed at ensuring
an end to such violations and that the rule of law prevails
must be taken in response.

It remains the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community to ensure that the
question of Palestine is resolved in all its aspects.
While supporting the steadfastness and resolve of the
Palestinian leadership in the face of such unprovoked
aggression against its land and people, we reiterate
our total condemnation of all those illegal actions and
crimes being perpetrated by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
dramatically raise tensions and destabilize the situation
on the ground.

In that context, we call for the immediate
establishment of a committee to investigate such
horrendous crimes and to bring the perpetrators to
justice in accordance with the relevant international
legal instruments at our disposal. We furthermore urge
the international community to continue to provide the
necessary humanitarian assistance to ease the suffering
of the affected Palestinian communities, in particular
vulnerable members of society such as women, children
and the elderly.
We welcome the ongoing efforts aimed at
negotiating an immediate ceasefire and appeal to both
parties to commit to embracing the opportunity and to
abiding by their previous agreements and obligations
with regard to a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians living side by side within secure borders.
Israel's ongoing violation of international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law, threatens to
further destabilize the very fragile situation and to
seriously undermine the future of the peace process,
which has been suspended as a result of Israel's
unilateral decision to halt the negotiations.

The international community, including the
Security Council, cannot continue to fail to act to
hold Israel accountable for such flagrant breaches
of international law. Such continued failure on the
part of the international community has only further
emboldened the occupying Power and bolstered its
impunity, which has resulted in the continuation of the
violations that I have just mentioned, and therefore the
failure to secure ajust and lasting peace.

We wish to warn and remind the Council that the
escalation ofthe Israeli-Palestinian crisis is the result of
its continued failure to effectively address the conflict
by finding a lasting and sustainable solution, as required
through the implementation of the various Council
resolutions that call for a two-State solution. For how
long will the Council continue to adopt resolutions that
are never adhered to?

Let me conclude by reiterating Namibia's support for
the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General
and our unwavering backing of and solidarity with
the people of Palestine in their just cause for freedom,
independence and social justice. We also affirm
our support for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, its unconditional
admission as a full Member of the United Nations and
its agencies and for it to take its rightful place among
the community of nations.

