Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The Council has
taken important decisions on the topic of protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in particular resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1894 (2009). As in other thematic
areas, however, it has struggled with the application of
the provisions and principles of its thematic decisions
when dealing with actual country situations. Recent
events and decisions of the Council have cast today's
debate in a different light. We hope that this will help
the Council focus its future policies, including its
consideration of the input of the wider membership.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
first and foremost the responsibility of the parties to
the conflict. State and non-State actors alike must at all
times observe the rules governing armed conflict, in
particular the Geneva Conventions. The Security
Council must in turn use the broad range of means at
its disposal to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, from insisting on respect for that law
on the part of all parties to a conflict under all
circumstances, to strengthening the protection
mandates of peacekeeping missions and, last but not
least, to using accountability mechanisms.

Recent events, especially in Libya, have led to
discussions about how to define the moment when an
internal armed conflict begins. This question is
relevant to determining whether international
humanitarian law applies in such a situation, in
addition to applicable human rights laws. But it has no
bearing on whether action is needed. The
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against civilians is always unacceptable and always
unlawful. Depending on the exact circumstances, such
acts can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity, but they must never be met with silence on
the part of the intergovernmental bodies of the United
Nations. There is also a collective responsibility to
ensure the protection of civilians outside situations of
armed conflict, and the Council acted accordingly in
adopting resolution 1973 (2011).

In addressing the need to protect civilians in
armed conflict or otherwise, the Council has to strike a
balance between its customary case-by-case approach
and the principles that should govern its action,
including those contained in its own resolutions.
Effectiveness must be a guiding principle of all action
that the Council engages in, but effectiveness is also,
among other things, a function of credibility. Such
credibility is promoted if the action is perceived to be
consistent and undertaken for the main purpose of
achieving the stated goal.

Against that background, we welcome the action
the Council has taken to protect the civilian
populations of Libya and Cote d'Ivoire. But we also
believe that other situations, particularly those in Syria,
Yemen and Bahrain, also require greater attention from
the international community. Likewise, there is a
renewed common responsibility in light of the report of
the Secretary-General's Panel of Experts on
Accountability in Sri Lanka. The Panel concluded that
"the conduct of the war represented a grave assault on
the entire regime of international law designed to
protect individual dignity during both war and peace".
Failure to protect a civilian population must not be
compounded by indifference to efforts to create
accountability.

For the second time in the history of the
International Criminal Court, the Council, in resolution
1970 (2011), decided to refer a situation to the Court
for investigation of the most serious crimes under
international law. We welcome the referral as an
expression of the Council's commitment both to
contributing effectively to the fight against impunity
and to a strong working relationship between the
United Nations system and the Court. The referral is of
particular value because it was decided by consensus.
We hope that this consensus will also prevail when the
Council is called on to act to ensure the
implementation of follow-up action to resolution 1970
(2011). In the absence of universal ratification of the
Rome Statute of the Court, such Security Council
referrals remain the only means of ensuring quick and
decisive action to fight impunity in a given situation.
Creating ad hoc and separate accountability
mechanisms such as tribunals would not only be very
slow, but would also increase costs dramatically.
When it referred the situation in Libya to the
Court, the Council underlined that it wished to avoid
any financial responsibility for its decision, while at
the same time it created an additional burden for the
States parties to the Rome Statute. We note in this
regard that the Security Council is not competent to
make decisions on budgetary matters, and that the
General Assembly may at any time enter into an
arrangement with the Court for reimbursement of costs,
as foreseen in the Relationship Agreement with the
Court.

The action of the Council, or the lack thereof, on
the topic of the protection of civilians has been one of
the defining moments in its history. We hope that the
Council will live up to the current challenges, different
as they are, in order to agree on ways to ensure the
protection of civilians.

