Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to start by thanking Council members for the extension
that allowed us to work intensively over these last
couple weeks with the Russian Federation to secure the
text that we have just voted on unanimously today, and
I offer my sincere thanks for the spirit in which Russia
carried out these negotiations. The stakes on this matter
could not be higher.

The eyewitness accounts often start the same way.
Helicopters buzzing overhead. Barrel bombs shoved
out, only to land without an explosion. Leith Fares, a
first responder in ldlib, Syria, recalled at first feeling
relieved when one of these bombs did not detonate on
16 March 2015. "It is usually good news when there is
no explosion", he said in an interview. But when Leith
went into the basement of a nearby home to search for
survivors, he said, "I felt short of breath, coughed and

became dizzy. I could not even take two breaths". In the
basement, six members of the Talib family sheltered,
with three children ages one, two and three. None had
visible wounds. But when the children arrived at the
local hospital, the doctor in charge recalled that "they
were foaming at the mouth, they were suffocating,
then their hearts stopped". Their parents struggled to
breathe too before dying from the attack, along with
their 65-year-old grandmother.

Think about how it must feel to be suddenly
overwhelmed by the sharp smell of chlorine; to think
you have escaped death by bombing only to realize
you might die by asphyxiation; to wonder how to run
from a weapon that you cannot see that is enveloping
you on all sides. It is a suffering so gruesome that the
international community has resoundingly condemned
the use of chemical weapons and established a norm
against their use under any circumstances, as enshrined
in the Chemical Weapons Convention.

So the United States welcomes the Council's
unanimous decision to extend the mandate of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism for another
year. The Mechanism is a vital tool for fighting
impunity - an independent group of experts with the
tools to tell us who is using chemical weapons in Syria,
after the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission has determined that
chemical weapons were used or were likely used.

The Mechanism's findings are clear. Investigators
have concluded that the Al-Assad regime has used
chemical weapons against the Syrian people not just in
one attack, but in three confirmed attacks so far. That is
three confirmed attacks carried out by a Member State
of the United Nations; three attacks using weapons
that the world concluded decades ago should never
be used; three attacks that have caused Syrian men,
women and children to suffocate to death. And these
arejust the attacks for which the Mechanism has to date
reached this conclusion. There is credible evidence of
many more chemical weapons attacks carried out by
the Al-Assad regime. The use of chemical weapons
by the Al-Assad regime is a clear violation of Syria's
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and under resolution 2118 (2013).

The Mechanism has also confirmed the use of
chemical weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) in Marea. The United States condemns
this attack in the strongest terms, as well as all of
the horrific atrocities that ISIL has carried out and
continues to carry out against innocent civilians. This
is yet another reason this terrorist organization must
be defeated and it is one more reason why the United
States will continue to lead the efforts of a 67-member
coalition against this colossal threat to our collective
security. It underscores the need for the Council to
address the threat posed by non-State actors like ISIL
who have the capacity and the depravity to use chemical
weapons again.

Today's resolution allows the Mechanism to
continue its work - work that, unfortunately, sadly, is
far from finished. The members of the Security Council
need the Mechanism to continue its investigation for
three main reasons.

First, the Mechanism is the only institution with
a mandate to identify those involved in the use of
chemicals as weapons. Until the Mechanism was
created, the Security Council received briefings in
the passive voice - hearing that chemical weapons
"were being used" in Syria, but never hearing which
parties were using them. It was, honestly, bizarre. Ifthe
Council had failed to extend the Mechanism today, we
would have been wilfully blinding ourselves to learning
the truth about who is responsible for some of the most
deplorable crimes imaginable. We would not have been
able to uphold a norm against chemical weapons use if,
as a Council, we had decided we did not want to know
who was using chemical weapons in the first place.

Secondly, evidence suggests that the Mechanism is
in fact helping to dissuade actors from using chemical
weapons. This is really important. In the 19 months
before the Mechanism was established, there were more
than 120 allegations of chemical weapons attacks, but
in the 15 months after the Mechanism began its work
that number has dropped to approximately 35 alleged
attacks. Let us be clear - one chemical weapons
attack is one too many and is completely unacceptable
and worthy of our collective condemnation. We also
know that there are other likely causes, as the Syrian
regime has established a pattern of using chemical
weapons when it is struggling using conventional
means; Russia's entry into the war in September 2015
has given Damascus a significant battlefield edge.
Perhaps that explains some of the drop in use. But
there is no question that perpetrators who know - as
they did before 7 August 2015 when the Mechanism
was authorized - that they would never be identified,
those perpetrators felt a greater sense of impunity than
they must feel now. Even if the Mechanism makes
only a small difference in keeping the parties from
using chemical weapons, it would save lives and help
safeguard a crucial global norm. That is well worth the
Council's full and sustained support.

Thirdly and finally, there is so much investigative
work left for the Mechanism to complete. The
Mechanism has so far only been able to make attribution
in four of the nine cases that were initially selected
for investigation, and new potential cases continue to
emerge. For example, there were numerous reports
on 10 August and 6 September that Al-Assad regime
helicopters dropped barrel bombs with toxic chemicals
on neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo, sickening dozens
of Syrians and killing at least five people. As long as the
parties to the conflict in Syria use chemical weapons
and as long as previous cases can still be investigated,
the Council needs to determine who was involved- and
we need the Joint Investigative Mechanism to do it.

But the Council's responsibilities do not end once
we know the facts. We already know that the Al-Assad
regime and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant were
involvedin chemical attacks. The members of the Council
now need to work together to make sure that those who
use such gruesome weapons face consequences. There
are sharp differences in the Council when it comes to
the conflict in Syria; that is clear. But, the unanimous
renewal of the mandate reflects one important principle
that we share - our unequivocal collective opposition
to the use of chemical weapons. That principle led us
to adopt resolution 2118 (2013), requiring Syria, whose
regime had just carried out a horrific attack, killing at
least 1,400 people, to dismantle and destroy its chemical
weapons programme under international supervision.
That principle led us to create the Joint Investigative
Mechanism and to now extend the Mechanism, and it
is on the basis of that principle that we should continue
to act to hold parties accountable for using chemical
weapons against Syrian people.

There is very little in the history of the Syrian
conflict that the Security Council has been able to agree
upon. Chemical weapons are one such exception to the
general rule of Council division. The fact that we can
achieve agreement in that narrow but important domain
should motivate us. It should motivate us to work harder
to stop the slaughter of civilians by other means, and it
should motivate us to achieve the political solution that
has long eluded the people of Syria, who continue to be
attacked in a savage manner to this very day.
