The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Ireland
on behalf of the European Union.

We thank Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for the
particularly important report that he just presented to
us as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), in particular concerning the question of the
revitalization of the Committee.

My country attaches great importance to the work
of the Committee, and we believe that since its
establishment a little more than two years ago the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has been playing a
central role, one that has been rightly recognized by all,
in monitoring the due implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001). In the light of that
experience, however, we must acknowledge that this
role needs to be strengthened, if we want to enable the
Committee better to carry out the task entrusted to it.
That is the thrust of the report of the CTC dated 19
February 2004 (S/2004/124, annex), on its
revitalization, to which my delegation lends its full
support.

It is essential to increase the means available to
the Committee quantitatively and qualitatively, first
and foremost in terms of expertise and logistics. That
will determine the effectiveness of the international
community's efforts in combating terrorism.

My delegation feels that the Committee now
needs to be in a stronger position to assess, in practice,
the nature and effectiveness of anti-terrorism measures
taken by States pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). It
can no longer merely consider in New York, national
reports submitted by States, however essential that may
be. Moreover, the Committee needs to be better
equipped to assess the real needs of States for technical
assistance. Technical assistance is the essential
complement to the normative work being done by the
international community. That is the spirit in which the
Group of Eight Counter-Terrorism Action Group -
which coordinates the provision of technical assistance
depending on the needs expressed by States and in
close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee - has been working.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
proposal for field visits - with the agreement, of
course, of the States concerned - in order to intensify
the dialogue with States.

The Committee also needs more effectively to
play its role of coordination and cooperation with
respect to regional and international institutions and
organizations, in order to maximize all of our efforts to
root out the scourge of terrorism.

Accordingly, the field missions of Counter-
Terrorism Committee experts could, for example,
usefully include, depending on need, experts from
other regional and international institutions or
organizations concerned. In particular, I am thinking of
the experts from the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
the Vienna-based United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, who are already doing an outstanding job in
helping States to become parties to the 12 international
counter-terrorism instruments and to adopt national
legislation to enable them to implement those
instruments.

The fight against terrorism requires more than
ever before - and recent events that have occurred in
various parts of the world clearly prove this - an
increased effort on the part of the international
community. It is therefore important to give the
Counter-Terrorism Committee the means it needs to
enable it to discharge the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council, in full compliance, of course, with
the provisions of the Charter.

My delegation will be working actively to make
the revitalization of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
a reality through the upcoming adoption of a draft
Council resolution.

I now resume my capacity as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to recall that yesterday, when the
Security Council convened its first meeting of the
month of March, on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, speakers expressed gratitude to China for
its leadership as President of the Council during the
month of February, and congratulated France on its
assumption of the presidency for the current month. I
have always appreciated formulas of courtesy, which I
believe reflect the good relations that exist among
delegations at the United Nations, and we all know that
through courtesy our work is made easier. But, given
the long list of speakers, perhaps participants would
agree to limit, or even to refrain from conveying, any
congratulatory words so that the Council can continue
its work with the desired diligence.

As another measure to optimize our use of time,
and in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not invite speakers individually
to take seats at the Council table and then to resume
their seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker
takes the floor, the conference officer will seat the next
speaker on the list at the table. I thank participants for
their understanding and cooperation.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ireland, to whom I give the floor.

