Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As always, I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his words. Like others, I would like to start today by expressing sincere condolences following the death of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad, the Amir of the State of Kuwait. As Prime Minister Boris Johnson has said, the personal contribution His Highness made to regional stability and humanitarian assistance will long be remembered. The United Kingdom has warmly welcomed the historic steps taken over the last two months, with the normalization of relations between three great friends of the United Kingdom: Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates and Israel. These positive steps are already having an impact, such as direct flights from Israel to the United Arab Emirates and early commercial agreements. More positive progress is to come in trade, cultural and scientific links and much more. We urge others across the region to follow the example of the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. We must acknowledge that the agreements represent a profound shift in the region. It is critical that as the international community we build on the momentum of normalization to take forward resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In his recent visit to Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab encouraged both the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to use the suspension of annexation plans - plans the United Kingdom strongly opposed - as an opportunity. We urge the Palestinian Authority to resume cooperation with Israel in the interests of the Palestinian people. We also call on both parties to make constructive and open steps towards a return to dialogue. While the threat of annexation appears to have receded, the United Kingdom remains concerned by a number of negative trends on the ground. We reiterate our call on both sides to halt any activity that makes peace more difficult to achieve. In accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), this includes terrorism, incitement, violence against civilians, demolition of Palestinian property and settlement advancements. In Gaza, we welcome the agreement reached on 31 August, which has restored a degree of calm and led Israel to lift its ban on fuel and goods imports through the Kerem Shalom crossing. On 15 September, Hamas launched rockets into Israel once more. We condemn these actions; they are unacceptable, unjustifiable and must stop. As ever, dialogue is the only way to address the situation. We remain concerned at ongoing plans to take forward settlements, including in Givat Hamatos and Har Homa and in the El area. All settlements are illegal under international law. Settlement construction in these highly sensitive areas would damage prospects for a two-State solution and threaten to further undermine the viability of a future Palestinian State with its capital in East Jerusalem. Despite the spread of the coronavirus disease, 2020 is on course to be the worst year since 2016 for Israeli demolition of Palestinian property, including of donor- funded structures paid for by Council members and international partners. In all but the most exceptional of circumstances, demolitions are contrary to international humanitarian law. We call on Israel to desist from such actions and to provide a clear and transparent route to construction for Palestinians in Area C. We are also concerned about ongoing evictions of Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem. Like all countries, Israel has a legitimate right to self-defence and to defend its citizens from attack. But in doing this, it is vital that all actions are proportionate, in line with international law and that they are calibrated to avoid civilian casualties. For example, the shooting and injuring by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) of an unarmed, deaf and mute Palestinian at the Qalandia checkpoint on 17 August is deeply concerning. The Israeli security forces must provide appropriate protection to the Palestinian people and be seen to conduct prompt and transparent investigations into claims of IDF misconduct. The Palestinian leadership must continue its efforts aimed at tackling terror and incitement, strengthen institutions and develop a_ sustainable economy. Hamas and other terrorist groups must permanently end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel. The Government of the United Kingdom strongly condemns all forms of violence and incitement to violence. We welcome Fatah and Hamas efforts towards reconciliation and hope that this can lead to the holding of democratic elections across the occupied Palestinian territories. Let me end by reaffirming that the United Kingdom remains active in the Middle East peace process. We continue to work closely with international partners to advocate a two-State solution and encourage a return to meaningful negotiations.
