Mr. Corr (Ireland): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for arranging today's open meeting.
It is especially important to hear the views of the
countries in the region and to thank them for their
engagement and cooperation in the peace process. Like
previous speakers, I also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast for his comprehensive
briefing on the peace process in Bougainville.

Ireland strongly supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General and the request of the
Government of Papua New Guinea that the mandate of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) be extended for another 12 months. Prime
Minister Somare said earlier this month that promising
peace is no longer enough; we must help people realize
the practical potential of peace. The Prime Minister
reaffirmed that the peace process remains a national
priority. My delegation warmly welcomes that
commitment.

The meeting of the Peace Process Consultative
Committee, held in Arawa on 30 October, agreed on a
new target date of 24 December for completion of
stage II of the agreed weapons disposal plan. It is now
important that all sides make rapid progress towards
meeting that goal, given a recent lack of momentum in
the weapons disposal process, as we heard from Sir
Kieran Prendergast this morning.

In that area, of course, UNPOB has a critical role
to play, since its verification and certification roles
become the trigger for implementation of agreed
arrangements for autonomy and for the guarantee of a
referendum among Bougainvilleans on Bougainville's
political future. There is now a good prospect that stage
III of weapons disposal - a decision on the final phase
of the weapons, which would see most, if not all, of
them destroyed - can be completed by the middle of
2003, thus allowing for elections for an autonomous
government in Bougainville.

It remains essential that the United Nations
maintain its full support and engagement with regard to
the process now well under way. Much progress has
already been achieved, including on the amnesty and
pardons issue. The Bougainville Constitutional
Commission has been at work consulting the people of
Bougainville, and it will soon begin to draft the
Bougainville Constitution. All of that progress must
continue.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville is extremely modest in terms of resources
and personnel, as the representative of Singapore
pointed out. Under the leadership of Ambassador
Sinclair, it has done an excellent job in meeting its
goals and in working to build peace and to advance
agreed objectives, especially with regard to weapons
disposal. There will always be some moves backward
and forward in such an interlinked political and
disarmament process; what is important is to maintain
clarity of focus on the task ahead. UNPOB does that
admirably.

UNPOB's finishing its work is something that
matters to the people of Bougainville, of Papua New
Guinea and of the region. At small financial cost but
with great gains for peace, UNPOB remains critical to
the completion of the process. We should therefore
focus, not on rigid time frames, but on benchmarks in
how it completes that work, and by that standard it is
doing very well. Today, it is also right to express
particular appreciation to the Peace Monitoring Group
countries - Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and
Vanuatu - for their crucial contribution to and work in
the process.

The year ahead will be an active one for United
Nations engagement in Bougainville. Stages II and III
of the weapons disposal process and the critical
determination that the United Nations must make in
certifying that the process is complete will be major
challenges. The pre-election period will also be a time
when sound judgement and advice will be called for. In
addition, as Ambassador Koonjul and others have
pointed out this morning, the extremely bleak
economic situation of Bougainville is a factor of which
the international community, including the United
Nations agencies, will have to take substantial account
in the year ahead. What is important now is to maintain
our full support for the peace process and to allow
UNPOB to finish its work.

