The European Union and its member States thank the 10 co-sponsoring members of the Security Council for organizing this important and timely open debate on climate and security. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; and the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this statement. This meeting is timely from a climate perspective, as new figures from the World Meteorological Organization show that the annual mean global temperature is likely to be at least 1°C above pre-industrial levels in each of the coming five years. We are approaching the crucial point of 1.5° far too fast. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has clearly demonstrated in its report Global Warming of 1.5°C the devastating effects such a temperature increase could have on the livelihoods and lives of people in many regions of the world. This meeting is also timely in the current pandemic context, as coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to hit countries across the world with unrelenting force, exposing and exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and compounding the impact of climate change on food and water security, livelihoods, social cohesion and security. That threatens to undermine development gains and human rights, as well as escalate violence and disrupt fragile peace processes. We simply cannot afford to lose our ambition in addressing the planetary crisis while fighting the pandemic, nor can we turn a blind eye to the consequences already materializing. That underlines the importance of enabling the Security Council to deal more systematically and effectively with the interlinkages between climate change and security. We have seen important progress over the past years. The analytical basis of the Security Council's work on climate-related security risks has improved by the work of the Climate Security Mechanism in the Secretariat. The Mechanism should be strengthened further, as it brings together expertise from various parts of the United Nations system: conflict prevention and mediation, sustainable management of natural resources, climate change, resilience and gender. We call for a regular and systematic report by the Secretary-General to the Security Council in order to expand the analytical basis and recommendations for actions, including strengthening the ability of missions on the ground to integrate climate-related security risks into their preventive and reactive actions. The Security Council must continue to mainstream climate-related security risks into its consideration of country- and regional-level conflicts. Similarly, the United Nations peacebuilding architecture needs to be enabled to address climate-related risks, including those over diminishing natural resources. In that regard, the increase in water stress as a result of climate change is particularly pertinent, as it heightens the risk of conflict and undermining peacebuilding efforts. The same goes for the security implications of sea-level rise and extreme weather events, such as floods and droughts. For effective, integrated responses, the peace and security, development and humanitarian pillars of the United Nations must work closer together at all levels, in line with the nexus approach. We must also maintain our focus on the gender dimension. A recent report by the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women demonstrates the many ways in which gender inequality, climate vulnerability and State fragility are interlinked. Countries with a higher value in one of those areas tend to score higher in the other two. In his 2019 report on women and peace and security (S/2019/800), the Secretary-General declared an urgent need for better analysis and for concrete, immediate actions to address the linkages. It is also crucial to continue to include young people in the discussions and decision-making processes regarding climate and security. They are the ones who will be most affected by the impact of climate change. The European Union (EU) remains strongly determined to implement our commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, including through the EU Green Deal. We call on all partners to show the same determination on the road to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. As the world's biggest climate donor, much of our help seeks to combine adaptation to global warming and interventions to improve the sustainable management of resources with the prevention of conflict. I cite two very different examples of our support. The first is the Copernicus satellite, whose imaging is used both for instant life-saving responses to extreme weather event disasters - like the recent hurricanes in the Caribbean - and as an early-warning mechanism for climate impact threatening the livelihoods and even existence of coastal communities. The second is the EU's many-year support of the African-led Great Green Wall initiative, aiming to restore degraded landscapes, address climate change concerns, and transform millions of lives in one of the world's poorest regions, the Sahel. In conclusion, the impact of climate change, like that of COVID-19, threatens us all. Just like the pandemic, addressing climate change needs a massive global effort, shared ambition and solidarity. And we need the entire United Nations system to be able to deal successfully with the different dimensions of climate change. Let us work together to ensure that all parts of the United Nations, including the Security Council, have all they need to fulfil their tasks properly.
