Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I welcome your presence among us
today.
(spoke in English)

I would like to start by thanking the presidency of
Togo for having organized this briefing and the Legal
Counsel, Ms. Patricia O'Brien, for her very
comprehensive presentation of the Secretary-General's
report (S/20l2/50). I also wish to thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Ambassador Yuri Fedotov, for his
participation in this briefing, bearing in mind the
important role UNODC is called to play in helping
build a solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia. The report of the Secretary-General is both
comprehensive and action-oriented. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretariat and the
Office of Legal Affairs for the good work done.

The phenomenon of piracy off the coast of
Somalia has its roots in Somalia. It feeds on
lawlessness and overall impunity and benefits from
conditions on the ground that are deficient for fighting
this scourge through Somali institutions, an efficient
judiciary and an appropriate system for the rule of law.

The dimension of the problem is such that it
transcends the territory of Somalia. It spills over its
borders, with a serious negative impact on the
neighbouring countries, on the region and on the
commercial flux of international navigation that runs
through the region. Moreover, the phenomenon
continues to spread like an epidemic to other countries
in the region, which must now also resort to prompt,
appropriate measures to fight this scourge if they want
to avoid becoming themselves easy prey of the strong
networks of pirates with known links to other types of
transnational organized crime through financing of
criminal activities, including terrorism.

The complexity of these activities and the way
they may interlink and potentiate dangerous
transnational effects make it advisable that the
international community remain vigilant and prepared
to act whenever the situation so requires.

There is indeed a role for the Security Council in
monitoring these new threats, which have the potential
to seriously endanger peace and security. This is why
we continue to encourage the Council not to disregard
its preventive role in closely monitoring such
situations. Last November, under our presidency of the
Council, we organized a meeting on new challenges to
peace and security (see S/PV.6668), having in mind
precisely the importance of the Council closely
following these and other potential threats from the
perspective of prevention.

We are therefore very pleased with the fact that
the report dedicates a significant part of its focus and
recommendations to the need to strengthen the legal
and judiciary capacity in the neighbouring countries
and the regions of Somalia, including, in particular,
Puntland and Somaliland. We fully support those
efforts, and we think that reinforcing those capacities
has now become part and parcel of the overall solution
to piracy in the region.

It is an undeniable fact: the dimension of the
problem requires an ensemble of measures and efforts
by many actors. We encourage those that can be
undertaken by the countries in the region, such as
Seychelles, Kenya, Tanzania and Mauritius, to help in
this regard, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and UNODC. Therefore, we
support the recommendations in the report that aim at
increasing programmes of assistance and capacity-
building in these countries and regions, to help them to
fight impunity for acts of piracy.

We find, however, that more has to be done to
involve Somalia in all those efforts. In our view, no
solution can be sustained unless Somalia, as a whole, is
able to cope with this problem, with appropriate
Somali law and with Somali courts and judiciary - in
all, a Somali solution to a problem that has its roots in
Somalia. The important report by Mr. Jack Lang
(S/2011/30, annex) already pointed clearly to that
reality. We cannot avoid it, and the international
community has to address it comprehensively by
helping build the needed capacity in Somalia, helping
it to regain economic and social development and
security levels that may enable it to overcome the
present difficult situation and avoid becoming an
increasingly easy target and prey of organized crime
and terrorism networks.

In this sense, we encourage further efforts by the
United Nations to assist Somalia to adopt the necessary
anti-piracy legislation and to establish the necessary
judiciary structures, with participation of international
assistance and relevant expertise, as necessary.
Extraterritorial Somali courts, as suggested in
Mr. Lang's report, could also be useful tools, in our
view, to be used as a transitory measure while the
necessary security conditions on the ground are not yet
met. That is particularly important with regard to the
detention and trial of piracy leaders as a vital approach
to disrupt the organized networks that support piracy.

We look forward to the next opportunity to
discuss these issues and trust that implementation of
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report,
together with the contribution of the international
community and the Security Council, will make a
positive and definitive impact in the fight against
impunity for acts of piracy in the region.

