Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing and presiding
over this debate. Iwould also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a common concern for us all and constitutes one of
the top priorities of the international community.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts continues to be civilians. We condemn all
attacks on civilians and are deeply concerned about
their destructive effects, particularly on women and
children. Turkey therefore welcomes the increased
attention of the Council to the issue of the protection
of civilians. We believe that the normative framework
on the protection of civilians has been largely
established. There now needs to be an increased focus
on implementation, rather than on norm setting. It is
now time to translate legal commitments into action.

There is no doubt that the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However,
the international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States openly fail to do so. The Security Council
has a particular and inevitable obligation in that regard,
which has consequences on the ground.

Syria is a case in point. The humanitarian situation
in Syria is growing grimmer every day as we approach
the two-year mark for the crisis. The regime has
failed to fulfil its responsibility to protect civilians,
in a grave escalation of violence with use of its heavy
weaponry, aerial bombings and missiles. The primary
responsibility to end the violence lies with the regime.
Certainly, the international community should play its
part in extending a helping hand to the Syrian people
in need.

The current level of cooperation with humanitarian
assistance institutions is further aggravating the dire
circumstances. That validates the relevance of the
calls for unhindered access to all areas, by the most
convenient and effective routes, in order to implement
the humanitarian response plan. Bilateral and collective
initiatives should focus not only on the humanitarian
consequences, but also on the political causes of the
crisis, which seriously threaten regional peace and
stability.

Regrettably, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also
continues to be a major threat to regional peace.
Central to the crisis is the ongoing occupation of
the land of the State of Palestine and the policies to
maintain the occupation. The illegal blockade of Gaza
is in its sixth year, in defiance of international law,
including resolution 1860 (2009). The recent Operation
Pillar of Defense resulted in the deaths of over 100
Palestinians and severe damage to their livelihoods.
With discriminating regulations in force, as well as
faits accomplis on the ground in the form of settlement
activities, the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people are denied every day not only in Gaza and the
West Bank, but also elsewhere in the region where they
are living as refugees. The obstacles created by the
occupation are incompatible with the dignity and value
of human beings. They must be eliminated without
further delay.

Unfortunately most of our attention and efforts
come when it is time to extinguish crises that have
escalated into violence. The best protection that can be
offered to civilians is to prevent armed conflicts in the
first place and to address their root causes. We need
to place greater emphasis on preventing conflicts from
erupting. That will save many lives and resources.

In that context, the promotion of human rights,
the rule of law, democracy and good governance
should continuously be on our agenda at the global and
regional levels. Those concepts are not only essential
to a functioning and healthy society, but they are also
important to the prevention of conflict, as they are the
building blocks of a society that is least likely to fall
into conflict. Furthermore, in cases when conflicts
cannot be prevented, the presence of those qualities
assists the protection of civilians by decreasing the
intensity of the conflict, the level of violence and the
chances of relapse.

We should also make sure that the perpetrators of
crimes against civilians are held fully accountable for
their actions. That pertains not only to the punitive,
but even more so to the preventive face ofjustice. The
international community has a duty to do more in that
direction, including through capacity-building and
technical assistance.

The importance of peacekeeping operations in
relation to the protection of civilians has also increased
throughout the years. That is clearly reflected in the
growing number of protection of civilians mandates. In
formulating and planning the implementation of such
mandates, there is a need to listen more to regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant countries that are active in
such crisis areas. They have a better understanding ofthe
difficulties on the ground and of the cultural differences
and sensitivities of each country. Furthermore, when
tasked with mandates for the protection of civilians,
we must ensure that proper resources and training are
provided to peacekeepers.

Before I conclude my remarks, allow me to
reiterate the clear distinction between the counter-
terrorism efforts of law enforcement agencies and
armed conflict as regards the application of the
concept of the protection of civilians. Turkey strongly
condemns all acts of terrorism and acknowledges the
legitimate right of Governments to combat terrorism.
Furthermore, the utmost diligence should be observed
in order not to extend any sense of legitimacy to
terrorist organizations. On this note, we would like to
once again underline our position that United Nations
documents should not contain positive references to
non-governmental organizations that are known to
have become instruments for terrorist organizations.

