Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame for his useful briefing on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) as well
as on current developments in the country. In addition,
I would like to thank Ms. Haj er Sharief for her valuable
remarks on the current needs of, and challenges to,
civil society in Libya. I also thank Ambassador Irina
Schoulgin Nyoni for her helpful briefing on the ongoing
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

We are committed to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We
believe that the Libyan Political Agreement is the only
framework for an inclusive political solution to the
conflict during the transition period. We commend the
United Nations action plan presented by Mr. Salame
last September as the most appropriate solution to the
issue of Libyan national reconciliation. We therefore
encourage all Libyans to work together in a spirit of
compromise to finalize the political transformation. We
also wish to reiterate the importance of the participation
of women in the process.

We commend the project undertaken to bring
about national reconciliation in Libya, which is
supported by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and implemented by UNSMIL and the United Nations
Development Programme, as it creates the conditions
for building the trust needed for national reconciliation.
In that regard, we take note of the Charter for Peaceful
Coexistence ,adopted in Fezzan last December.

However, we are concerned about the deteriorating
situation in the country, including the immigration
crisis and the threat itposes to regional and international
peace and security. In that regard, we call on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, in cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization
for Migration, to address the root causes of large
movements of people, including forced displacement,
unmanaged immigration and trafficking in persons, in
order to prevent exploitation of refugees and migrants
by smugglers and human traffickers. All refugees and
migrants should be treated with humanity and dignity.
We therefore urge and encourage the Libyan authorities
to take concrete steps to stamp out human rights
Violations and abuses in centres under their control,
remove those reasonably suspected of carrying out
Violence, investigate and prosecute those responsible
and publicly signal that such abuses will no longer
be tolerated.

Poland calls for an international order based on
respect for international law and the delivery of justice.
We also support holding accountable those who obstruct
and undermine the Libyan Political Agreement.

