Mr. Riecken (Austria): We would like to sincerely
thank Luxembourg for convening this important open
debate today. Let me also express our appreciation for
Luxembourg's leadership and tireless efforts on children
and armed conflict in the Council. We welcome the
briefings made, as well as the adoption of the resolution
2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.

Austria associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Human Security Network statement to be delivered by
the representative of Greece.

There is no doubt that the Security Council
has elaborated an impressive and comprehensive
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. Yet more efforts need to be devoted
to a systematic implementation of the Security Council
resolutions and the mainstreaming of child protection
concerns into the Council's work.

Out of the 55 parties to conflict listed in the annex
to the Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict (S/2013/245), the majority are persistent
perpetrators that have been listed for at least five years,
and 11 of them even for over 10 years. Austria therefore
warmly welcomes the new campaign launched by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui and UNICEF to end the recruitment and use
of children by Government security forces in conflict
by 2016.

At the same time, we should not overlook the
importance of United Nations engagement with and
access to non-State armed groups and the continued
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the conclusion of action plans with non- State
actors. After all, they constitute the vast majority of all
the parties listed in the annexes. The Security Council
should also make better use of the tools available
and must be prepared to take vigorous action against
persistent perpetrators, for example through the use of
targeted sanctions.

As the results of the study entitled Education under
Attack 2014, which was launched last week, clearly
demonstrate, attacks against schools, teachers and
students and incidents of the military use of schools
are far more widespread and pervasive than previously
documented and thus require more action. The Security
Council should consistently, including in its country-
specific work, condemn attacks against schools and
their misuse. Against that backdrop, Austria welcomes
the work by the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack on the so-called draft Lucens guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict.

Last but not least, allow me to turn to the efforts
by United Nations peacekeeping missions on child
protection. Child protection advisors play a crucial role
not only as a single point of contact within the mission
but also in reaching out to all stakeholders responsible
for children's rights and often also in monitoring the
implementation of action plans.

In addition to the deployment of child protection
advisers, ensuring appropriate training of peacekeepers
on child protection is of critical importance. We
therefore welcome the work carried out by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on developing
training standards and are proud to contribute to
the development of a specialized training for child
protection advisers. Following the recent validation of
the course materials, the first training course for child
protection advisors will be held in the autumn of this
year. Austria will also be hosting a United Nations
training of trainers course on the protection of civilians
and child protection in May this year.

In addition to ensuring that peacekeepers have the
right skills to implement child protection mandates,
they themselves and their conduct need to adhere to the
United Nations high standards. Vetting procedures, in
particular the United Nations human rights screening
policy, as well as the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces, are important tools
in that respect.

