Mr. Van Coorsdrecht (Netherlands): I would
like to thank Angola for organizing this debate. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union. I commend today's
briefers for their interventions and their outstanding
work on perseverance and bringing peace and stability
to the Great Lakes region.

The Netherlands is concerned about the renewed
threat of conflict and human suffering in the Great
Lakes region. A poignant example is the unravelling
of the peace process in Burundi during the past year.
We have seen how a crisis has emerged after the parties
concerned were unable to peacefully agree on the
country's democratic future.

The Netherlands has been a part of peace,
development and justice in the Great Lakes region for
decades. Through our embassies in each country we
contribute to peace and dialogue, to accountability and
human rights, and to inclusive development. We believe
that dialogue is a better proposition for the future
than repression or armed conflict. With the United
Nations, the Netherlands has supported the inclusive
dialogue in Burundi for many years, also at times when
very few people believed a solution was possible. We
accompanied the complex process of integration and
reform of Burundi's security forces. These processes
were fraught with difficulties, but through experience
we know it can be done. We call on all parties in Burundi
to keep these past achievements in mind, to foreswear
all violence and to urgently participate in the regionally
led inclusive dialogue in a spirit of compromise. As in
the past, the Netherlands will stand by Burundi's side
as a friend to advise, to support and to assist. We will
not let the citizens of Burundi down.

Like Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo now has a choice to either consolidate past
achievements or to descend into violence and social
unrest. The Netherlands fully supports the efforts of
the African Union, through Mr. Edem Kodjo, to bring
stakeholders together to seek consensus on the country's
future. Electoral unrest is especially dangerous for the
fragile situation in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Aside from addressing the root causes
of conflict, it is important that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo resume all
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in neutralizing armed groups, such as the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, and
creating conditions for their effective disarmament
and reintegration.

The Netherlands is deeply concerned about the
increasing human rights violations throughout the
region. Hard-won space for media, human rights
defenders and political opposition is being deliberately
shut down. Arbitrary arrests disappearances and
extrajudicial killings are increasing. We call on all
parties to exercise restraint and to look for common
peaceful objectives that will benefit all citizens. As
impunity is at the basis of recurrent cycles of violence
and human rights violations, it is imperative that those
responsible for crimes, war crimes, sexual violence and
human rights violations be held accountable so that the
cycle can be broken and victims can see justice done.

We welcome the United Nations Regional Strategic
Framework, which addresses these very same issues.
We look forward to continue working with the United
Nations and with all parties concerned with a view to
restoring stability and a basis for a sustainable future
for all in the Great Lakes region.

