I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. I also welcome the participation in this video- teleconference of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. Concerning Kosovo, one of France's utmost priorities is the normalization of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, within the framework of the dialogue conducted under the leadership of the European Union (EU). That objective is our compass, and I would like to make two remarks in that respect. First, France welcomes the appointment on 3 April of Miroslav Lajeak as the European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue. We fully support mediation by the European Union, given that the dispute is a European security issue. We call on the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia to engage with Mr. Lajeak. Secondly, we welcome the announcement on 1 April by the caretaker Government of Kosovo of the full suspension of the 100 per cent tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is an important step in the right direction. The flow of goods between Serbia and Kosovo has restarted, which is an important development. We encourage both sides to take further steps to enable the resumption of the EU-led dialogue. We are aware that the pursuit of that objective is taking place in a difficult context owing to the mobilization of all resources for the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 crisis nevertheless shows that cooperation is the best way to fight against common challenges and, in that respect, I welcome the cooperation on the ground between Belgrade and Pristina to fight the pandemic and hope that it will help rebuild trust between the parties. In addition, bearing in mind the political situation in Kosovo, we call on all stakeholders to set aside their political differences and prioritize the fight against COVID-19. In addition, I reiterate France's support for the work of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, which works tirelessly to promote security, stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region. Its work in bringing communities closer together and promoting the women, peace and security agenda is essential and must be commended. Those efforts must continue, in conjunction with the initiatives of other regional and international actors, in particular the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. France is convinced that Serbia and Kosovo have a shared European future. In order to build that future, we will continue to support the reforms needed to consolidate the rule of law and socioeconomic development. In support of the EU-led mediation, we will ramp up our efforts to facilitate the conclusion of a comprehensive, final and legally binding agreement between the two parties, which will contribute to the lasting stabilization of the Western Balkans.
