Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me firstthankMalaysia
for having convened this open debate and express my
delegation's warm welcome to His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, Minister for Foreign Affairs ofMalaysia.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, along with the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Director of Facilitation for
Peace and Development, for their presentations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam, on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and that to
be made later by the representative of Kuwait, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

We have listened attentively to all of the
presentations made here in the Security Council today.
Clearly, children should never have to be the victims,
or bear the burden, of a conflict that they did not create
or choose to be part of. With no power to escape,
many children have been taken away forcefully from
their families and communities by State or non-State
actors and placed in life-threatening situations. It
is a shock to our conscience when we hear that child
abduction is being used systematically as a tool of war,
with the intention of spreading fear and subduing and
humiliating entire communities. Many ofthese children
are forced to become child soldiers. They are also
forced to become tactical agents. Girls face a greater
risk compared to boys, as they are often specifically
targeted for abduction, sexual slavery and forced
marriage. Worse yet, girls are abducted for trafficking
as well.

In the light ofthese Violations, Indonesia condemns
child abduction in armed conflict and is deeply troubled
by the increasing number of such cases recently.
Indonesia joins the international community in calling
for the immediate release of abducted children, without
preconditions.

Indonesia also stresses the need for a more Vigorous,
sustained, coordinated and well-supported endeavour,
firmly rooted in international humanitarian law, refugee
law and human rights law, aimed at protecting children,
who are disproportionately affected in armed conflicts,
including as victims of abduction. Clearly, the Security
Council has a critical role in this undertaking.

Given the present situation, we would like to share
some of our views on this issue.

First, it is critical to ensure that the emerging trend
of child abduction in armed conflict is not perpetuated.
All perpetrators, regardless of their status as State
or non-State actors, should be held accountable for
gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. It is imperative that the Security Council and
other international organizations take all measures
necessary to ensure that parties to armed conflicts
simply - I repeat, simply - comply with international
humanitarian laws and standards.
Secondly, children associated with armed groups
or forces should be first and foremost treated as
victims. Efforts should be focused on their effective
rehabilitation and reintegration into society. In this
regard, any legal process against child soldiers or
children associated with armed groups, in our view,
should apply strictly a restorative-justice paradigm.

We should also acknowledge that hunger, poverty,
discrimination and marginalization may lure children
to return to armed conflicts voluntarily. They will
become a threat to fragile peace deals when they feel
that they are not accepted in society and know nothing
but violence as a way of life.

Thirdly, we support the idea of further expanding
the normative framework for the protection of children
in armed conflict by adding abduction as a criterion for
listing those parties that violate international norms.

Fourthly, we support the ongoing movement to
strengthen the international framework with a view
to preventing the military use of schools during
armed conflict. In this regard, we welcome the recent
convening of the Oslo Conference on Safe Schools.

Fifthly, we recognize the importance ofestablishing
a mandatory pre-deployment requirement for child-
protection training for all countries contributing troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Sixthly and lastly, we believe that the international
community, in particular the United Nations, should
invest more resources in and devote greater attention to
conflict prevention, as this is the best way ofprotecting
children from armed conflict.

In addition, enhanced efforts to strengthen the
normative and operational framework for protecting
children in armed conflict should be made, even in time
of peace, including by building national capacities and
institutions and by sensitizing the public at large to the
issues. Indonesia will continue to put a high priority on
safeguarding children.

In conclusion, it is our collective duty to put an end
to the nightmares and the suffering of child victims of
armed conflict. Their place is in the peaceful setting
of their homes and communities, with other children
in classrooms, and living a carefree childhood without
knowing the fear of being abducted.

