The President (spoke in French): At the outset of the
meeting, I should like, on behalf of the Security Council, to
express deep sympathy and profound condolences to the
Government and people of China, as well as to the families
of the three victims of the tragic incident that occurred in
the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Belgrade
on 7 May 1999.

I now invite members to stand and observe a minute
of silence in their memory.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 7 May 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1999/523)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
the decisions taken at the 4000th meeting, held on 8 May
1999, I invite the representatives of Albania, Belarus, Cuba,
India, Iraq and Ukraine to take the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber; I invite Mr. Vladislav
Jovanovie to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Sychou (Belarus), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Hasan
(Iraq) and Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber;
Mr. Jovanovic' took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now resume its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1999/529, letter
dated 9 May 1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1999/530, letter dated 10 May 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/1999/541, letter dated 10 May 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the press
statement by the President on 8 May 1999 and
expresses its deep distress and concern over the
bombing of the Embassy of the People's Republic of
China in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 7
May 1999, which has caused serious casualties and
property damage. The Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and profound condolences to the Chinese
Government and families of the Victims.

"The Security Council expresses profound
regrets over the bombing and deep sorrow for the
loss of lives, injuries and property damage caused by
the bombing, and notes that regrets and apologies
were expressed for this tragedy by members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The
Council, bearing in mind the Charter of the United
Nations, reaffirms that the principle of the
inviolability of diplomatic personnel and premises
must be respected in all cases in accordance with
internationally accepted norms.

"The Security Council stresses the need for a
complete and thorough investigation of the bombing
by NATO. In this connection, it takes note of the
fact that an investigation has been initiated by
NATO and awaits the results of the investigation.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/ 12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.30 pm.

