Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Ijoin others in
thanking our briefers, Nickolay Mladenov and Stephen
O'Brien. I thought it was particularly interesting to
hear the considered views of colleagues coming to the
end of their two years as non-permanent members of
the Security Council.

When we last met here in July (see S/PV.7736), we
discussed the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex). It
set out worrying trends for the Israel-Palestine issue,
trends that, as the report itself made clear, are eroding
the viability of the two-State solution. Since our last
discussion there has been an acceleration of some of
those trends in the wrong direction, and so we are
further still from the ever-elusive two-State solution. I
see three areas of particular concern.

The first is settlements. As we saw in the Arria
Formula meeting last week, Israel has pushed forward
plans for more than 1,500 settlement units, and it
continues to demolish Palestinian structures. That runs
in direct opposition to Quartet recommendations to
cease the policy of systematic settlement expansion and
to remove blocks on Palestinian development. This year,
as Stephen said, we have seen 958 structures levelled.
But they are not just structures, they are homes, shops
and schools. This is all part of an Israeli policy that
has left 1,000 people displaced, including 690 children.
That is 690 members of a generation who currently seem
destined to inherit a situation no closer to peace than
their parents. With demolition orders issued against the
Palestinian village of Susiya and the Kahn Al-Ahmar
school, east of Jerusalem, I fear we have not seen the
end of this disturbing trend. Livelihoods are on the
line just when Israel needs to be building confidence
between communities, not demolishing the bedrock on
which they are built. The United Kingdom once again
urges Israel to cease its systematic policy of settlement
expansion, demolition of Palestinian structures and
limits on Palestinian development.

Secondly, we are extremely worried, as is Nickolay,
about the dire situation in Gaza. It is there where the
ramifications of 50 years of strain are most visible.
There is a water crisis; far from drinking quality, 90 per
cent of the water is not even fit for agricultural use.
There is a jobs crisis; unemployment rates are among
the highest in the world. And we are on the brink of
an even more disturbing crisis: a possible return to
war. Anyone sleep-walking into that needs to wake up.
The continuing rocket attacks launched by Hamas, and
subsequent Israeli responses, demonstrate just how real
the risk is.
My third point is that this is not inevitable. Health
facilities and schools have been rebuilt in Gaza.
Efforts have been made, by both sides, to improve
energy supplies for the Palestinian people. Leaders
on both sides must seize whatever momentum those
small positive developments provide to make strides
and progress in other areas. We need to see elections
in Gaza and the West Bank. We need to see an end to
the hateful rhetoric. And, finally, we must see a return
to the negotiating table, to end this conflict once and
for all.

I would like to turn our attention to the worst
single issue facing the Middle East region - indeed,
possibly the whole world 4 Syria. The suffering of
the people of Aleppo has become a weekly focus for
the Council. Veto after veto prevent Security Council
unity and prevent us from taking action. But we must
press forward. There are 100,000 reasons for us to do
so - 100,000 children under siege; 100,000 children
struggling without food or medical provisions; 100,000
children living in the wreckage of eastern Aleppo.

These children hold no responsibility for the events
that have led to their life in a war zone, and yet the
Syrian regime and Russia have consistently chosen to
put them at risk. They have chosen to continue to send
their jets over the homes of these children, bringing
with them havoc and destruction. Russia has chosen
to back a regime that employs the medieval tactics of
siege and starvation in the pursuit of military victory.
What is their rationale for being on the wrong side of
history? The excuse - and that is exactly what it is,
an excuse - is that the terrorists must be defeated. Of
course the terrorists must be defeated. We all agree
with that, but it does not justify bombing Aleppo until
there is nothing left to bomb.

After its veto, Russia's proposed solution to regain
some goodwill is an eight-hour pause, uncoordinated
with anyone else. That is wholly inadequate. The United
Nations has repeatedly called for at least 48 hours to
provide the most basic aid, and even that would not be
enough time to address meaningfully the suffering in
Aleppo. Sustained access on the basis ofa full cessation
of hostilities is required. It is within Russia's gift to
make that happen. It is not too late.

The Security Council must unite to end the
war 4 unite around a policy to stop the aerial
bombardment and shelling of eastern Aleppo
immediately and for a lot longer than eight hours. It
must do so indefinitely. After five years of bloody
conflict - after the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians 4 we can do better, and those 100,000 children
in Aleppo deserve better.

