Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): The States of the Horn of Africa and other
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) - in particular Ethiopia,
Djibouti, Somalia, Kenya and Uganda - have drawn
the Council's attention to Eritrea's destabilizing
activities in the subregion. Concerned about the
situation, IGAD, as a subregional group, has on several
occasions addressed itself to the presidency of the
Security Council, in particular on 8 August.

Despite the appeals of the international
community and the African Union, Eritrea has
continued to fail to comply with, or implement, the
relevant United Nations resolutions. For that reason,
and to prevent further aggravation of tensions, IGAD
has called on the Council to impose new sanctions.
IGAD States have all along emphasized the need to
create the conditions for lasting peace in the subregion,
and any initiative to that end is therefore welcome.

In response to urgent appeals from countries of
the Horn of Africa, Gabon, as an African member of
the Security Council, decided to co-sponsor a draft
resolution on further sanctions against Eritrea. Our
commitment is also based on the decision adopted at
the fourteenth ordinary session of the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government in
January 2010, in which the African Union emphasized
the need to vigorously set about implementing
resolution 1907 (2009). It also called on Eritrea
immediately to comply with the demands of resolutions
1862 (2009) and 1907 (2009), and called on the
Security Council Sanctions Committee to implement
sanctions against Eritrean police and military
authorities and Eritrean leaders.

The draft resolution before the Security Council
for the most part replicates the provisions of resolution
1907 (2009). New measures, contained in paragraphs 9
2

to 13, are essentially economic measures. Those
measures have been focused to take into account the
need to avoid possible negative effects on the civilian
population.

Gabon therefore solemnly urges the members of
the Security Council to respond to IGAD's request by
adopting the draft resolution. Beyond its provisions,
the draft is designed first and foremost to promote
peace and improve security in Africa as a whole, and
the subregion of the Horn in particular.

