The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

The transitional period in Somalia will come to
an end in August, which will usher in a new stage in
the settlement of the question of Somalia. It will
present daunting challenges while also providing
significant opportunities. The many problems facing
Somalia are interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and
therefore require an integrated response.
China believes it is necessary to formulate and
implement a comprehensive strategy for the early
realization of peace, security and development in
Somalia. That comprehensive strategy should reflect
Somalia's ownership and give full play to the
important role of the United Nations. In our view, that
important strategy should comprise five pillars.

First is the effective promotion of political
reconciliation in Somalia. We hope that the
Transitional Federal Government will work within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement, complete its
constitutional process and other transitional tasks as
planned and enter into dialogue as soon as possible
with the relevant national parties and international
cooperation partners on post-transitional arrangements,
with a view to reaching consensus at an early date. We
hope that the various Somali parties will seize this
opportunity to effectively promote national political
reconciliation.

Second is strengthening capacity-building in the
security sector. We call on the Transitional Federal
Government, with the assistance of international
partners, to step up efforts to strengthen the security
sector so as to establish at an early date a professional
army, capable of maintaining national peace and
stability and of protecting the security of the Somali
people. We urge the parties concerned to continue to
provide donations to the Somali Security Sector
Institutions Trust Fund.

Third is the promotion of economic and social
development. Supporting the people is a decisive factor
in the future of Somalia, and the key to winning the
people's support is to show the Somali people the
prospect of a good life so that they can have
confidence in their country's future. China calls on the
United Nations and donors to mobilize more financial
and material resources to help Somalia to bring about
development. Somalia should have a greater say on
questions such as the distribution and implementation
of financial assistance.

Fourth is fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia.
China calls for deep reflection by the international
community on its strategy to combat piracy. Greater
attention should be paid to effectively addressing the
land-based origins of piracy through political,
economic and judicial means.

Fifth is support for the leading role of the African
Union. China highly values the important role of

11-2583]
regional organizations, such as the African Union, and
of the African Union Mission to Somalia, and calls on
the international community to provide more support to
the African Union. We support the Security Council in
responding positively to the relevant requests of the
African Union and in giving favourable consideration
to the deployment of a peacekeeping operation in
Somalia at an appropriate time.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council stresses the need for
a comprehensive strategy to encourage the
establishment of peace and stability in Somalia
through the collaborative efforts of all
stakeholders in the fields of the political process,
security sector building, humanitarian relief,
protection of civilians, human rights, socio-
economic development, counter-terrorism and
combating piracy. The Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued instability in Somalia,
which has led to a multitude of problems,
including terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, and a dire
humanitarian situation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the Djibouti Agreement as the basis for the
resolution of the conflict in Somalia. It urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to broaden and
consolidate the reconciliation process, intensify
efforts to complete the outstanding transitional
tasks, and prioritize the timely completion of the
constitution and the delivery of basic services to
the population, paving the way for a better future
for Somalis, including their economic and social
development and the realization of their human
rights.

"The Security Council welcomes the work
of Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to support the Somali
people in reaching agreement on post-transitional
arrangements in consultation with the
international community. It strongly urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to engage in this
process in a more constructive, open and
transparent manner that promotes broader
political dialogue and participation in line with

11-2583]
the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to assess, in his
regular reports delivered to the Council before
the end of the transitional period, the respect for
these principles. These principles are essential for
future cooperation between the international
community and the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The Security Council notes that the
transitional period will end in August 2011. The
Council regrets the decision by the Transitional
Federal Parliament to extend its mandate
unilaterally, without carrying out necessary
reforms, and urges the Transitional Federal
Institutions to refrain from any further unilateral
action.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahiga, welcomes his
efforts and those of the United Nations, and calls
for an increased United Nations presence and
increased coherence of United Nations activities
in Somalia.

"The Security Council affirms the
importance of the development of Government
institutions and the strengthening of civilian
capacity-building across Somalia, including
ensuring the participation of women in public life,
the prevention and resolution of conflict,
peacebuilding and socio-economic reconstruction.
The Council urges the international community to
mobilize additional support to the Transitional
Federal Government and local and regional
administrations in that regard.

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern about the worsening humanitarian
situation in Somalia, and the impact of the
current drought, which have left over 2 million
Somalis in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
and have resulted in significantly higher flows of
refugees to neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council also expresses
concern at the continuing decline in humanitarian
funding for Somalia. The Security Council
commends the work of humanitarian aid workers
and urges all Member States to contribute to
current and future consolidated humanitarian
appeals.
28

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the targeting and obstruction of the delivery of
humanitarian aid by Al-Shabaab and other armed
groups in Somalia and demands that all parties
ensure full, safe and unhindered access for the
timely delivery of humanitarian aid.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of strengthening the Somali security
forces, including the development of effective
command and control. While emphasizing that
the Somalis hold the primary responsibility for
achieving political stability, security and the rule
of law, the Council urges Member States and
regional and international organizations to
contribute generously and promptly to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security
institutions, and to provide assistance to the
Somali security forces.

"The Security Council recognizes the
progress made by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Security Forces in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu. The Council deeply
regrets the loss of life in the recent fighting and
recognizes the significant sacrifices made by
AMISOM. and the Somali National Security
Forces. The Council expresses its sincere
gratitude to the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment to AMISOM, and
expresses its condolences to them and to the
Transitional Federal Government and the Somali
people.

"The Security Council condemns all attacks,
including terrorist attacks on the Transitional
Federal Government, AMISOM. and the civilian
population by armed opposition groups and
foreign fighters, particularly Al-Shabaab.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of predictable, reliable and timely
resources for AMISOM. in order for it to better
fulfil its mandate. The Security Council calls on
the international community to make
contributions urgently and without caveats to the
United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. or
directly in support of AMISOM. It notes the
recommendations on Somalia of the Africa Union
Peace and Security Council of 15 October 2010
and underlines its intention to keep the situation
under review. It encourages the full deployment
of 4,000 additional AMISOM. troops as
authorized by Security Council resolution 1964
(2010) as soon as possible.

"The Security Council stresses the
responsibility of all parties and armed groups in
Somalia to comply with their obligations to
protect the civilian population from the effects of
hostilities, in particular by avoiding any
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. The
Security Council expresses deep concern about
the continuing violations and abuses committed
against children in Somalia by parties to the
conflict and urges the immediate implementation
of all conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict in Somalia.

"The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the threat posed by piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia,
especially by the extended range of the piracy
threat into the western Indian Ocean, the increase
in pirate capacities and the increasing violence by
the pirates. The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms such violence, including hostage-
taking, murder and other acts of violence against
individuals. The Security Council recognizes that
the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to
the problem of piracy and armed robbery, and
stresses the need for a comprehensive response to
tackle piracy and its underlying causes.

"The Security Council calls upon all
Member States, in particular those in the region,
to refrain from any action in contravention of the
Somalia and Eritrea arms embargo and to take all
necessary steps to hold Violators accountable, and
affirms the importance of enhancing the
monitoring of the Somalia and Eritrea arms
embargoes through persistent and vigilant
investigation into the violations, bearing in mind
that strict enforcement of the arms embargoes
will improve the overall security situation in the
region.

"The Security Council welcomes the
endeavours of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional organizations to promote peace and
stability in Somalia and reiterates its full support
to AMISOM. and its troop- and police-

11-2583]
contributing countries, especially Burundi and
Uganda."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/6.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkey.

