Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): Let me begin
by thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
introducing the seventh report to the Security Council.

Lithuania welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Libya in establishing the rule of law
and bolstering an effective system ofjustice throughout
the country. Some progress has been made, yet Libya
continues to face complex and serious political,
security and legal challenges. Despite some positive
developments, the system of criminal justice is not yet
fully functional and the security sector requires major
reform.

We believe that the International Criminal Court
is an important and necessary partner of the Libyan
authorities in restoring the rule of law and ensuring
accountability for the serious crimes committed in
Libya. Since the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), the
Libyan Government has continued to demonstrate its
determination to cooperate with the Court. However,
with regard to the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, we would like to stress that
admissibility is a judicial issue under the exclusive
purview of the Chambers of the Court. While both
admissibility decisions remain under appeal, we would
like to remind Libya, as the Prosecutor has states in her
report, that Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. The obligation to
surrender to the Court the persons against whom arrest
warrants have been issued must be respected.

At the same time, we welcome the cooperation
between the Libyan authorities and the Office of the
Prosecutor in implementing last year's memorandum
of understanding on burden-sharing in further
investigations and prosecutions of persons allegedly
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity
in Libya since 15 February 2011.

We note the information provided by the
Prosecutor concerning the ongoing investigations by
her Office of the allegations of crimes committed by
some pro-Al-Qadhafi officials who currently might be
outside of Libya. Wejoin the Prosecutor in encouraging
the Libyan Government to provide all the necessary
support to the staff of the Court so they can conduct
investigations promptly and in an unimpeded manner.

Moreover, we believe that the situation of conflict-
related detainees remains a major concern that needs
an urgent solution. We take note of the fact that, despite
some progress made, the deadline set by the Libyan law
on transitional justice for completing the screening of
detainees has expired and, in conjunction with security
issues and capacity constrains, 7,000 people have
not yet been transferred to the State authority. Public
prosecution can hardly cope with the problem. Such a
lack of effective accountability creates an environment
conducive to torture or other ill treatment, including
the deaths of individuals in custody. Therefore, we
would like to stress the importance of the proper
implementation of the law on transitional justice as a
basis for the reconciliation process.

Let me conclude by underlining our support
for, and commitment to the Court and the Office of
the Prosecutor. We hope that they will successfully
continue their thorough investigation of the situation in
Libya.

