Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me join others in
expressing my appreciation to Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, for his very comprehensive briefing. We thank
the Secretary-General for his reports on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2019/722) and on future planning
for protection of civilian sites therein (S/2019/74l). My
statement today will focus on three key issues, namely,
the political, security and humanitarian situations.

On the first issue, my delegation welcomes last
week's meeting in Juba between President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar and their commitment
to ensuring the timely formation of the revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity. The long-
awaited meeting was a significant step in the right
direction, especially as progress in implementing
critical provisions of the revitalized Agreement was
rather limited. As we approach the end of the extension
of the pre-transitional period, my delegation wishes
to recall that the revitalized Agreement is the only
option right now. We must make it work. To borrow
the language of the Special Envoy for South Sudan
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the remaining critical tasks of the Agreement
can be completed only with unity and compromise.
All parties must hold regular face-to-face dialogues
in order to maintain the positive momentum, reinstil
confidence and resolve outstanding issues, including
transitional security arrangements and the resolution of
boundary issues. We reiterate our call for the timely
and transparent disbursement of funds pledged for
the implementation of the Agreement. Indonesia fully
endorses the provision of technical assistance by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
support the implementation of the Agreement.

Secondly, we are encouraged by the fact that the
permanent ceasefire is holding across the country and
political violence has decreased. Confidence and trust-
building continue at the subnational level, much of
which was facilitated by UNMISS. However, we regret
that sporadic clashes involving non-signatories to the
Agreement continue to take innocent lives in Central
Equatoria region. The importance of IGAD's continued
efforts to bring non-signatories into the peace process
cannot be overstated.

Indonesia stresses the imperative of the full
protection of civilians and observance of international
humanitarian law. Accountability for human rights
Violations must be upheld. Impunity will only prolong
the conflict cycle, thereby jeopardizing the credibility
of the peace process. That is not what we want at this
crucial stage of the peace process.

We commend the role of UNMISS to promote the
rule of law and capacity-building and to strengthen
the judicial presence in the country. Repeated access
restrictions against UNMISS potentially impede its
ability to implement its mandates, including to protect
civilians and to investigate human rights violations.

Thirdly, our collective efforts should always be
aimed at saving human lives. My delegation feels
compelled to bring to the Council's attention the dire
humanitarian situation affecting people in South
Sudan. It is estimated that 6.96 million people are
severely food insecure, of whom 20,000 will likely be
in catastrophe. A durable solution is desperately needed
for the 1.83 million internally displaced persons and
2.3 million refugees.

The country is also struggling to acquire the funding
needed to meet the Ebola virus preparedness target.
As of now, only 45 per cent of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan has been funded. The international
community needs to contribute more.

The operating environment for humanitarian
actors in South Sudan continues to be challenging
and dangerous. All sides must provide humanitarian
actors with the necessary space for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

