The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

At the outset, I should like to express my gratitude
to the Permanent Representative of Sweden, Mr. Olof
Skoog, and to the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Chile, my dear friend Carlos Olguin Cigarroa, for
their respective briefings. I should like also to thank all
members of the Council for their statements, which have
made a very important contribution to the discussion on
this issue.

I would also note the presence here today, under rule
37, of the countries concerned by the various sanctions
committees. I have to say that only a few countries are
part of the problem involving certain members of the
Council bringing pressure to bear on others, and we
deem it very important to hear some of the experiences
of sanctions committees and the views of the countries
concerned.

When we speak of transparency, we believe that
meetings such as this are very important. I think that
this is the first time that we will all be hearing the views
of the countries affected by sanctions. We deem it very
important that the rest of the diplomatic community
at the United Nations hear from such countries, as it
will be possible for them to publicly air their views on
the sanctions, and to hear the national position of each
member of the Security Council on the very important
issue of sanctions committees.

Our intention here is, of course, constructive, and
our objective relates primarily to sanctions committees
on specific countries, not committees on terrorism
or other committees whose work is of a completely
different nature. We are speaking of committees that
involve entire countries and peoples.

In this respect, the Charter of the United
Nations indeed stipulates that certain actions may be
taken before any military action to avert threats to
international peace and security; it does not mention
sanctions, as Ambassador Yoshikawa said, only a set of
measures as set out in Article 41.

Venezuela, as a country that respects the norms
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, therefore embraces the provisions of Article
41. We should recall that the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council on the Government of South Africa
played a very important role, together with the struggle
waged by the people of South Africa and the wars of
liberation on the continent that led to the defeat and end
of the apartheid regime, which was a source of shame
to humankind.

We should also emphasize that while Article 41
establishes the Security Council as the guarantor of
international peace and security, my country rejects
as illegitimate and contrary to international law any
unilateral sanctions imposed by certain countries on
others to achieve political solutions or punish regimes
that they deem inconvenient.

The fact that the sanctions imposed by the United
Nations are legal does not, of course, mean that they
are perfect. We are all aware of the fact that sanctions
regimes can have unintended consequences and that in
certain cases they have led to greater destabilization
and suffering, the very thing they supposedly had
sought to alleviate. Let me give two concrete examples.

During the 1990s, Iraq was subject to the most
extensive sanctions regime in the history of the United
Nations. Iraq depended on oil exports for its revenues
and for practically all other needs of its society, and
sanctions blocked all of those exports. The human cost
ofthe sanctions imposed on Iraq between 1991 and 1998
involved more than 1 million people in that country.

Something similar occurred in Latin America and
the Caribbean. In 1994, the Security Council imposed
an economic embargo on Haiti; those sanctions
destroyed the country's already weak economy and its
social structure. Long before the terrible earthquake
of 2010, sanctions imposed by the United Nations had
already severely jeopardized the future of the Haitian
people for generations to come. However, those two
examples have enabled the Security Council to change
its approach to sanctions, shifting from comprehensive
to targeted sanctions and from countries to individuals
and entities, seeking to reduce the negative impact of
sanctions on the populations of the affected countries.

However, sanctions regimes, in particular managed
andsectoralregimes,stillhaveunintendedconsequences,
including an adverse humanitarian impact on civilians,
high economic costs for neighbouring countries and
the criminalization of economic activities. One issue
that we believe remains unresolved is that of the
discretionary imposition of sanctions. What countries
should be subject to sanctions and how is it decided?
There are sanctions that may prevent threats to the
national sovereignty of some countries and there are
others that threaten global security but are not subject
to sanctions because they are supported by the veto in
the Security Council.

Some issues require sanctions. There is much that
can be done to ensure that sanctions regimes work
and are more in line with the provisions of Article
48. In our View, the criteria for efficacy in sanctions
committees should be clearly defined. What is it that
makes a sanctions committee effective or not? It should
indisputably be linked to political objectives. Sanctions
cannot be imposed permanently on countries. They
should have an objective that has been agreed in the
highest political organ of the Organization - the
Security Council.

There are other issues of concern to us, such as
sanctions imposed on natural resource management.
We maintain that this violates the sovereignty of
States and their right to manage their own resources,
in accordance with the General Assembly resolutions,
as mentioned yesterday, and in particular resolution
1803 (XVII) on the inalienable right of countries to
manage their own resources. We maintain that for
most developing countries, one of their only sources of
income is natural resources; restricting countries in the
management of their own resources will therefore serve
only to exacerbate the economic and humanitarian
situation in the countries concerned.

Another issue of concern to us is the lack of due
process with regard to imposing sanctions on countries
and individuals. Although we acknowledge that the
Security Council has acted to address the issue of
due process, in particular as related to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, with the introduction of the post
of Ombudsperson, we believe that such a post should
be evaluated and extended to all committees, as we
propose in our concept note (S/2016/102,annex). The
guarantee of due process in sanctions committees
does not currently reach the minimum legal threshold
established in national or international legislation. It
is similar to an inquisitorial court. There is no way to
determine how a person or entity may end up subject
to a sanctions regime, other than through information
provided by or a proposal from one of the penholders
to the various committees. By way of example, more
than 50 per cent of sanctions appeals in courts in the
European Union have had successful outcomes. In other
words, this issue must be addressed with transparency,
in the absence of clear andjust procedures to determine
the persons or entities subject to sanctions regimes.

In addition, we must carefully study and resolve
the issue of the duration of sanctions regimes. Many
are established without clear steps or criteria to be met
by the sanctioned countries in order for sanctions to
be lifted. No one knows. A country is sanctioned but
has no idea how sanctions can be lifted. Very often,
the reasons for establishing a sanctions committee
vanish but are then promptly replaced by a completely
different set of reasons. This clearly demonstrates that
very often sanctions imposed by the Security Council,
under pressure from some of its permanent members,
are merely a way to punish some countries and not
others. That is why some sanctions regimes have been
in place for such a long time with no clarity about why
they have been extended. The oldest committees are
those concerning Iraq, which has lasted 26 years, and
Somalia and Liberia, each lasting 24 years.

Of the 16 sanctions committees, 62.5 per cent
concern African countries. The Security Council takes
an unusual interest in imposing sanctions on Africa.
Nine of the committees have been in place for more
than 10 years. The average life of committees that
have ended in recent years was 11 years. There are
at least five committees that no longer exist, which
demonstrates the challenge of ending sanctions
regimes once established and the prevailing injustice
that often prevents sanctions from being lifted. That is
why clear and comprehensible procedures and criteria
for the lifting of sanctions should be communicated
openly to affected States. That is imperative because
it is not uncommon for some countries to exploit the
ambiguous wording of texts drafted 10 or 15 years ago
in an effort to continue punishing countries that are an
inconvenience to them.

With regard to chairs of sanctions committees,
we maintain that they should be appointed through a
transparent, balanced, inclusive and timely process in
which all members of the Security Council, and not
just the permanent five, take part, as is currently the
case. As soon as they are appointed, they can begin
the process of thoroughly preparing and standardizing
working methods.

With regard to committee functions, as the
Ambassador of New Zealand noted, it seems that
committee chairs are simply spokespersons for
members, conveying information provided by the
panels of experts. At times, we have thought that this
position was given to elected members because chairs
of sanctions committees are politically innocuous. We
believe that it is important for elected members to chair
committees because they have no conflicts of interest.
In other words, it does not make sense for a member of
the permanent five to be a penholder or a committee
chair when there is an obvious conflict of interest, since
they have appointed themselves and have not vetoed
their own membership of sanctions committees in an
effort to impose sanctions on a specific country.

However, we believe that committee chairs should
exploit their position to share their own opinions,
thoughts and recommendations. Each report prepared
by chairs for the Security Council is extensively revised
by the panels of experts and the representatives of
various countries. When we wish to have a political
discussion in the Security Council, we find ourselves
seated behind the same ambassadors and experts who
impose their own criteria on sanctions committees.
This lack of flexibility does not allow a member
country holding the chairmanship or its ambassador to
be innovative or make a contribution that would assist
in meeting the objectives of the sanctions committees.
In that regard, we believe that the chairs of the sanctions
committees should at the very least be able to express
their views about the functioning of the committees and
how they can adjust to political situations that are often
fluid, as is the case in the Horn of Africa and in Libya
in North Africa. These are evolving situations and
committees need to adapt on the basis of discussions
held in the Security Council concerning the need to lift
or reduce sanctions or to take any decision against a
given country.

With regard to the panels of experts, we believe
that the experts are technically capable and skilled
individuals, whom we thank for their work, which they
frequently undertake in truly adverse circumstances. We
call on the panels of experts to be truly independent in
their assessments. That can sometimes prove difficult,
but no panel should demonstate political prejudice
towards the country to which they are assigned. The
information gathered by panels of experts is noted by
the national capitals of neighbouring countries, which
have an interest in whether sanctions are maintained
against a particular country. The panels' reports
sometimes contain information that may be difficult
to source or verify. Such information may be reported
by civil society or non-governmental organizations and
there is no way to verify it.

The work of the panels of experts is very important,
and along with their reports serve as the bases for the
sanctions committees discussions. The panels often
engage in their own interpretation of the provisions
and mandate of the relevant resolution, and it can be
very difficult to change such assessments. Ultimately,
the panels of experts play a lead role in sanctions
committees, and may even have powers that carry more
political weight than those of the chair.

We believe that the sanctions committees need to
be more accountable. It should be an open mechanism;
we do not wish to see more bureaucracy. Those who
are responsible for the respective sanctions committees
need to be accountable to the Security Council
for their work; they must respect the committees'
political objectives and be able to express their views
concerning the lifting or modification of sanctions
and the committee's goals. The work of the sanctions
committees should not be compartmentalized, given
the fact that many regional conflicts must be seen, in a
cross-cutting manner, to have problems similar to those
in countries of the same region.

We have made a number of recommendations
and look forward to receiving the support of all
members for a draft document reflecting the important
contributions expressed here today. We feel very
strongly that the work of the sanctions committees must
reflect more accurately the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Sanctions should not be punitive,
but an instrument to address and prevent threats to
international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

