Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
the Central African Republic (BONUCA), Cheikh
Tidiane Sy; World Bank Vice-President Mats Karlsson;
and the Acting Deputy Director of the Regional Bureau
for Africa of the United Nations Development
Programme, Frederick Lyons, for their briefings.
Bangladesh warmly welcomes the presence among us
of The Honourable Anil Kumarsingh Gayan, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Mauritius, and we thank him for his very important
statement. We should like to offer particular words of
appreciation to Mr. Sy and his team on the ground for
their tireless efforts towards securing peace and
supporting institution-building in the Central African
Republic.

The last time the Council considered the situation
in the Republic was in July. At that time, my delegation
committed its total support for the important role
BONUCA had been playing.

Later in the meeting, we shall have the pleasure
to listen to the Central African Republic Minister for
the Promotion of Civic Responsibility. We look
forward to hearing his perspective on the situation in
his country.

Since the institution of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic, we have seen some progress in achieving
peace and stability in the country. However, we still
find a number of concerns prevailing on the ground.

First, as to the absence of national reconciliation,
it is important that the Government and the opposition
get into dialogue to consolidate peace and national
reconciliation. We would encourage the Government to
initiate dialogue. In that respect, we would urge the
Representative ofthe Secretary-General to use his good
offices to focus on this aspect.

Secondly, as to human rights, while we are happy
to see a diminishing of summary executions, we are
equally concerned at the "neighbourhood justice" that
is alarmingly taking over in the Central African
Republic. The Secretary-General in his report has
portrayed a worrisome human rights situation in
various dimensions. This is another area where we
would once again ask for the urgent attention of the
Secretary-General's Representative, in consultation
with the Government ofthe Central African Republic.

Thirdly, we are particularly concerned at the
long-unpaid arrears of civil servants and the resulting
discontent. In the country's current economic situation,
this is likely to have a spiralling effect on the social
situation. The Secretary-General has underlined that
the resentment might intensify. In that regard, we
appreciate the Government's recent announcement to
pay part ofthe arrears ofthe civil servants. We strongly
encourage the Government to continue its efforts in
that direction.

Fourthly and finally, let us turn to the role of the
international community. Following last May's
meeting, we expected bilateral and multilateral donors
and the multilateral financial institutions to support the
Central African Government in a much more robust
manner. Although the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund have recently released some financial
resources, the bulk of the commitments remains
unfulfilled. This morning, we heard the Secretary-
General's Representative underline how reconstruction
and reconciliation efforts could be at risk because of
resource constraints. We remain concerned, learning
from the Secretary-General's report that much of the
recent release of the World Bank's credit will be
consumed by further debt-servicing. We believe that
the Central African Republic should be considered for
debt relief as soon as possible.

Bangladesh would support the Secretary-
General's call to the donors in that vein to assist the
Central African Government to meet the multifarious
challenges on a stronger footing. This will have an
important impact on the country's overall economic
stability. Bangladesh fully agrees with World Bank
Vice-President Karlsson in his emphasis on the need to
align the efforts of the entire United Nations
community, focusing on social and economic areas.

Following this meeting, the Council will adopt a
presidential statement. My delegation fully supports
the elements in that statement.

