Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Like other
speakers, I would very much like to welcome the first
report of Special Representative Harri Holkeri to the
Security Council.

I associate my Government with the statement to
be made by Italy on behalf of the European Union.
Because most of the important points have already
been covered in this debate, I will try not to be
comprehensive but to touch on just a few points of
importance to the United Kingdom.

First, I would like to congratulate Special
Representative Holkeri on the launch of the Belgrade-
Pristina talks in Vienna. He can count on my
Government's full support. The direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina is an opportunity to
normalize the lives of the people of Kosovo
irrespective of their ethnicity. Therefore, like others,
we were disappointed that the Kosovo delegation was
neither representative of the Provisional Institutions
nor multi-ethnic. Mr. Holkeri diplomatically described
that as regrettable. The meeting could have shown that
Kosovo's Government is genuinely committed to
normalization and a true multi-ethnic society. They
need to show that. The Provisional Institutions now
have a key role in the working groups. It is vital that all
parties should now constructively engage in those
working groups.

We would also like to support Mr. Holkeri's
proposal to examine the further transfer of
competencies that do not prejudice Kosovo's status
under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
However, as Mr. Holkeri said very clearly, that process
cannot be linked to the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.
Mr. Holkeri quite rightly said that bargaining over that
is not acceptable. The transfer of competencies is an
issue that can be agreed upon only by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and,
ultimately, by the Council.

I think it is important to reiterate this morning my
Government's support for the Council's well-
established commitment to the policy of "standards
before status". It is important too that Mr. Holkeri
should hear clearly from the Council that that has been,
and remains, the Council's approach. Many others
around the table this morning have underlined that. The
Council has, over years and months, looked carefully at
the particular circumstances in Kosovo. Committed as
we are to multi-ethnicity, to democracy and to
prosperity in Kosovo and the region, it seems, to my
Government at least, essential to make progress on
standards before final status comes to be addressed.

I should like now to touch even more briefly on
four other particular points.

The first pertains to the Kosovo Protection Corps
(KPC). We are concerned about the existence of
extremist and criminal elements within it. We welcome
the joint investigation by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR. The KPC has come a long way since 1999, and
the process of weeding out members with extremist
connections appears successful. But the development
of the KPC remains a key priority of the United
Kingdom.

My second point has to do with our concern about
allegations and rumours of corruption surrounding both
locals in Kosovo and internationals. I would like to
stress our full support for United Nations efforts to
tackle that matter.

My third point, like many other speakers, is to
say a word on returns. We welcome the "open letter"
initiative by the Provisional Institutions. It is a small
step towards encouraging Serbs to return, and towards
the building of a tolerant society that can provide
security for all its minorities. But more still has to be
done. Equally, parallel structures must go.

Finally, several have spoken about the process of
privatization. I would like to express my Government's
support for that process. We believe it is essential for
the development of Kosovo's economy, which, as we
have heard, is in difficulty. In that connection, we wish
to urge prompt clarification of the legal position of
Kosovo's transitional Administration.

