Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council during its consideration of the situation in Somalia,
a subject of great importance to us all.

Allow me also to express my profound gratitude in
seeing you, a native of a sister country, Botswana, presiding
over this gathering, and in this endeavour I wish you good
success.

I would be remiss in my duty, Sir, if I did not
congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United States, Mrs. Madeleine
Albright, who also conducted the work of the Council
successfully.

We further thank the Security Council, through you,
Sir, for affording interested Member States the
opportunity to participate in the formal meetings of the
Security Council pertaining to matters of great
importance. We are hopeful that this practice will
continue so as to ensure transparency in the work and
decision-making process of the United Nations, as
expressed in Article 15, paragraph 1, of our Charter.

It is now a year since the United Nations Operation
in Somalia (UNOSOM. II) scaled back its operations in
Somalia. At that time, the overwhelming perception was
that the Somali people knew best what was good for
them. Thenceforth, Somalia ceased to make news media
headlines, and the focus of the international community
shifted elsewhere.

In the Security Council, it was, and continues to be,
stated that the people of Somalia - especially the
leadership - bear the ultimate responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and restoring peace. We
too, Sir, support that assertion.

Unfortunately, the plight of the Somali people
remains in limbo. It is obvious that Somalia, like a sick
doctor, cannot cure itself of the ills that afflict it, without
the support of the international community. We are
convinced that the United Nations remains an
irreplaceable instrument in forging a lasting solution for
peace, for which the deserving people of Somalia have
been yearning for a very long time.

The report (S/1996/42) of the United Nations
Secretary-General dated 19 January 1996 informed us that
harassment, beatings and the abduction of international
humanitarian organizations' personnel had forced the
United Nations agencies to relocate, thus hindering the
smooth delivery of assistance to Somalia.
Similar observations were made by the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity in
his recent report, CM/ 1912, presented to the 63rd session
of the Council of Ministers, meeting in Addis Ababa from
26 to 28 February 1996, on the situation in Somalia. In
particular, in paragraph 3, on the question of peace and
national reconciliation, he stated:

 

"If anything at all, it would appear that the situation
has undergone some degree of retrogression in some
respects."

We are perturbed to learn about recent reports, on 9
March 1996, concerning the senseless assassination of a
noted peace activist, Mr. Elman Mohamed, and we deeply
regret further loss of life. We hold accountable all those
responsible for these killings, as well as the leaders of the
warring clans who are reluctant to commit themselves to a
meaningful dialogue that will lead to a lasting peace in
Somalia.

Equally, the Security Council should not be
discouraged by the attempts of a few armed men to
frustrate the will of the majority of the people in Somalia.
The Somali people have suffered a lot for a long time. It is
time the international community lived up to its
responsibilities in the maintenance of peace and security.

While we commend the efforts of all those who
continue to search for successful solutions and those who
are providing humanitarian assistance, given all the risks
involved in this endeavour, we also reiterate the appeal of
the Organization of African Unity to those concerned to
desist from supplying war materials, which further
exacerbate the situation, to any of the factions in Somalia.

The Somali people are looking to all of us for further
assistance. It is important that we do not abandon them.
Through you, Mr. President, we appeal to the international
community to assist them in any way possible. It is our
hope that the international community will be generous in
rendering the badly needed humanitarian assistance and that
the Security Council, working with all those involved,
particularly the Organization of African Unity and
interested regional intergovernmental organizations, will
redouble its efforts to demonstrate its resolve and
determination to find a lasting solution.

