Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): First, we would express our thanks to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings today to the Council after their briefings two weeks ago (see S/PV.8715). Viet Nam's position on this issue remains unchanged. We continue to support the ongoing efforts of the United Nations, the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy towards a peaceful settlement of this protracted crisis. We support the work of the United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee, which serves as a platform for genuine dialogue among Syrian parties. Some have called it a door-opener for the peace process in Syria. If the door is to remain open and accessible, we must build enough trust and confidence to pave the way to a tangible outcome. All parties must continue to step up confidence-building measures. Secondly, we firmly believe that the only way to bring peace to the people of Syria is through a comprehensive and credible political solution in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and, most importantly, the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015). That solution demands good and strong political will from all relevant parties in the process of dialogue and negotiation. We welcome the ongoing discussions among the parties concerned to address the situation. However, it is sad to see no progress made, month after month. Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about the escalation of the situation in north-west Syria and its grave impact on the well-being of 4 million people in the area. The longer the conflict and escalation continue without a political solution, the more intense the suffering of innocent civilians becomes. We are especially concerned over reports of the continued increase in displacement and redisplacement, affecting some 100,000 people during the past two weeks, almost 60 per cent of whom are children. In addition, reports indicate that a high number of civilians have been killed, including in camps for internally displaced persons. The temperature there is like in New York now. It is hard to imagine the situation of people without adequate shelter and the necessary supplies, especially women and children. In this regard, we once again call upon all parties to exercise maximum restraint so as to avoid any further deterioration of the situation. The fight against terrorism is a must, but the protection of innocent civilians and the avoidance of civilian suffering must always be an imperative for all. We therefore support the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate ceasefire. Last but not least, the Security Council, together with the international community, should continue to urge for and support further efforts, including international diplomatic efforts, to achieve a political settlement for the situation in Syria, with full respect for international law as well as the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. This is the most viable path to peace, stability and development in Syria and the region.
