Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As active members of the Group of Friends
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality, we
are very pleased to see you presiding over the Security
Council for the month of May, Madam President, and to
congratulate you on convening this important meeting.
I would also like to salute Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for a very active and successful presidency during the
month of April. We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
report on the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/4l6, annex).

Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress towards peacebuilding and achieving an
equitable economy and sustainable development
for all its citizens. Indeed, according to Mr. Inzko's
report, significant progress has been made over the
past six months with respect to the country's plans to
join the European Union and NATO. A foreign policy
strategy has also been agreed for the next five years,
as has a strategy for developing and implementating
plans to strengthen the country's economy, reform its
institutions and reduce unemployment. In particular,
we would like to highlight the trilateral meeting in
March between the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
and its counterparts from its neighbours Croatia and
Serbia, which we understand will be repeated in the
near future. All these developments are signs that there
is a common vision for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Equatorial Guinea hopes that this important vision
and progress can be maintained and strengthened
so that it can help to foster lasting national unity,
which will cement Bosnia and Herzegovina's role
in the Balkans, Europe and the world. That is why
we would like to express our deep concern about the
continuing divisive and inflammatory rhetoric of
political leaders from all political groups, and on many
occasions for ethnic reasons. Such behaviour puts
all the aforementioned achievements in jeopardy and
hinders the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
the preparations for the elections scheduled for October
and the process of institutional reforms needed to
facilitate peaceful elections, ensure that the results of
the elections are implemented, support decision-making
in State institutions to protect and strengthen the rule of
law, secure lasting peace and development and continue
efforts to contain and eliminate crime, corruption,
Violent extremism and terrorism.

I would like to express our appreciation for the
commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and emphasize our support for his
mandate and efforts to assist in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. We also appreciate the work
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
supporting and facilitating all of these processes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the work ofthe High
Representative and the United Nations country team.

We share the High Representative's view that
elected officials have a responsibility to contribute to
peace and reconciliation. October's elections will be a
turning point in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I would like to see the political and ethnic divisions
between Serbs, Bosnians and Croats set aside before
the election season and national interests taking
precedence over any other self-interest, for the benefit
of the country and the people, including refugees and
displaced persons. Equatorial Guinea stands ready
to work with the international community to achieve
lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

