Mr. de Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium's commitment to the European Union-led
military force in Chad and the Central African
Republic (EUFOR) has been constant and demonstrates
our concern for security and the humanitarian situation
in this area. We have been contributing about
100 personnel to the European mission since the
beginning of its deployment to Chad and the Central
African Republic. While the presence of EUF OR and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) is slowly beginning
to bear fruit, the security situation has not yet changed
fundamentally, and a multidimensional presence will
remain necessary beyond 15 March 2009. EUFOR,
whose mandate expires on that date, was always
intended to be transitional mission, and we are
preparing for its replacement by a United Nations
military force as part of a strengthening of
MINURCAT. I welcome the fact that that the Chadian
authorities agree with that reasoning and with the
deployment of a United Nations force. It is important
that the planning for such a United Nations force begin
immediately to permit an effective transfer of authority
on 15 March 2009. In our View, the force will have to
replace EUFOR both in Chad and in the north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic, where EUFOR
has deployed 200 personnel.

The future component of MINURCAT in the
Central African Republic will not necessarily be very
much larger, but it could prevent a security vacuum as
long as Central African armed forces are unable to
undertake security tasks on their own. It will thus be
essential to permit efforts to support the security
sector- particularly those carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission - to succeed.

More basically, no military force will be able to
ensure long-term security if the political context
causing the lack of security does not change. For that
reason, the international community must also think
about the root causes of the lack of security. We must
further strengthen our efforts to normalize the relations
between the Sudan and Chad, resolve the Darfur crisis,
support national dialogues in Chad and the Central
African Republic and facilitate a dialogue between the
Chadian authorities and armed groups in Chad, which
must lay down their weapons and express their
grievances in ways other than violence.

My delegation believes it would be useful to
consider the possibility of giving the United Nations a
clearer mandate to help find solutions at the political
level so that our efforts in the region will have lasting
effects. Such a commitment could take a variety of
forms, but it must be an element of our debates in the
coming months.

