Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express Egypt's appreciation to the delegation
of Japan for convening this important open debate. I
also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
comprehensive briefing.

Emerging and new challenges facing the
world - including terrorism, the proliferation of
extremist groups, organized crime, migration and
environmentalandotherunconventionalissues-require
an innovative approach to addressing them. Given the
nature of those challenges, there is a need to coordinate
all efforts of the United Nations. Evolving and
increasingly complex contemporary challenges require
us to avoid adopting short-sighted approaches and silo
mentalities in favour of a comprehensive approach to
ensuring peace and sustainability by focusing on the
root causes of those challenges. In order to confront
those interrelated contemporary challenges, we must
uphold the following principles.

First, we need to develop the analytical capacity
of the Secretariat to develop comprehensive solutions
that take the nature and dimensions of every challenge
and their various contexts into account. Such a flexible,
analytical approach would allow the Organization to
identify the best means and tools for addressing those
challenges on a case-by-case basis.

Secondly, we must enhance the effectiveness
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) so that it
becomes a forum in which to coordinate national,
regional and international work and provide advice and
proposals to the Security Council, thereby allowing
the Council to design mandates that would support the
implementation of comprehensive strategies aimed at
building and sustaining peace and laying the ground
for sustainable development in countries that require
the PBC's assistance.

Thirdly, we need to develop regional approaches
to transnational challenges by enhancing coordination
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations to avoid duplicating regional
and international efforts to that end.

Fourthly, we need to fully honour the principle
of the national ownership of efforts to confront
contemporary challenges. National institutions must
shoulder the responsibility of setting their own
priorities and implementing their own follow-up when
confronting the challenges facing them, while the
international community can contribute to supporting
such national efforts.

Fifthly, we must make full use of States' expertise
at the national level and the lessons learned by the
United Nations system by focusing on building national
institutions and capacities, thereby enabling States to
confront such challenges in a comprehensive manner.

In conclusion, in order to address such contemporary
challenges comprehensively, the United Nations must
coordinate the work of all its bodies without confusing
their mandates. That means that all United Nations
bodies must respect each other's mandate without
encroaching upon it, in particular with regard to the
development pillar

