Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, the statement made by the the
representative of the United States forces me to make
rather detailed comments, since Ambassador Power
cast the situation in such a light as to suggest that the
onus is exclusively on the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Let me start with resolution 2118 (2013). She
presented the situation as though that resolution were
written in such a way as to prove or demonstrate
something, and that only the Government of Syria had
to comply. That is not the case. If we look at the text
of the resolution, we see that it is clearly addressed to
all parties to the Syrian conflict and that a great deal
is said about non-State actors. That is no coincidence.
Why was it done? It was done because in 2013 two very
serious cases concerning the use of chemical weapons
occurred in Syria. The first occurred on 19 March in
the area of Ghouta, after which the Syrian Government
immediately called for an independent United Nations
inquiry. It was only as a result of the opposition of
several Western members of the Security Council that
the inquiry was not carried out immediately.

There was an even more tragic case on 21 August.
Ambassador Power alleged, although she did not state it
explicitly, that the Syrian Government was behind it. It
was not. We deeply discussed that case in the Council's
consultations on 16 December, at which we presented
an extensive argument that not only was the Syrian
Government not behind the sarin attack of 21 August,
but that, for technical reasons, it could not have been
behind it. At the time, our Western colleagues did
not provide any counter-argument, but merely made
unsubstantiated accusations against the Government
of Syria. By the way, our statement at that time can
be found on our Permanent Mission's website, and I

suggest that Council members familiarize themselves
with it.

As for the fact-finding mission on the use ofchlorine,
it seems that even today the United Kingdom and the
United States are pointing fingers at the Government
of Syria with regard to the use of chlorine. That forces
me to share with the Council our experts' assessments
of that report, which we have already shared in detail
in closed consultations. However, since we have heard
these accusations in the Chamber, I am compelled to
repeat them.

First, the entire inquiry of the OPCW is based on
subjective facts provided by certain witnesses. The
criteria for their selection and their status are not
clear - whether they were civilians or members of
illegal armed groups. Since there was a lack of clarity
with the way evidence was maintained, the OPCW did
not accept from witnesses and survivors samples of
chemicals allegedly found at the site of the barrel bomb
explosions. The clinical condition of certain witnesses
described in the report corresponds to the effects of
chlorine on the human body. At the same time, similar
symptoms could be displayed as a result of poisoning
by other toxic substances. According to the report, the
Mission could not reach a concrete conclusion on which
toxic substances were used in the incidents in question.
Thus, it is impossible to say unequivocally that those
substances contained chlorine.

During the investigation, none of the victims
revealed obvious symptoms. There were no analysis
of the samples immediately after the incidents, nor
was there any pathological assessment of the causes
of death. There are no exact figures on the number
of people who suffered and there is no indication that
they were present at the places where the attacks took
place. It is unclear what kind of detonator was used
for the gas containers, or what the purpose was of the
other chemicals and ammunition - sulphuric acid and
yellow and brown substances.

In the photographs and videos annexed to the
report, all the ammunition appears to be primitive and
homemade. Its manufacture does not correspond to the
information provided by the witnesses with regard to
possible methods of delivery raises questions about the

possibility that Government aviation could have been
used. With regard to its construction, the ammunition
are casings containing 50 litres. Their detonation could
not have to have the kind of consequences described
by witnesses. For explosions of such Wide coverage,
each barrel bomb would need to contain at least 150
kilograms of trinitrotoluene-equivalent explosives, and
it would be almost impossible to have that amount in
those casings.

The document does not provide information about
the direct links between the overflight of helicopters
and the explosion of ammunition containing chlorine.
Only a few witnesses heard the sound of helicopters.
No one actually saw or captured the dropping of
ordnance on film. In other words, the explosives could
have been exploded on the ground during overflight
by helicopters, especially at night. The barrel bombs
described are not the made of the precursor chemicals
available to the Syrian Army. The use of homemade
explosives by the Syrian Army would be difficult to
explain because they would cause much less damage
than the powerful conventional, aviation-delivered
ordnance that the Syrian Air Force is equipped with.

This is unfortunately a highly technical matter, but
we have two options. We may either adopt a professional
and expert approach. Of course, some people may
find this boring, as the reports need to be discussed
and experts must consider them, which is why no one
reads them; or we can go meet the press and say that
the Syrian Government is at fault. Such a media-based
approach is very advantageous, but it may in practice
protect those who were actually responsible for the acts
that took place on 19 March and 21 August 2013 and the
more recent ones involving the use of chlorine.

We provide these technical details, but our
colleagues find it easier to just smile and say "We know
that it is the Government that is responsible". Can we
seriously work like that in the Security Council? No. We
must not protect the terrorists who have use chemical
weapons more than once and have used chemical
substances in Iraq and Syria. Yet that is precisely the
position of our colleagues. They are providing de facto
protection to those individuals.

