We thank the organizers for convening today's discussion on the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. Environmental degradation affects not just the ecosystem but also the people who depend on it and live in it. It is also a multidimensional issue. To begin with, when it is caused by those living in an ecosystem, it is due to a range of interrelated factors, primarily poverty, and not necessarily greed. In many developing countries, such problems arise from issues related to people living at subsistence level. The question then is - do we want to treat poverty and subsistence agriculture as peace and security issues? In many other cases, the perpetrators of environmental degradation may well be outside national boundaries, while the people suffering are inside. Is peace and security then the right paradigm to address this issue, or is strengthening the implementation of agreements a more appropriate and, probably, more effective way to do it? Environmental degradation can have a humanitarian impact or effect, like many other aspects of human activity. However, merely linking everything related to environmental issues with peace and security does nothing to enhance our understanding of the problem, and neither does it help us address those issues in a meaningful way or call out the real perpetrators in order to make them adhere to their commitments on environmental issues and help change the behaviour of people living at subsistence level. There has been an increasing tendency, both in the Security Council and outside it, to start discussing environmental issues with a certain disregard for the various important principles that govern environmental discussions on topics such as climate change and biological diversity. Principles such as common but differentiated responsibilities are sacrosanct in this matter. Steering away from those principles and other commitments or attempting to discuss such issues by obfuscating those responsible for addressing them will only do a disservice to the real issue and will make it difficult to have a meaningful discussion on it. Consequently, linking environmental degradation to humanitarian impact and then to peace and security does not enhance our collective effort to address environmental degradation in any meaningful way. What we need is collective will to address such important issues multidimensionally without shirking our respective commitments under the various important conventions, inter alia, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. What we need, therefore, is greater resolve to implement the commitments and contributions undertaken under environmental agreements, instead of the securitization of environmental issues. We commend the efforts and initiatives undertaken by affected countries to address this issue in a meaningful manner so that the humanitarian issues impacting the lives of ordinary people are tackled. We also call on countries in a position to do so to assist those countries, especially in keeping with their obligations under the various relevant conventions. That will ensure that environmental degradation and the consequent humanitarian issues are addressed in a collaborative fashion so that they do not develop into potential conflict areas. There is also need for greater sensitivity in connection with the energy mix of various countries, many of which are not of their choosing. One should resist the temptation of painting all countries with a varied energy mix with the same brush. The touchstone should be whether their respective commitments are being honoured. Demonizing one particular energy source and calling for action without allowing for organic energy transitions, which require huge commitments, does not help. It may be equally relevant to ask whether there is enough evidence to suggest that there is a link between environmental degradation and peace and security. Chapter 4 of the Special Report on Climate Change and Land, issued by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 2019, states that: "(ljand degradation may trigger competition for scarce natural resources, potentially leading to migration and/or conflict, though, even with medium evidence, there is low agreement in the literature." In other words, even the best science available to us does not indicate definitively that environmental degradation is a threat to peace and security. India is a leading contributor to climate action. Over the past few years, we have reduced our annual carbon emissions by 38 million tons. In the course of the past decade, around 3 million hectares of forest and tree cover have been added, which has increased the combined forest and tree cover to 24.56 per cent of the total geographical area of the country. Going forward, India aims to restore 26 million hectares of degraded and deforested land and to achieve land-degradation neutrality by 2030. We have set additional targets of eliminating single-use plastic by 2022 and installing 450 gigawatts of renewable energy by 2030. India has taken a leadership role in order to protect the environment. We organized the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals and the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Going forward, each of us, including the private sector, civil society and the Government, can make more climate-friendly lifestyle choices to ease the transition to a sustainable lifestyle. Let us view environmental degradation as an opportunity to strengthen multilateralism and seek equitable and inclusive solutions to build a greener, cleaner and more sustainable world.
