Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in
thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for their clear and comprehensive
updates, and commend them both for their efforts to
bring about a political and humanitarian solution in
Yemen. They can rest assured of our full support in all
their undertakings. My delegation is closely following
the recent developments, and I would like to make two
points today.

First, Kazakhstan welcomes the political consultations
in Sweden and urges all parties to continue to engage
in good faith and without preconditions in the political
process led by the Special Envoy. We are encouraged by
the fact that the consultations took place successfully
and by the confidence-building measures announced,
including the exchange of prisoners, and we hope
that this will move Yemen a step closer to peace. We
believe that the Stockholm declaration - in particular
with regard to the agreement on the city and port of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa; the
joint committee for initiating an agreement on the
exchange of prisoners; and the mutual understanding
concerning Taiz - will have a huge impact on both
the security and humanitarian situation in Yemen. The
implementation of the agreement is crucial because
Al-Hudaydah is the centre of gravity of the war in
Yemen. The ceasefire and withdrawal of all forces from
the port and then from the city will allow for the opening
of the humanitarian corridors to the city of Taiz, which
are important to the survival of those people in Yemen
who are in need of humanitarian aid.

Secondly, we emphasize that all obligations under
international humanitarian law must be respected by
all parties, who must take responsibility to mitigate the
humanitarian situation by fully cooperating with the
United Nations and the relevant humanitarian agencies.
Kazakhstan joins others in urging all to refrain from
damaging critical civilian infrastructure, violence
and indiscriminate bombings that could inflict mass
casualties on innocent civilians. It is also necessary
to address inflation-related issues. The cessation of
hostilities will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
basic public services to the population of Yemen. That
is the best way to give those and future consultations a
chance to succeed.

Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy's efforts to achieve
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue, with the involvement of the
international community, especially the countries of
the region.

