Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): This morning my
staff had a meeting to discuss what I should say at this
morning's session. The instructions they gave to me
were that I should give a very short speech based on
three Cs. The three Cs are commend, commitment and
criteria. But after having a discussion with Ambassador
Greenstock on the way in, I thought I would add a
question or two after the three Cs.

First, with regard to commending, I think there is
no doubt that we have a lot for which to commend the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and, of course,
its Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock. My only concern
is that Sir Jeremy might receive so much praise today
that he will not know how to handle it in the course of
day-to-day events. But, most important, he has shown
that United Nations committees - which are often
perceived, as we know, to be toothless entities - can
actually make a difference. There is no doubt that the
CTC has made a significant difference since it was set
up. But we also want to commend the rest of the team,
including the three Vice-Chairmen - Ambassadors
Koonjul, Lavrov and Valdivieso. I know that the three
of them have also had to chair very long meetings and
go through piles of reports. At the same time, I wish to
commend all the experts and the other staff who have
been involved in this exercise. So there is a lot of
commendation to be provided.

The second C is commitment. In that regard, we
want to declare once again that Singapore is fully
committed to the fight against terrorism. As members
are aware, we came close to experiencing a terrorist
attack ourselves some time ago; so we are committed
to doing whatever we can. Also in this regard, I would
like to add that we are also committed to sharing our
expertise with others, including our colleagues in the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
For example, to enhance the capabilities of ASEAN
member States in the fight against terrorism, Singapore
has offered logistical support for training in various
aspects of anti-terrorism skills that will strengthen the
national mechanisms of ASEAN member States to
combat terrorism.

I believe that my colleague from ASEAN will be
speaking later today - and of course Singapore
associates itself fully with the statement to be made on
behalf of ASEAN members. By the way, I should also
mention here that we are looking at other ways and
means of sharing our expertise, not just with the
ASEAN region but also with the rest of the Asia-
Pacific region as well.

Finally, with regard to the third C, which is
criteria, I want to refer to a sentence in Sir Jeremy
Greenstock's presentation to us. He said that the CTC
did not intend to declare any Member State 100 per
cent compliant with resolution 1373 (2001). We
completely agree that that is the right approach to take.
But I think that Member States will be asking
themselves the question of how to assess themselves
with regard to whether or not they have fulfilled the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) and all the
demands made of them by the CTC. I therefore wonder
whether, in the course of the next three months, the
CTC can try to work out some kind of criteria. It may
be difficult to create formal criteria, but some kind of
informal criteria might be desirable, so that Member
States can measure themselves against some sort of
benchmarks provided to them by the CTC in trying to
do some kind of self-assessment of their performance. I
am not sure whether that is doable, but I hope Sir
Jeremy Greenstock will reflect on it with his
colleagues.

Finally, I have a question or two. I turn to a
sentence in Sir Jeremy's presentation, where he said:
"The CTC is not a law-enforcement agency, nor is it
working on cases." (Supra)

Sometimes, we compare the Security Council to a
fire department that is sent to put out fires whenever
conflicts break out. What is the best layman's analogy
we could find to describe the nature of the work of the
CTC so everyone understands the nature of the beast
we are dealing with when we deal with the CTC? I
wonder whether Sir Jeremy has any suggestions in that
direction.

Finally, I am glad Sir Jeremy mentioned there
will be a full debate and discussion in three months'
time. It will be very important for the one-year review
of the accomplishments of the CTC to have a more
extensive debate, with wider participation of all
Member States. Clearly, if this fight against terrorism
is going to succeed it needs the commitment of 189 -
or by then 191 - Member States. It is important that
they participate in that review. But what would the
CTC like them to bring to the table when they come for
the discussion? If Sir Jeremy has any thoughts on how
Member States can prepare themselves for that very
important review, it would be helpful if he wants to
plant the seeds now. Certainly it would help my
delegation and I hope other delegations as well.

