Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing and
his work as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
later in this debate by the observer of the European
Union.

I would also like to offer my condolences to the
United States and the International Security Assistance
Force for the helicopter accident that took the lives of
six American soldiers.

Now that the presidential and provincial elections
scheduled for 5 April 2014 are looming on the horizon,
we can better assess the road that Afghanistan has
travelled over the past 12 years. What was hardly
imaginable in 2001 is taking shape today. Ifthe elections
are successful, the country will have established a
significant milestone partway along the road that can
distance it a little farther from the recent years of war
and lead it to peace and stability.

A successful election is one that takes place on
schedule and in which candidates campaign freely,
peaceably and with mutual respect. It is an election in
which the participation of everybody, women included,
is assured without exception, in which voters' and
candidates' physical safety is guaranteed, and in which
voters, especially women voters, can go to the polls
without having to deal with moral or psychological
pressure. It is also an election whose results are accepted
by the largest possible number of people because the
balloting and counting are conducted transparently. We
welcome the progress made so far with the electoral
preparations. We urge that no effort be spared to put a
capable security framework in place and emphasize the
importance of ensuring the broad inclusion of women at
all levels of the electoral process.

The distance travelled since 2001 is also visible at
the level of the security transition. The Afghan security
forces, which did not exist 12 years ago and which were
created with the help of the international community,
are now in overall charge of the national territory.
Despite the magnitude of the task, they are rising to
the occasion. But the challenges remain significant.
Anti-Government elements are still operating, and
attacks on humanitarian workers and the numbers of
civilian victims of the conflict have grown alarmingly.
These challenges demand that security capacities be
strengthened. It is also crucial to put an immediate end
to any uncertainty as to the scope of future international
support missions to the Afghan security forces, or we
risk losing the fruit of years of work and cooperation.

Concerning human rights, the progress made
since 2001 must also be preserved. In that regard, it
is important that the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission Human maintains its autonomy
from the Government and its credibility vis-a-vis the
people. It is also important to act decisively in order to
combat the high levels of discrimination and abuse of
which Afghan women are still victims. In that regard,
we are extremely concerned about the findings of the
8 December joint report from UNAMA and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
implementation of the law on eliminating violence
against women. The low rate of indictments under
the act compared to the number of complaints filed
is inexplicable. Impunity seems to be the rule rather
than the exception. It should be recalled that full
application of the law eliminating violence against
women was one of the major commitments in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. The international
community should not compromise on this point.

I would also like to reiterate how serious
Luxembourg considers the plight of children in armed
conflict. We welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/721) includes information
on violations and abuses committed against children.
Given the scale on which such abuses and violations
continue to occur, we urge that UNAMA maintain
sufficient capacity for child protection, in accordance
with resolution 2096 (2013).

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
belief that for national reconciliation to succeed in
Afghanistan it must be led by the Afghans themselves.
At the same time, close cooperation must be established
with regional partners in order to address the many
challenges that exist not only in the areas of the
economy and security, but also in the fight against drug
trafficking. UNAMA, meanwhile, will continue to play
an important supporting role after 2014 and should
be provided with resources sufficient to fulfilling its
mission.

