Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling this open
debate on East Timor. We are grateful to the Special
Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, whom we
heartily welcome in our midst, for the comprehensive
and informative briefing on the latest developments in
East Timor.

After his last appearance here, in early February,
it was indeed time we heard from Mr. Vieira de Mello.
We greatly appreciate the commendable efforts that the
Special Representative and his team in the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) are making in East Timor. It is no mean
achievement that initial obstacles delaying the
rehabilitation work have been overcome.

The situation in East Timor presents us with a
range of issues that are germane to a nation in the
making. Some of the issues were born out of the
violence and destruction that marked the initial phase
after the landmark referendum last year.

We refer here to the issues of security, the
repatriation of refugees, the financial situation, poverty
and unemployment, health and education, investigation
of human rights violations, reconstruction of
infrastructure and restoration of civil and judicial
administration. This list, however, is not exhaustive.

On earlier occasions we raised some of these
issues and took note of the progress thus far made.
Today we heard Mr. Vieira de Mello update us on some
of these aspects. We would nevertheless like to make a
few points.

Since early May we have noticed a drag on the
process of repatriation. There appears to be some
difficulty in determining the number of refugees in the
camps in West Timor. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees was to have
conducted a registration, which would have given a
clear idea of the number of refugees. We are also
concerned at the reports of intimidation of the refugees,
with the ulterior objective of dissuading them from
returning. On the other hand, there is also the issue of
the emotions that are prevalent among the population
of East Timor regarding the returnees.

All these issues adversely affect the repatriation
process. We therefore remain concerned at the sluggish
repatriation of refugees and urge all concerned to
redouble their efforts to achieve a speedy solution.

We note with appreciation the encouraging results
of the various income generation projects. We
commend the contribution of the Quick Impact Projects
and the transitional employment projects to the
improvement of the unemployment and poverty
situation. But all of these are short- to medium-term
issues. For a long-term perspective, issues of
investment and trade need to be addressed. Small
enterprise and private business are keys to substantial
progress in this area. We urge the investment
promotion unit of UNTAET to take a more innovative
approach to addressing the situation.

We have all along emphasized the need to focus
on the role of women in peace and development in East
Timor. We commend the organizers of the first
National Women's Congress, held recently in Dili, and
hope that the overarching theme of equitable
development and national reconstruction will provide
the opportunity for future discourse on women's role in
education, health, development and reconciliation. We
hope the outcome will be regularly and systematically
followed up at appropriate stages.

We are heartened by the increasing cooperation
between UNTAET and the Indonesian authorities in
various areas of activity in times of peace as well as in
times of distress. The floods that devastated West
Timor last month were one such occasion. UNTAET
played a timely and brave role, which we deeply
appreciate.

The ongoing cooperation with respect to judicial
issues, investigation of human rights violations,
cultural artifacts, archives, pension assets and border
issues augurs well for the future of cooperation and
cohabitation between the territory and its next-door
neighbour.

This brings us to an issue which I believe is of
profound concern to everyone. It pertains to the
protection and security of the ethnic minority in East
Timor. Notwithstanding the efforts that the East Timor
leadership and UNTAET have made, we have seen
disturbing evidence of a clear rise in intolerance for the
ethnic minorities. There are reports also of religious
intolerance, which manifested in some recent incidents.
These are disquieting signs that must be taken very
seriously.

We strongly urge the East Timorese leadership
and UNTAET officials to investigate thoroughly every
such incident and take the necessary measures to
prevent their recurrence. We welcome the efforts to
develop the national reconciliation commission, which
we believe is an important step.

The international community in turn has to
support all of these ongoing efforts in East Timor. We
are very encouraged by the result of the two-day donor
meeting held in Lisbon, which is a manifestation of the
trust and confidence of the international community in
the work done so far in East Timor. We believe this
confidence was critically important for UNTAET and
the East Timorese population. We would urge that in
the coming months the policy of imparting to the East
Timorese people a sense of ownership of development
efforts be given more visibility.

