Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me thank you, Sir, for
convening today's debate. Poland aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

However, I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.
Poland attaches great importance to the protection
of the human rights of individuals belonging to
religious and ethnic minorities. We have quite a long
tradition of tolerance and interreligious dialogue. Let
me just mention one document: the declaration of the
Confederation of Warsaw of 1573, which granted the
freedom of religion to all the citizens of the Polish-
Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was the first legal act of
that kind adopted in Europe.

My Government is gravely concerned by the
current violence against ethnic and religious groups in
the Middle East. Poland contributes to the aid delivered
to members of persecuted minorities by the United
Nations and European Union agencies. We have also
taken unilateral actions, as in August last year when
we sent over eight tons of assistance to Christians in
Northern Iraq in reaction to their dramatic situation
and the persecution they were facing. We are very
grateful to the authorities in Erbil for helping us with
that project.

Unfortunately, every day brings new horrors to
the people in the Middle East and North Africa. All
religious and ethnic groups have been suffering from
unprecedented violence, including Christians, Shias,
Sunnis, Yazidis, Kurds and others. The widespread
violence affects everyone from Iraq to Libya and,
recently, Tunisia. I condemn, in the strongest terms,
the horrific act of terror in Tunis, in which three Polish
nationals lost their lives, among over 20 other people.

Every day we also witness other chapters of the
barbaric destruction of the cultural heritage of the
Middle East perpetrated by the so-called Islamic State
and other extremists groups. I would like to mention
one event that is extremely sad for Poland. Last year,
the Al-Nusrah Front ruthlessly demolished the fourth-
century Church of Saint Sergius and Bacchus in
Malula, near Damascus. The attack destroyed two icons
presented to that church in 1943 by General Wladyslaw
Anders, commander of the Polish army, who shortly
before had escaped the inferno of Stalinist Siberia.
The Polish army was on its way to Monte Cassino to
fight there for the freedom of Poland and the liberation
of Italy. Today, the church is burned, the paintings
destroyed.

We cannot underestimate such actions. Their
ultimate goal is not only to intimidate the unfaithful,
but to change the social and ethnic composition of the
region forever. The history of the twentieth century
teaches us about the need to take action in the face
of such developments to prevent even larger-scale
atrocities.
It is now more than five years since the beginning
of the war in Syria, and we urge the Security Council
to live up to the obligations that the Charter of the
United Nations imposed on this body, and finally to
take the necessary actions that can help put an end to
the conflict in that country. The situations in Iraq and
Libya also requires concrete actions by the Council.
Further inaction will only fuel extremism and deepen
the suffering of millions of people across the Middle
East. It will also enable the spillover of the sectarian
violence across the region and globally. After all the
acts of terror that have taken place in recent months,
we should all be well aware that no country is safe from
the threat of extremism. It is in our common interest to
respond adequately to these challenges.

