President Clinton: We come together in this
historic meeting to discuss the role of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security.

I thank President Konare for the minute of silence
for the United Nations workers who died in West
Timor yesterday, and I ask the Indonesian authorities to
bring those responsible to justice, to disarm and
disband the militias and to take all necessary steps to
ensure the safety of those continuing to work towards
humanitarian goals there.

Today, I would like to focus my peacekeeping
remarks on Africa, where prosperity and freedom have
advanced, but where conflict still holds back progress.
I cannot help noting that this historic meeting in this
historic Chamber is led by a President and a Secretary-
General who are both outstanding Africans. Africa's
achievements and the strengths of the United Nations
are evident. Mozambique and Namibia are just two
success stories.

But we ask the United Nations to act under
increasingly complex conditions. We see it in Sierra
Leone, where United Nations action saved lives but
could not preserve the peace. Now we are working to
strengthen the mission. In the Horn of Africa, United
Nations peacekeeping will monitor the separation of
forces so recently engaged in brutal combat. In Congo,
civil strife still threatens the lives of thousands of
people, and warring parties prevent the United Nations
from implementing its mandate.

We must do more to equip the United Nations to
do what we ask it to do. It needs to be able to have
peacekeepers who can be rapidly deployed, properly
trained and equipped, and able to project credible
force. That, of course, is the thrust of the report on
peacekeeping reform transmitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General. The United States strongly supports
that report. It should define the goal of our assistance
for West African forces now going into Sierra Leone.

Let me also say a word, however, beyond
peacekeeping. It seems to me that, both for Africa and
for the entire world, we will be forced increasingly to
define security more broadly. The United Nations was
created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. War kills massively, crosses borders,
destabilizes whole regions. Today, we face other
problems that kill massively, cross borders and
destabilize whole regions: a quarter of all the deaths on
the planet now are caused by infectious diseases such
as malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS. Because of AIDS
alone, life expectancy in some African nations is
plummeting by as much as 30 years. Without
aggressive prevention, the epicentre of the epidemic
likely will move to Asia by 2010, with very rapid
growth rates in the new independent States.

The affected nations must do more on prevention,
but the rest of us must do more too - not just with
AIDS, but also with malaria and tuberculosis. We must
invest in the basics: clean water, safe food, good
sanitation and health education. We must make sure
that the advancements in science work for all people.
The United States is investing $2 billion a year in
AIDS research, including $210 million for an AIDS
vaccine, and I have asked our Congress to give a tax
credit of $1 billion to speed the development in the
private sector of vaccines against AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis. We have to give a tax credit because the
people who need the medicine cannot afford to pay for
it as it is. We have worked to make drugs more
affordable and we will do more. We have doubled our
global assistance for AIDS prevention and care over
the last two years.

Unfortunately, the United Nations has estimated
that to meet our goals we will collectively need to
provide an additional $4 billion a year. We must join
together to help close that gap. And we must advance
the larger agenda to fight the poverty that breeds
conflict and war. I strongly support the goal of
universal access to primary education by 2015. We are
helping to move towards that goal in part through our
effort to provide school lunches to 9 million boys and
girls in developing nations. For about $3 billion a year
collectively we could provide a nutritious meal to
every child in every developing country in a school in
the world. That would dramatically change the future
for a lot of poor nations today.

We have agreed to triple the scale of debt relief
for the poorest countries, but we should do more. This
idea of relieving debt, if the savings will be invested in
the human needs of the people, is an idea whose time
came long ago, and I hope we will do much more.

Finally, Mr. Secretary-General, you have called
on us to support the millennium ecosystem assessment.
We have to meet the challenge of climate change. I
predict that within a decade, or maybe even a little less,
this will become as large an obstacle to the
development of poor nations as disease is today. The
United States will contribute the first complete set of
detailed satellite images of the world's threatened
forests to this project. We will continue to support
aggressive efforts to implement the Kyoto Protocol and
other objectives that will reduce the environmental
threats we face.

Now let me just say in closing that some people
will listen to this discussion and say, "Well,
peacekeeping has something to do with security, but
these other issues do not have anything to do with
security and do not belong in the Security Council."
This is my last meeting, and Ijust have to say that I
respectfully disagree. These issues will increasingly be
considered by the Security Council.

Until we confront the iron link between
deprivation, disease and war, we will never be able to
create the peace that the founders of the United Nations
dreamed of. I hope the United States will always be
willing to do its part, and I hope that the Security
Council increasingly will have a twenty-first century
vision of security that we can all embrace and pursue.

