Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, for
his briefing. Uruguay acknowledges the important
work carried out by UNOCA in terms of good offices,
preventive diplomacy and mediation, and in support of
United Nations and regional and subregional initiatives
to achieve peace and security in the region.

With regard to the briefing by the Special
Representative, we note that the tensions caused by the
controversy surrounding electoral processes continue
to affect the Central African subregion, although,
in a few cases, tensions have been eased by attempts
at dialogue between Governments and opposition
groups. In that regard, we welcome in particular the
various efforts made by countries in the subregion
to peacefully reduce tensions through genuine and
inclusive dialogue. We encourage all interested parties
to cooperate with each other with transparency and
in good faith in order to resolve the various political,
social and economic issues.

Having more women participate in the
decision-making process would help us to make
headway on the issue. There is still a very low level of
women's participation in the subregion. As mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/465),
there have been a few positive developments in that
regard, such as the establishment and development of
a regional platform on the issue of women, peace and
security. Nonetheless, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), whose goal is to ensure that women play
a greater role in decision-making, remains a challenge
in Central Africa. Uruguay believes that more effective
participation by women in the post-conflict transition
phase would be vital to ensuring lasting peace.

I would like to highlight two very important
situations that Uruguay believes clearly reflect the
difficult living conditions faced by a large number of
civilians in many countries of the subregion - the
humanitarian and human rights situations.

According to information provided by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
violence and insecurity caused by Boko Haram has
destroyed families and communities in the Lake Chad
basin region, where 2.4 million people are displaced
and more than 7 million require food assistance.
Throughout the region, there are more than 10 million
people in need of humanitarian aid, which makes it the
backdrop for one of the worst humanitarian crises in the
world. In that regard, we commend the collective efforts
of the international community - and of the countries
in Central African subregion in particular - to address
the threat posed by terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram and Lord's Resistance Army. Such efforts have
eased, at least to some extent, the tremendous suffering
they inflict on the civilian population.

As to the human rights situation, Uruguay is
concerned about the information contained in the
report with regard to ongoing human rights violations
in many countries of the subregion, where the
excessive use of force, detention and arbitrary arrests
of political opponents, civil society activists and media
professionals reflect a persistent trend that leads to the
reduction of political space. In addition, the prevailing
climate of impunity in some countries continues to be
of concern, given that, among other things, it is a major
hindrance to creating an environment that is conducive
to the holding of peaceful elections and a clear path to
democratic governance.

Lastly, I would like to express Uruguay's support for
the Special Representative and all UNOCA personnel,
who work tirelessly to promote peace and security in
Central Africa.

