Ms. Makotose: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the work of the police
component of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

Resolution 2363 (2017) conferred to main priorities
to the UNAMID mandate. The first is to protect civilians
across Darfur. That includes active patrolling in areas
at high risk of conflict and with high concentrations
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), and securing
IDP camps, adjacent areas and migration routes to
ensure a more effective response to threats of violence
against civilians. More specifically, we have conducted
several thousand patrols in support of the physical
protection of civilians, including more than 2,300
confidence-building patrols to camps for the displaced,
and more than 2,600 to respond to the security needs of
internally displaced persons, particularly women and
children engaged in livelihood activities outside their
camps. Additionally, UNAMID police have undertaken
more than 500 joint patrols with community policing
volunteers, and have managed public order during the
distribution of humanitarian assistance.

The second mandate priority is establishing a
protective environment by engaging communities in
community-policing initiatives and supporting the
capacity-building of the Sudanese police in Darfur.
Community policing volunteers engage with the
community on various issues, such as advocating
participation in the Government's arms collection
programme and urging IDPs and Sudanese uniformed
personnel to respect the buffer zone and avoid
provocation during presidential visits. With regard to
capacity-building for the Sudanese police force, we
support the institutional development of the police in
line with our joint programme for the rule of law and
human rights.

I should also like give a brief update on the
reconfiguration of the police component. We have
successfully withdrawn from 14 team sites with
minimum challenges. We have repatriated two formed
police units (FPUs), while the repatriation ofcontingent-
owned equipment remains ongoing. Two FPUs have also
been delinked from the military and relocated at two of
the six team sites earmarked for the reconfiguration.
Some challenges were encountered and are now being
managed for the four team sites and the two temporary
operating bases that are to be implemented in the second
phase. Supervising and monitoring the closed team
sites has not been easy, as road and weather conditions
have affected our movement. The military numbers and
capabilities are different from those of the FPU, which
will have an impact on the outputs that will be possible
in those delinked team sites.

The UNAMID police component strives to
implement our mandate in a gender-responsive way.
Under the guidance of the Secretary-General's gender
parity strategy, we have advocated for, and are thankful
to, Member States to respond to the call for skilled
staff. The UNAMID police now includes 20 per cent
female individual police officers and four professional
staff out of 16, with two more in process. Both males
and females are deployed at team sites and in sector
headquarters, where they are all engaged in all forms of
duties. Females are encouraged to apply for leadership
positions, and we have conducted leadership-training
workshops to support their confidence-building and to
mentor them. The UNAMID Police Women's Network
also continues to meet and encourage the empowerment
of women. Men are also part of the Network, and I am
happy to report that in one sector there are more male
than female members.

Those are just a few of the many internal efforts
made, as we also assist and advocate for the Sudanese
police force in Darfur to mainstream gender. There
is greater awareness now, but females remain few in
number and none hold senior leadership positions. We
are working on some projects that we hope, if supported
by donors, will see marked progress. That progress is
essential if we are to fully support the prevention and
management of conflict-related sexual violence and
sexual and gender-based violence in Darfur. The patrols
continue to receive information, but some victims are
so traumatized and afraid of stigmatization that they
do not come out. More advocacy and support for those
victims is required.

Women in Darfur remain the main players in
economic and livelihood income-generating activities,
as many males continue to avoid venturing out for
fear of being killed. For their efforts, some women
are raped, harassed or abused. More work needs to be
done to support those women with safe economic and
income-generating activities. Of course, it would be
more helpful if the Sudanese police force in Darfur's
capacity to investigate and prosecute offenders
were enhanced.

For us to receive more female peacekeepers, the
national police services must themselves include
proportional national representation. Females need
additional training and mentoring to build their
confidence. More role models are required. And
Member States need to second more qualified females
for senior positions.

