The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received a letter from the
representative of Yugoslavia to the United Nations, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovie
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/1051, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 November 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
transmitting a letter from the President of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in preparing the Kosovo-wide
elections on 17 November 2001 and calls on the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and all parties concerned to continue to strive for
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999. It further calls upon all women and
men of Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
to vote.

"The Security Council welcomes the helpful
role played by the President of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Governments of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia in recommending Kosovo
the

Serb participation in the elections. Participation
will allow them to take part in shaping Kosovo's
multi-ethnic future.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing on 5 November 2001 of the UNMlK-FRY
Common Document by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the President of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Government of the Republic
of Serbia. This document is consistent with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government in
Kosovo.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
statement of its President of 5 October 2001
(S/PRST/2001/27). It encourages the further
development of a constructive dialogue between
the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMlK) and the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It
emphasizes the responsibility of the provisional
institutions of self-government and all concerned
to respect fully the final status provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). It underlines its
continued commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999), which remains the
basis for building Kosovo's future."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/200l/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10:40 am.

