Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
for his insightful briefing on the Secretary-General's
semi-annual report on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and recent developments in West Africa
and the Sahel (S/2018/649). I would like to express my
appreciation for Mr. Chambas's important contribution,
as well as that of UNOWAS, to advancing peace and
security throughout a vast region.

We also commend the close cooperation with
regional and subregional actors, which is extremely
vital to having an effective impact. Such collaborative
efforts have yielded the latest positive political and
economic developments that we have witnessed in
West Africa. In this vein, we call upon UNOWAS
to continue its work on strengthening post-electoral
stability and drawing close attention to the upcoming
elections across the region. At the same time, several
challenges, including the increasing threat of terrorism
and violent extremism in West Africa and the Sahel,
with their linkages to transnational organized crime,
continue to affect stability in the region.

Kazakhstan welcomes an increase in national and
regional ownership of the issues and fully supports
regional initiatives to address the foregoing threats
through the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Multinational Joint Task Force. My delegation
therefore commends the international partners for
mobilizing financial support for these initiatives.

At the same time, we echo the report's
recommendation on the need for strong counter-
terrorism efforts to be fully compliant with
international law, ensuring that operations are aligned
with broader regional initiatives and that they do not
harm local populations. Other growing concerns are
the increasing threat of conflict between farmers and
herders, aggravated by the effects of climate change,
food insecurity, forced displacement, rapid population
growth and weak governance. Our delegation believes
that in order to effectively address these issues,
a military approach and humanitarian assistance
should go hand in hand with development efforts in
an integrated, complex and well-coordinated manner
reinforced by long-term sustainable funding.

Our efforts need to be focused on the structural
drivers of instability by reducing poverty, providing
basic services, creating better opportunities for
education and employment, strengthening local
governance and mitigating the impact of climate
change. While we welcome United Nations reform on
repositioning the development system with greater
coordination among various United Nations agencies,
we now have to go further and increase coordination
at the regional level so as to advance peace and
development on a comprehensive and efficient basis.
We therefore welcome the continued efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States to
advance the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including through the development of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, and stress
the importance of developing a similar integrated
approach for the Lake Chad Basin region.

Finally, we underscore the importance of
promoting the meaningful inclusion of women and the
effective integration of young people in political and
developmental processes. Kazakhstan will continue to
work together was the Security Council and key actors
to find a solution for lasting peace in West Africa and
the Sahel.

