Ms. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me first to thank through you, Sir, the members of the
Security Council for allowing us to state our position in this
forum.

The item before us today is of particular importance.
Turkmenistan has traditionally maintained respectful, good-
neighbourly relations with Afghanistan, free from any short-
term political interests.

The internal conflict in Afghanistan, which has now
lasted many years and which was caused by foreign
intervention 20 years ago, is a source of grief in our
country. As has been repeatedly stressed by the President
of Turkmenistan, Afghans are dear to us, and we are
prepared, to the extent possible, to help them find a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.

Turkmenistan has been and remains the only country
that maintains an ongoing presence in Afghanistan. I am
referring to our two consulates in Herat and
Mazar-e-Sharif. Although the domestic political situation
in Afghanistan has changed, the consular offices of
Turkmenistan have remained, because they ensure the
normal functioning of our border - a border almost 900
kilometres long that needs to be managed. For neutral
Turkmenistan the border is not a fence; it is an instrument
for carrying out a foreign policy that seeks to help
establish an atmosphere of peace, security and mutually
advantageous partnership in the region. Turkmenistan will
maintain relations with Afghans irrespective of what
position they adopt. Turkmenistan respects the choice of
the Afghans themselves particularly as regards what kind
of life they should build and what rules they should
adhere to.

Turkmenistan believes that relations between
Turkmenistan and Afghanistan are not an
intergovemmental privilege but reflect a mutual attraction
between two peoples and their unchanging recognition of
each other. The main thing today is to help the Afghans
to find concord and, with active international support, to
embark on a long-term programme for the rehabilitation
of their country. This was the precise approach adopted
during the two rounds of talks between key Afghan
factions in Ashkhabad at the beginning of the year.
Results began to be achieved, direct talks were started,
and the first signs of a possible agreement emerged.
However, that process did not receive any real
assessment. Apparently we were not prepared for this
event, and various attempts were made, at various other
levels and using other formats, to try to resolve the
Afghan problem.

In this case, we believe that quantity has not led to
quality. All it takes is for a process to encounter an
obstacle and it is abandoned and something new is
started. The scattering of the efforts of the international
community - this lurching from one initiative to another
without giving any one a real chance to be successful, or
concentrating all efforts on just one - not only has not
improved the situation; in our View, it has made things
worse.

We all agree as to the central role to be played by
our Organization in coordinating the efforts of the
international community. In that respect, we call upon it
to be more active and to focus its efforts on one goal: the
resumption of direct inter-Afghan dialogue without any
discriminatory evaluations of any Afghan party, and

 

particularly without the imposition of any formulas or
outside participants. Ongoing contact between the parties to
the conflict, under any circumstances and whatever the
consequences, is a step towards resolving the conflict. The
United Nations will encounter failures and setbacks; no one
is immune to them. But one cannot undertake efforts only
if the results of those efforts are going to be successful.

We think that in the efforts of the United Nations and
of all those concerned to see a solution to the Afghan
conflict, an important role should be played by countries
that bear a particular responsibility for the fate of peoples,
in particular the five permanent members of the Security
Council, States that are the immediate neighbours of
Afghanistan, and the major regional Powers - India,
Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

For our part, Turkmenistan, which has direct ongoing
relations with the parties to the Afghan conflict, is prepared
to continue to promote the process of seeking peace, with
the agreement of the Afghans. For Turkmenistan, the main
point here is the Afghan people's choice - a people that
possesses the wisdom, experience and courage to take any
decisions, even the most difficult ones.

We were deeply saddened at the news of Mr.
Brahimi's illness, and we would ask you, Mr. President, to
convey to him our good wishes for a speedy recovery.

