Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): My delegation deeply
appreciates your initiative in convening this open meeting,
Mr. President.

I should like first to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and Under-Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for
his comprehensive and precise briefing on the situation in
Sierra Leone.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved so
far in the implementation of the Lorne Agreement as well
as the arrival of the first United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) contingents in Freetown. We
congratulate the members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and other troop-
contributing countries on their efforts to uphold the peace
process.

Even though the situation in Sierra Leone is
beginning to move in a positive direction, with the
institution of the Government of National Unity and the
initial deployment of the UNAMSIL, the country still
faces serious difficulties in the security and humanitarian
fields.

The first report on UNAMSIL clearly indicates that
the overall situation remains very fragile. The continued
actions by the rebel groups, jeopardizing the
implementation of the Lorne Agreement, are unacceptable.
We condemn the continued detention of women and
children by the rebel groups and the recent wave of
violence against the civilian population and humanitarian
personnel. We join our colleagues in demanding the
immediate release of the two members of Medecins sans
Frontieres. We also deplore the increase in ceasefire
violations which may lead to the resumption of civil war.
So there is an urgent need for concerted action to remove
all obstacles to the implementation of the Lorne Peace
Agreement. However, international efforts to promote
peace in Sierra Leone cannot replace the efforts of the
Sierra Leonean parties themselves to promote national
reconciliation.

Since most parties are now represented in the
Government of National Unity under a power-sharing
agreement, priority should be given to ensure that all

 

parties abide by the letter and the spirit of the Lorne Peace
Agreement. Radical groups must be persuaded that dialogue
is the only viable option. They must be warned that the
international community remains determined to prevent the
country from plunging again into chaos and anarchy, as
well as to adopt measures against those individuals who
refuse to join the peace process.

Implementation of the peace process requires adequate
resources to be carried out. As a first priority, the
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants is essential. In this
respect, we commend the Governments of the United
Kingdom, Canada, Norway, Germany and Italy for their
contribution to the DDR programme.

We urge strict compliance with the provisions of the
existing arms embargo on Sierra Leone, and we support
further measures such as the establishment of a monitoring
and inspection mechanism to strengthen the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime.

The Secretary-General's report calls attention to the
fact that humanitarian assistance cannot be provided in
many areas of Sierra Leone due to the precarious security
situation. It is imperative that safe access for humanitarian
personnel be guaranteed so as to meet the needs of the
entire affected population.

There are also long-term tasks that the international
community will have to address in the future, such as the
rehabilitation and the reconstruction of the country and the
need to assist with the return and reintegration of an
estimated half a million Sierra Leoneans who have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries. At this critical moment in
the peace process, it is essential that the international
community continue to provide financial and logistical
support for the effective implementation of the Lome Peace
Agreement.

Finally, we welcome the designation of Ambassador
Adeniji of Nigeria as the new Special Representative in
Sierra Leone and would like to express our deep
appreciation to his predecessor, Francis Okelo.

