Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation is taking the
floor following the voting on draft resolutions S/2019/ 961
and S/2019/962, on the cross-border mechanism.

Indonesia voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2019/96l, submitted by the co-penholders, since
the text is the result of in-depth efforts to find middle
ground for divergent positions among Security Council
members. The draft reflects compromise and ways to
address concerns that were raised. In that regard, we
thank the co-penholders for facilitating the process. We
also appreciate the efforts of Russia in submitting draft
resolution S/20l9/962, on the renewal ofthe mechanism,
in the spirit of improving humanitarian assistance to
Syria. However, my delegation believes that the draft
was not exhaustively discussed by all Council members
and does not fully address the needs of the 4 million
people in need.
My delegation deeply regrets that we have been
unable to agree on a solution today. As I mentioned
in my statements yesterday (see S/PV.8694) and this
morning (see S/PV.8696), civilian lives are at stake
and we are responsible for addressing this urgent issue
immediately. It is fair to say that we are all equally
unhappy. However, this is not about the happiness of
Council members. This is mainly about the lives of
4 million people in need of lifesaving humanitarian
assistance. I cannot offer a magic formula to resolve this
deadlock because we do not need one. What we need
as Council members is a simple formula that is based
on genuine dialogue, with pure humanitarian goals that
avoid the politicization of the issue. What we need is
a resolution that guarantees access for humanitarian
assistance - a simple resolution, a piece of paper that
contains a mandate for us to work for humankind.

Indonesia stands ready to actively support the
continuation of our common goal to save Syrian lives.
They are innocent, apolitical and in need of our genuine
help. This is not the end. We must continue to work
for the sake of the Syrian people. There should never
be an end to saving lives. I call upon all colleagues,
members of the Council, to continue to work on this
noble endeavour. The Syrian people need us all.

