Mr. Cui Tiankai (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China expresses its appreciation to Pakistan for having
proposed this open debate on counter-terrorism. I thank
you, Madam President, for having travelled to New
York to preside over this debate. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

Pakistan is at the forefront of the international
struggle against terrorism. The tremendous efforts
and enormous sacrifices it has made in that regard are
recognized by the whole world. On 10 January, several
blasts took place in the city of Quetta, in the Pakistani
province of Baluchistan, causing heavy casualties.
China strongly condemns those attacks. We wish to
express our deep condolences and sincere sympathy to
the wounded and to the families of the victims. China
rejects terrorism in all its forms and will continue to
support the Government and people of Pakistan in
their efforts to safeguard national stability and combat
terrorism.

The convening of this meeting is a strong testament
to Pakistan's responsible attitude towards the issue
of counter-terrorism. China fully appreciates this
effort. I am confident that our meeting today will help
strengthen international consensus and contribute to
international cooperation on counter-terrorism.

In the wake of the events of 11 September, the
Security Council swiftly adopted resolution 1373
(2001), which led to the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. That reflects the international
community's firm resolve to combat terrorism. In the
ensuing years, some progress has been made, and the
threat of terrorism on the whole is abating. On the
other hand, the situation today remains quite serious.
Terrorist activities are rampant in certain parts of the
world, and the turbulence in certain other regions
provides space for terrorist infiltration.

We have seen new developments concerning
terrorist organizations. The average age of terrorist
operatives has decreased, the methods employed are
becoming more varied, and some organizations are
joining together to form terrorist networks. In a word,
the breeding ground for terrorism is far from having
been eliminated, and international counter-terrorism
cooperation remains a long and uphill battle.

Today's open debate offers a valuable opportunity
to explore effective and comprehensive ways to combat
terrorism. I wish to set out the following positions of
my Government on international counter-terrorism
cooperation.

First, we need to fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned. In
combating terrorism, it is important to adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of countries; fully listen to their
views and opinions; and carry out international
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
Without global support, the fight against terrorism
cannot be sustained. Therefore, the international
community should provide more assistance to those
developing countries that suffer from a lack of capacity,
while respecting the wishes of such countries.

Secondly, we need to leverage the role ofthe United
Nations and its Security Council as the main channel
of cooperation. Terrorism is a threat to global peace
and security. China supports the important role of the
United Nations and its Security Council in coordinating
national efforts and shaping a global response. It is
important for countries to strictly abide by the relevant
Security Council resolutions and fully implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We welcome the establishment of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and we hope that there will
be better coordination and greater synergy among
the various counter-terrorism agencies of the United
Nations.

Thirdly, we need to adopt a comprehensive approach
in addressing the root causes as well as the symptoms
of this scourge. Terrorism is the result of a complex
array of political, economic and social factors; it cannot
be resolved by military means alone. Counter-terrorism
efforts must be combined with economic growth
and the proper settlement of regional conflict. There
should also be more dialogue and exchanges between
different civilizations, religions and ethnic groups, so
as to promote mutual understanding, tolerance and
harmonious coexistence. A comprehensive approach
involving political, economic and diplomatic means
should be employed in order to eliminate the root
causes of terrorist activities.

Fourthly, we need to reject double standards.
Terrorism is the arch-enemy of all humankind.
Terrorist activities, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed, under whatever pretext,
should be condemned and combated. There should not
be different standards for different attacks. The fight
against terrorism should not be determined by ideology,
nor should it be associated with specific countries,
Governments, ethnicities or religious beliefs. On this
issue, the international community should build greater
consensus and speak in one voice.

China has been suffering from terrorism. For years,
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement and associated
groups have carried out numerous violent terrorist
attacks against China, causing heavy casualties and
economic losses in my country. Definitive evidence
abounds. Such attacks are grave threats not only to
China's national security, but also to the peace and
stability of our region. The international community
shouldjoin hands in a united effort against it.

China has consistently played an active role
in international exchanges on counter-terrorism
cooperation. My Government has signed 12 relevant
international conventions within the United Nations
framework and faithfully implemented resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). Pursuant to paragraph
6 of resolution 1373 (2001), China has submitted
seven reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
documenting China's implementation of the resolution
and the latest progress in its counter-terrorism
endeavours.

China has also taken an active part in international
cooperation against terrorism financing. We have
signed cooperation memorandums with 20 foreign
financial intelligence agencies and joined the Financial
Action Task Force, the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money-Laundering and Financing of Terrorism, and
the Asia/Pacific Group on Money-Laundering. We
have also provided, as our ability permits, material
assistance and training to support the counterterrorism
efforts of other developing countries.

The world has made considerable progress in the
fight against terrorism. However, there is still a long
way to go. The international community should strive
tirelessly and take a comprehensive approach in order to
wipe out terrorist threats. China pledges its continued
efforts to that end.

