Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The Council is briefed
almost daily about the horrific impacts of conflict
around the world. We know that children are among
those who suffer the most. They are recruited, attacked,
tortured and abducted and are also victims of sexual
violence. Their schools and hospitals are attacked,
and they are often denied life-saving humanitarian
assistance.

The Council can never do enough to protect those
children. We strongly support the mandate and work
of Special Representative Zerrougui. We thank her,
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Ms. Brandt and
Mr. Ramm for their briefings today, and even more
so for their efforts. We also thank Luxembourg for
its dedication to child protection and for unifying the
Security Council through a draft presidential statement
aimed at moving the agenda forward.

The past decade has seen substantial progress on the
child protection agenda. We now have important tools
at our disposal, including an expanded set of triggers
for listing perpetrators of grave violations and for the
more regular inc1usion of child-protection advisers
in peacekeeping missions; the signing of action plans
by the Governments of Myanmar, Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the past year are
also welcome developments. Yet, as the Council knows,
grave violations against conflict-affected children
continue and do so on a daily basis.

The situation in Syria is dire. Possibly half of the
almost 7 million Syrian internally displaced persons
are children; approximately half of the 1.6 million
refugees are children. Between 3 and 4 million Syrian
children are in need. Thousands of children have been
killed, gravely injured and even tortured. The damage
to Syria's infrastructure, including schools - with one
in five either destroyed, damaged or converted into a
shelter - is depriving Syrian children of their basic
needs.

There are far too many other accounts of violations,
which we have been briefed on. In Mali and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo it is crucial that
peacekeeping missions ensure the effective protection
of children. We have also heard terrible reports of
the large number of children recruited in the Central
African Republic - a situation on which the Council
must be engaged.

More broadly, my country shares the concerns of
the Secretary-General that the evolving character and
tactics of armed conflict are creating unprecedented
threats to children. In particular, we share the serious
concerns about the use of schools for military purposes.

Obviously, more must be done. I would like to
focus very briefly on three areas where greater efforts
could be made.

First, action plans to halt child recruitment have had
a real impact on ending violations against children in a
number of countries. Given that many non-State armed
groups violate children's rights during conflict, we
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to continue to focus on engaging with them,
as well as with Governments, in a concerted effort to
conclude action plans.

Secondly, some existing sanctions regimes have
child rights violations as listing criteria. The Council
should make better use of its sanctions regimes
to designate individuals or entities not previously
considered for listing, but whose child-rights violations
would qualify them for it.

Thirdly, it is crucial that we end impunity for those
most responsible for serious crimes against children.
We call on States to criminalize serious violations of
international law committed against children. In cases
where States are unwilling or unable to investigate
and prosecute crimes, the Council should consider
whether referral to the International Criminal Court is
warranted.

In conclusion, we must ensure that children, who
are those most vulnerable during armed conflict and
those least able to withstand its ravages, are shielded
from its impacts. Protecting children should compel
both Council unity and action. We should ask ourselves,
following Special Representative Zerrougui's lead this
morning, "If not for these children, then for whom will
this Council act?".

