Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Permit me to express
the gratitude of my delegation to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. Like previous speakers before
us, my delegation also welcomes the presence of
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General and for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council.

As indicated in the report, we are pleased to learn
of the progress achieved in Timor-Leste. Indeed,
Timor-Leste has taken significant steps forward in
solidifying its position at the regional and global
levels, notably as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. In this
regard, my Government stands ready to work together
with the Government of Timor-Leste.

It is also gratifying to record that our bilateral
relations are steadily flourishing, thus serving our
common interests in many spheres, including border
demarcation. Indonesia has embraced Timor-Leste as
part of many regional forums and initiatives. There is
no doubt that Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to be
steadfast in building stronger relations between them as
two friendly neighbouring countries. Our common
history has taught us that arriving at a stable and
mutually beneficial relationship should be based upon a
forward-looking attitude.

The phase, the substance and the priorities of our
relations, however, should be fully determined by us as
two sovereign States. The international community and
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) should be fully appreciative and
supportive of this principle. After all, when
UNMISET's planned mandate ends in May 2004, the
two countries, as eternal neighbours, have no
alternative but to strengthen their bilateral relations. In
doing so, we will eliminate the need for any third party
to influence the nature and course of our interaction.

Timor-Leste has been widely considered a
success story for the international community. Much of
the credit should go to the perseverance of the East
Timorese themselves and other dedicated international
personalities. One cannot forget, however, that the non-
existence of favourable cooperation and an
unwillingness to be reconciled make it difficult for
other peacekeeping operations to emulate this success.
Rather than supporting the distinctive and laudable
situation between our two nations, some quarters tend
to disregard it and even attempt to inflict other agendas
on us that would surely disrupt our shared vision.

As the first anniversary of Timor-Leste's
independence approaches, it is high time for the
international community to permit a more progressive
transfer of operational responsibilities to the East
Timorese. UNMISET, to be faithful to its name and
mandate, is to provide assistance to a sovereign entity,
as stipulated in resolution 1410 (2002). We believe that
UNMISET, as a true peacekeeping mission, will
honour its exit strategy and not reluctantly surrender it
on the basis of a careful assessment on the ground.

My delegation cannot but note with concern
prejudices expressed in the report on certain issues, in
particular concerning security at the border and justice.
My Government's position and strong commitment in
these endeavours need no reiteration.

In view of the efforts of both Indonesia and
Timor-Leste to develop good and friendly relations, the
steadily growing relationship between the two
countries is far too important to allow any issue that
might arise to disrupt this relationship. As our bilateral
relations continue to flourish at all levels, we call on
the international community, as well as the United
Nations, to support them.
