The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
approval by the Burundian people of the post-
transitional Constitution through the referendum
of 28 February 2005, whose final results have just
been declared. The very broad participation of the
citizens of Burundi, who have voted in favour of
the Constitution in large numbers, is the sign of
their support to the peace process. It is an
important event for Burundi and for the whole
region of the Great Lakes of Africa.

"The Security Council calls upon all
Burundians to remain committed to the course of
national reconciliation, for further steps remain to
be taken. It invites in particular the political
leadership in the country to work together
towards the common goal of holding,
expeditiously, local and national elections that are
free and fair. It encourages the donor community
to continue providing its assistance to this end."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

