Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The adoption of
today's resolution marks another important step towards the
re-establishment in Haiti of a fully functioning democracy.
It demonstrates the continuing commitment of the Security
Council to international peace and security and the further
consolidation of the great improvements in Haiti since the
departure of the military regime.

My Government agrees with the Secretary-General and
the other contributors to the Multinational Force that the
conditions in Haiti now permit a smooth and early
transition to the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).
We commend the efforts of the Multinational Force and of
all the countries contributing to it, which have created the
environment necessary for the full deployment of UNMIH.
As the resolution makes clear, it will be important for the
Secretary-General to keep UNMIH force levels under
constant review and to recommend to the Council
adjustments as and when the situation in Haiti permits.

The resolution just adopted acknowledges that the
threat formerly posed to peace and security in the region
has now been removed. We congratulate President Aristide
on his role in helping to make this possible. His efforts to
promote peace and reconciliation have obviously been a
most important factor in the success of the multinational
operation. It is important that the people of Haiti give the
highest priority to the process of reconciliation and the
maintenance of stability. Ultimately it is the Haitians
themselves who have responsibility for the reconstruction
of their country. We will continue to support them, not least
in the approach to the forthcoming legislative elections. We
look forward to an early start to a free and fair election
campaign, monitored by the United Nations.

It is too early to predict the final and complete success
of the United Nations involvement in Haiti, but the action
taken so far by this Council and by the Multinational Force
has given us strong grounds for optimism. My Government
believes that the resolution we have just adopted will bring
success a significant step closer.

