Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the African States.

Let me, at the outset, express our thoughts and
prayers for all those who continue to suffer from the
scourge of terrorism, not only most recently in France,
but also in Lebanon and Egypt.

We are deeply grateful to the United Kingdom
presidency for calling for this debate at this time. We
would also like to thank Secretary of State Greening
and the Secretary-General for their statements. We
associate ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The United Nations, as we know, was founded to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to reaffirm our faith in fundamental human rights,
and to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom. The Organization has since
then become the fundamental actor in joint efforts
to seek common solutions to common problems that
challenge humanity. The multiplicity of terrorist acts,
the spread of organized crime and the growth of illegal
economic activities in the world are impediments to the
development that we seek and represent a growing risk
to the stability and survival of some of our Member
States.

Terrorism remains one of the most potent threats
to international peace and security. The recent events
in Kenya, Lebanon, France and Egypt have once again
demonstrated the need for the Organization to assume
its role as the preeminent multilateral forum to address
today's crises and challenges. In that context, let me
state Africa's strongest condemnation of all terrorist
acts. We call on the international community to adopt a
zero-tolerance policy towards all acts of terrorism and
to eradicate the structures of terrorism, its network of
supporters, its financing centres, its training facilities
and all those who seek to establish and foster incubators
of hate.
It is patently clear to all of us that national solutions
are no longer sufficient to meet the current security
threats, which are cross-border in structure and
complex in nature. It is time for the United Nations to
demonstrate the necessary political will to agree on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. It
is time to consolidate the normative framework against
the increasingly complex and terrorist challenges that
we face around the world.

In this era of global transformation, peace, security
and development have become ever more closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The African
States emphasize the importance of peace and security
as a necessary precondition for development, not only
on our continent, but in the rest of the world. There can
never be development in the absence of true peace and
stability.

As we proceed to implement the post-2015
development agenda, adopted recently in the form
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), the African States
would like to emphasize the imperative need for
peaceful and inclusive societies as a key component
for sustainable development. The African continent
has made remarkable progress in becoming more
prosperous and peaceful. In January of this year, in
Addis Ababa, the African Union adopted Agenda 2063
as its 50-year transformative agenda for peace, security
and development. Over the past two decades, Africa
has made considerable progress in strengthening
democratic governance through the support of regional
and subregional organizations. The continent has
adopted measures to address tensions and the threat
of conflict. It also continues to monitor and promote
human rights, build peace and security, and consolidate
good governance.

Much has been done, but much still remains to
be done. The African States note the need for greater
efforts to implement the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as envisaged in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The peaceful settlement of disputes
can only be achieved through frank and open dialogue
based on mutual respect. Conflict prevention is a much
more cost-effective and sustainable option than force.
Mediation and prevention efforts, facilitation and the
use of good offices remain central tools in managing
situations of imminent and latent conflict. The African
Union's contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts demonstrates its strong commitment to the
search for peace and stability, and it stands ready to
increase its profile in the peacekeeping landscape.

The ongoing 10-year review of the peacebuilding
architecture is timely. It compels all of us to face head-
on the challenges of building and sustaining peace and
the ever-present risk of lapses or relapses into conflict.
The broad focus of the review will be critical, given
the need for comprehensive, integrated approaches
in that area. We welcome the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490), which, in our view,
covers most of the discussions and recommendations
made repeatedly over the years by Member States,
including countries on the Peacebuilding Commission's
agenda, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations, civil
society and partners, such as the international financial
institutions.

We must take the bold steps needed to translate
our deliberations into a resolution that can bring about
the transformation that we all seek. Peacebuilding is
the work of all and must be at the core of the work of
this Organization. The question is, of course, how to
achieve peace and progress without creating avenues
for waste or unnecessary duplication within the
Organization. The business of peacebuilding must
inform our inputs and must focus our minds on making
sure that the recommendations contained in the reports
of the Advisory Group become a reality. Of primary
importance is the need to deploy the necessary resources
to meet our overall aspirations of peace, security and
development.
In conclusion, as we consider the critical link
between peace, security and development, partnerships
with regional organizations and other relevant
institutions must be given consideration.

We also believe that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and other actors must focus on the broader
ideal and principle of sustaining peace before and after
conflict. All principal organs of the United Nations and
the United Nations system must focus on that broader
objective, and we must consider new approaches that
can break down institutional silos and ensure that we
work collectively as one.

