Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Council members
will recall that in its report last year (see S/2015/446),
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
indicated that the peacekeeping operations of recent
years have tended to last longer than in the past and
that it is therefore all the more important to conclude
their various stages as soon as conditions allowed. It is
therefore my pleasure to present the special report of
the Secretary General of March 31 on the Cote D'Ivoire
(S/2016/297), in which he submits to the Council
his proposals with respect to the conclusion of the
peacekeeping phase in that country.

I welcome in particular the fact that since the
finalization of the report last month, the Government
of Cete D'Ivoire has continued to pursue reforms
allowing for the expansion of the political space and
the strengthening of unity and national cohesion. For
example, last week the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
adopted a bill on the status of the political opposition,
which the opposition had long called for. The bill
establishes the post of opposition leader with the rank
of Minister of State, sets the rules and procedures for
his or her designation, and - importantly - provides
public funding for political parties. The opposition
leader will be the candidate or the leader of the party or
political grouping that had come in second in the most
recent presidential election. In this case, that would
be Mr. Pascal Affi N'Guessan, leader of the Front
populaire ivoirien.

Meanwhile, discussions are under way to hold
a constitutional referendum towards the end of the
year for the adoption of a new constitution that
would better reflect the evolution of the socio-
political context in Cote d'Ivoire over the past decade.
The amendments under consideration include the
question of the nationality of the candidates in the
presidential elections and the establishment of the
post of Vice-President. The Independent Electoral
Commission, for its part, has established a committee
to review the redistricting proposals called for by
the political parties of the opposition in view of the
upcoming parliamentary elections.

Although the security situation is more or less
stable, there are still several weak points, such as those
highlighted in the special report that has been submitted
to the Council today, including intracommunal conflicts
in some regions of the country and military threats
in the south-east. The country is riven with pockets
of tension, in particular in the Boukani region in the
north-east of Cote d'Ivoire, where violent clashes broke
out on the night of 23 to 24 March between herders and
farmers in Bouna and led to the deaths of30 individuals
and a massive displacement ofmore than 2,000 persons,

mainly women, children and the elderly. The United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) deployed
a detachment of its quick-reaction force to the town of
Bouna to participate in protection of civilian efforts
and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Mindaoudou, accompanied by members of the
Ivorian Government, visited the region and called for
calm and restraint and made it clear that the path of
dialogue should be followed in order to peacefully
manage such clashes.

I must also point out that the relationship between
the Ivorian security forces and the population remains a
source of concern. For example, on 28 March there was
an attack on the Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire
(FRCI) by unidentified individuals near Tabou in the
south-west, which resulted in the injury of two FRCI
soldiers.

Following the terrorist attacks in Grand-
Bassam on 13 March - for the commission of which
Al-Mourabitoun, a group based in northern Mali and
affiliated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
claimed responsibility - the Government took
proactive measures to identify and bring to justice
those responsible for those attacks. The Government
also launched criminal investigations and arrested the
alleged attackers. At the same time, the Government of
Mali, in close cooperation with the Ivorian Government,
arrested two alleged assailants.

It is worth noting that, faced with these terrorist
threats, the Governments of the subregion have decided
to step up their cooperation at the subregional level as
part of their common fight against terrorism and violent
extremism. Last week, C6te d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso,
Mali and Senegal convened a quadripartite meeting of
ministers responsible for security. During the meeting,
they established a security platform and adopted a
series of measures intended to prevent terrorist attacks.
The ministers also decided to pool their efforts and
to strengthen the links among their security services.
Four days after the attack in Grand-Bassam, the
Governments of Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, the forces of
UNOCI and the representatives of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia held a quadripartite meeting in
order to support the strengthening of border security
cooperation between Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

In general, since the post-election crisis that shook
Cote d'Ivoire in late 2010 and early 2011, tangible
progress has been made on all fronts. We have seen
significant headway made at the political level,
especially in terms of political dialogue, even though
there is much to do in order to establish national
reconciliation and social cohesion. There has also been
notable progress in strengthening the legal system and
efforts to respect human rights. The economy of Cote
d'Ivoire has also undergone a remarkable transition,
characterized by a rapid and sustained economic
recovery and a general increase in production rates,
with a gross domestic product in double digits in recent
years. We welcome the Government's commitment
to translating this economic recovery into a better
standard of living for its people and to ensuring that the
benefits of its growth are shared.

It must be reiterated that the country's security
situation remains fragile and characterized by the
presence of militias and the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. Therefore, the full re-establishment
of the rule of law and a strong security environment
throughout the country is still a challenge to be
overcome. However, I also note that the stabilization
seen throughout the country has enabled many displaced
persons and refugees to return to Cdte d'Ivoire, and
indeed the country has avoided a humanitarian crisis.
There may be some remaining needs and pockets of
vulnerability here and there, but there is no humanitarian
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

(spoke in English)

Later this year, two significant political processes
will be launched. The first is the national referendum,
which I referred to earlier, and the second is the
legislative elections. All political stakeholders have
expressed their intention to participate, provided that
conditions are in place to ensure the credibility and the
legitimacy of the process. Additionally, the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire expressed confidence when it received
our strategic review team. That review is the basis for
the report before the Council. The Government of C6te
d'Ivoire expressed confidence that national security
forces are now fully competent to secure those sensitive
processes without security support from UNOCI.

Taking into account the situation in the country
and our assessment of the positive trajectory of
C6te d'Ivoire, the Secretary-General recommends
that UNOCI be extended for a final period, until
30 June 2017. By 30 April 2017, UNOCI should have a
streamlined, prioritized mandate focused on the tasks
that are most essential for consolidating peace, as
detailed in the report.

The Secretary-General also recommends a final
phase of the drawdown of UNOCI's military and police
components, which would be reduced to 2,000 and 670
personnel, respectively, in the coming months. During
the last year of their deployment, the troops and formed
police units of UNOCI would support the Ivorian
authorities in protecting the population in the event of
incidents that could threaten a strategic reversal of its
stability, while individual police officers and military
observers would continue to provide operational and
command-level mentoring and advice to their national
counterparts.

All UNOCI military and police personnel and
the vast majority of civilian personnel would leave
Cote d'Ivoire by 30 April 2017 and the full closure of
the Mission would occur by 30 June 2017. Given the
positive trend in Cote d'Ivoire, the Secretary-General
does not recommend the establishment of a successor
United Nations mission there. It is therefore even
more essential that every effort be made to ensure a
seamless transition from peacekeeping during the next
14 months.

Over the course of its final year, UNOCI will
prioritize the handover of its priority tasks to the
Government of Cdte d'Ivoire and the United Nations
country team. Therefore, we are exploring options
for engaging the country team in the mandated tasks
of UNOCI while the Mission is still deployed and
supported by UNOCI's budget, in keeping with the
recommendations of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations. It would also be
important for other partners to be closely associated in
the exit strategy of UNOCI. We are therefore exploring
options for setting up a transition mechanism that would
involve all the stakeholders, including the Government,
the United Nations, regional organizations, donors
and other partners in the transformation of the United
Nations engagement in the country.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I would say that UNOCI has made
considerable progress since its deployment in April 2004,
12 years ago. The country is currently firmly anchored
on the path of peace, stability and economic recovery. I
want to commend and pay tribute to the Ivorian people's
determination to move forward in building a stable and
prosperous country. Congratulations are also in order

in particular for President Alassane Ouattara, for his
determined leadership and for his tireless efforts to
build peace and promote democracy and the rule of law
at a very crucial time in the country's history. I would
also like to thank the Council for the key role it has
played, including through the deployment of UNOCI
and through its political support for our Mission at all
levels. In the same vein, we think it important to thank
our regional and subregional partners - the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the European Union - and our many bilateral
partners for the constructive roles they have played
through the years in Cote d'Ivoire and its region.

C6te d'Ivoire's trajectory is a positive one. In my
opinion, it would be prudent to wind up the current
phase of our collective commitment represented by a
peacekeeping mission in the country; in other words, the
Mission needs to be drawn down. I therefore welcome
the fact that the Security Council is ready to make a
determination in the near future that the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire is no longer a threat to regional peace and
security and that it is open to defining the future role of
United Nations in C6te d'Ivoire in order to uphold all
efforts to build peace, stability and democracy in the
country and the surrounding region.

