Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing, and welcome Foreign Minister Daeie
and Ambassador Citaku to the Council Chamber today.

Today's briefing will be Sweden's last meeting on
Kosovo during our current tenure as a member of the
Council. During these two years, despite challenges,
important steps have been taken by Pristina and
Belgrade to normalize relations and advance on their
respective European Union (EU) tracks.

The future of both Serbia and Kosovo clearly lies in
the European Union. The EU integration process is the
most important driver of positive change and necessary
reforms in the Western Balkans. We welcome the
continued engagement of Pristina and Belgrade in
the EU-facilitated dialogue for the normalization of
relations. Full normalization is vital to a stable, peaceful
and prosperous Western Balkans, and a comprehensive
and legally-binding agreement must be reached as soon
as possible.

Pristina and Belgrade should implement their
commitments and pursue the dialogue process with
constructive engagement and dedication. Important
achievements, such as the integration of Kosovo
Serb judges and prosecutors into Kosovo's judicial
system last year, should serve as an inspiration for
further progress.

The developments in the Western Balkans have a
direct influence on the rest of Europe. The European
Union has therefore invested heavily in the stability
and prosperity of that region, both politically and
financially. It is essential that the status issue not
hamper the European perspective for the two countries.
The normalization of Kosovo in an international
context, including its membership in international
organizations, must be allowed to move forward.
We encourage the Government and the opposition of
Kosovo to accelerate work with the necessary reforms,
including the fight against corruption and organized
crime, in order to advance further on the EU path.
The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have
undoubtedly made invaluable contributions to bringing
us to where we are today. Present challenges in Kosovo
are, however, better dealt with in the framework of the
EU integration process, including in close cooperation
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo. The handover of responsibilities from
UNMIK to the local authorities should continue.

UNMIK's efforts should instead be refocused so
that the means deployed by the United Nations are better
tailored to the situation on the ground. To that end, we
would welcome a strategic review of the Mission in due
course. Given the progress made in Kosovo, the current
reporting cycle to the Security Council should also be
adjusted to six months to better reflect the realities on
the ground. That would entail two reports from the
Secretary-General a year.

Since 1999, Sweden has contributed militarily,
economically and politically to the stability and
prosperity of Kosovo. Our political support, which is
also demonstrated through our bilateral development
cooperation, will continue, with a clear focus on
supporting Kosovo's EU integration.

