Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
participates in this debate in the Security Council with a
great sense of pride and commitment: pride, because of
the indomitable spirit of the African people, which has
energized us always, and commitment because we believe
in the cause of peace and development in Africa.

It is in this perspective that Bangladesh
wholeheartedly welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/1998/318 on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. We note with
particular appreciation the outlining of some initiatives by
the Secretary-General which are to be pursued both within
Africa and by the international community with a View to
eliminating the roots of conflict through a variety of
sustained economic and social measures.

We express our satisfaction at the Security Council's
initiative to address an issue of such great import for
international peace, security and development. In this
connection, we note that the Secretary-General has
submitted this report both to the Security Council and to
the General Assembly, and that he intends to involve the
United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, in the formulation and implementation of a
comprehensive set of measures to bring Africa out of the
spiral of conflict and set it on the road to stability and
sustained and equitable growth. This context is important
to my delegation.

We fully share the view expressed by the Secretary-
General that the prevention of conflict begins and ends
with the promotion of human security and human
development. As in other places, conflicts in Africa have
their roots in social discrimination, economic deprivation
and lack of accountability in the use of political power.
At the same time, we believe that the colonial legacy and
its continuation in different forms and manifestations are
still at work to prevent social and political assimilation
and equitable distribution of resources; this foments
tension and conflict within and among nations. There is
little justification for lamenting human and material losses
in conflicts in Africa and elsewhere when the policies of

 

yesteryear contributed to creating irreparable socio-
economic and political divisions in every society, feeding
today's violence.

Prevention is always better than cure. The Secretary-
General has reaffirmed this idea once again in the context
of the African situation. We share his conviction and
therefore support his suggestion that the international
community should encourage the concerned Governments
to seek a political solution of a conflict situation, working
through special mediators and commissioners. We also find
interesting his suggestions in part III of the report for
addressing threats to peace and security in Africa. We note
in particular his emphasis on the need to seek political
solutions to disputes by utilizing the resources of regional
organizations such as the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) under the direction of the United Nations; this is
worth considering.

We would, however, like to reiterate our view that
while we welcome the significant role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping and peacemaking activities,
the primary responsibility of the United Nations in this
regard should not be compromised in any way. In this
context, we would also be happy to know how effectively
the newly created Executive Committee on Peace and
Security is contributing towards harmonizing United
Nations efforts to promote the Organization's goals in this
area.

On sanctions, we believe that further study needs to be
undertaken to make these more focused and effective in
achieving the desired objective without too much collateral
damage. In this connection, suggestions put forward by the
Secretary-General are useful and could be studied in the
context of General Assembly resolution 51/242, entitled
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace".

Peacekeeping remains an essential tool in the hands of
the United Nations to address conflict situations.
Bangladesh, as a leading contributor to peacekeeping efforts
of the Organization, has had its share of service in African
and other missions. We also concur with the view that
peacekeeping is becoming increasingly complex, with
additional responsibilities being added to its mandate. While
we note this emerging trend in peacekeeping efforts, we
believe that due care should be taken not to load
peacekeeping missions with too much responsibility beyond
their agreed jurisdiction. Post-conflict peace-building efforts
should be calibrated carefully, taking into consideration the
distinctive roles of the various organs and agencies of the
United Nations in this function. In particular, the key role
of the General Assembly in the formulation of post-
conflict peace-building activities needs to be recognized.
We believe that an overwhelming consensus exists on this
point.

Violations of humanitarian law and of the sanctity of
the human person, particularly abuses of the rights of
women and children during a conflict, are a major
problem, and we are happy to see the attention paid by
the Secretary-General to these aspects in his report. We
should like to commend him for appointing a Special
Representative for children in armed conflict with a View
to keeping a sustained focus on this issue. We fully
support the idea of making children a "zone of peace"
during any conflict. On human rights abuses in conflict
situations, we note the Secretary-General's proposal to
fund all special human rights missions from assessed
contributions to the Organization. We support the idea
that the rights of all civilians, including relief workers, in
situations of armed conflict should be respected and
protected.

A fair degree of consensus exists these days on the
idea that Governments should be politically accountable
and socially responsible, as well as pro-people, based on
the rule of law and respect for the dignity of the human
person. In this context, we find merit in the Secretary-
General's suggestions in his report on various aspects of
good governance. We believe that non-governmental
organizations can play a complementary role to support
efforts to make Governments more accountable and
responsive.

We also share the View expressed by the Secretary-
General that development is a human right and is central
to the prospects for reducing conflict in Africa. Indeed,
we believe that lack of development is the source of all
conflicts in Africa and that the international community
therefore needs to encourage African countries to focus
on development, with particular emphasis on investing in
the social sector. As the Secretary-General has said,
investment in human resources must be recognized not
merely as a byproduct of economic growth but as a
driving force for development. It is also an essential
component of eliminating poverty, which feeds all
discontent and hatred. Here, we believe that investment in
the education of girls has the most effective return.
Indeed, we have seen in our country how investment in
women's and girls' education and empowerment through
an elaborate network of microcredit and other support
programmes has transformed them into socially
productive resources. We are encouraged to note that

 

during the first ever high-level meeting between the
Economic and Social Council and the Bretton Woods
institutions, held last Saturday here at United Nations
Headquarters, the benefit of social investment as an
essential development tool emerged as a common theme
among the participants.

No domestic efforts can be successful in the
developing countries, in Africa in particular, unless these
are matched by equally robust and positive international
support. In this context, my delegation fully supports the
Secretary-General's call for at least 50 per cent of donor
aid to Africa to be spent there. Likewise, we endorse the
Secretary-General's call to all bilateral creditors to convert
all their remaining bilateral debt owed by the poorest
African countries into grants.

Besides debt support, market access to products from
the less developed African countries is also important, and
in this connection we support the idea of enhanced and
guaranteed access to developed country markets as well as
improved regional South-South cooperation. Indeed,
relatively advanced neighbouring countries could consider
providing market access to products from the African least
developed countries on a non-reciprocal basis. Regional and
subregional integration can also help overcome single-
country handicaps in economic activities. The Secretary-
General's suggestions in this regard deserve serious
consideration.

Bangladesh's commitment to the well-being of our
brothers and sisters in Africa is rooted in a number of
compelling factors. Bangladesh has been a major
contributor in almost all peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations in the African continent. We
have together pursued a similar line of struggle for our
independence and still share similar values of life and
outlook about the contemporary global situation. On the
economic front, most of the African countries are the
members of the group known as the least developed
countries (LDCs), of which Bangladesh has the honour to
serve as the coordinator. We therefore share common
experience and a common goal in our struggle to foster a
stable social order, economic emancipation and political
freedom to make life meaningful to our peoples. Let me
reaffirm our commitment to see a conflict-free Africa
contributing to global peace, security and development in a
meaningful way.

