Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation bids a warm welcome to
President Xanana Gusmao, and we welcome his
important statement. We would also like to thank Mr.
Hasegawa, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his presence at this meeting and for his
briefing.

China is very pleased to note that, thanks to the
outstanding leadership of the President of Timor-Leste,
the situation in the country has remained calm; that the
Government has, step by step, strengthened its capacity
to run the country; that the rule of law has also been
gradually strengthened; and that Timor-Leste's
relations with neighbouring States have also been
enhanced.

Here we would like warmly to congratulate the
Timorese Government and people on the achievements
they have made in their nation-building undertakings. I
should like to express our appreciation to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for its work
in that respect. At the same time, we should realize
also that Timor-Leste, as one of the poorest countries
in the world, has little infrastructure to start with and
that the road towards nation-building has not been
easy. The question of how to continue with the success
story of Timor-Leste is not only the unshirkable
responsibility of the international community but also
merits serious consideration by the Council.

In that respect, I believe that, first, UNOTIL
should, within its remaining mandate, focus more
closely on the transfer of skills and knowledge, with a
View to enhancing capacity-building in the country, and
that it should also continue to cooperate with
international and bilateral partners in the process of
making adequate and careful arrangements aimed at
ensuring the continued functioning of State institutions
following UNOTIL's withdrawal.

Secondly, the Secretary-General points out in his
report that the presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2007 will represent a major challenge to the country.
In that respect, the Timorese Government has asked the
United Nations to consider the establishment of a
special political office to help ensure the successful
holding of the elections.

China expresses its understanding of and
agreement with such a request, and we call on the
Council seriously to consider that request and reach
agreement on the relevant arrangements in a timely
manner so as to ensure the lasting stability and
development of the country.

Thirdly, properly addressing the outstanding
problems with the country's neighbours will not only
create a positive environment for its long-term
development but also contribute significantly to
regional peace and stability.

In that respect, the Timorese leadership under
President Gusmao has demonstrated exceptional
political wisdom and courage by taking strategic
decisions with foresight. We would stress our
admiration and appreciation, and we appeal for the
support and respect of the international community.

In conclusion, I urge donors, the United Nations
system and international financial institutions to
continue to devote attention to Timor-Leste and to
provide it with generous help, so that it can embark on
the path of sustainable development. China will, as
always, support the country in its efforts related to
independence and nation-building. We will develop
trade and economic cooperation with it and continue
our help to the extent of our ability.

