Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency this month. I wish you
the full success that you deserve, and I am certain
that you will play an outstanding role in the Council.
We also thank the Indian delegation for its exemplary
presidency in November.

I wish to begin by thanking Mr. Jamal Benomar
for his interesting and timely presentation and by
commending him for his ongoing work in Yemen.

A year has passed since the signing of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Transition Agreement, putting an
end to nearly 11 months of fighting in Yemen. Since
then, we have seen progress achieved throughout a
fairly complicated transition process that could be
instructive for other countries in a similar situation. We
believe it essential for the transition process to continue
and for the constitutional and electoral reforms to
be concluded. It is also essential that the unity and
democracy process be completed in a framework of
respect for the fundamental rights of all the people.

In that context, we welcome the visit of the Secretary-
General to Yemen last month. We hope that it will give
renewed impetus to the development of policies and
capacities that will contribute to a successful conclusion
of the transition process. In particular, we believe that
the National Dialogue Conference must be launched
as soon as possible, although we also understand that
if it is to meet expectations, it must be appropriately
prepared with the support of all the people of Yemen.

On that point, we warmly welcome the
announcement of the agreement to resolve the
contentious issue of seat assignment for the inclusive
National Dialogue Conference, which is a key element
of Yemen's democratic transition. The agreement
clears the way for the National Dialogue Conference to
be convened by the end of the year. Its results will be
incorporated into the drafting of a constitution by late
2013 that will, in turn, enable general elections to be
held in February 2014.
In our opinion, a vital part of that process is for
all parties to demonstrate mutual respect and to refrain
from using force to achieve their ambitions. They must
demonstrate flexibility in addressing complex issues
and be prepared to accept those compromises that will
form a common denominator to preserve the interests
of all concerned. In addition, we consider efforts to
completely restructure the security sector to be a major
step forward. It is crucial to unify Yemen's armed forces
in order to empower them in the fight against all groups
seeking to destabilize and block the new Government's
efforts to establish a democratic State. In that context,
we commend President Mansour's efforts to achieve a
political transition, which must respond exclusively to
the interests of the Yemeni people.

We oppose and condemn all acts of violence or
terrorism, irrespective of the source, especially those
aimed indiscriminately against civilians. We therefore
urge all groups in Yemen to refrain from provocation and
to cooperate in the due implementation of resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). We also consider it critical
for every individual responsible for violations or abuses
of human rights, including acts of violence, to be held
accountable for their actions.

The problems facing the people of Yemen cannot be
resolved solely by addressing the security situation. All
of the measures to counter poverty and unemployment
must also be implemented. Policies must be adopted to
respond to the social and economic problems that have
made Yemen a fertile ground for social dissatisfaction
and kept the people in unstable economic conditions.
We therefore believe that the results of the meeting
of donor countries are positive. We hope that the
assistance offered will continue to ensure progress in
the transition process.

The Yemeni authorities must continue on the
current path of the transition process. At the same time,
they must work to implement policies to alleviate the
major problems facing their people, especially poverty,
hunger and insecurity.

