Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for his comprehensive briefing today.
Every month he returns to the Security Council to report
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Every month the
situation becomes more acute. The number of people
driven from their homes increases. The number not
knowing where their next meal will come from grows.
And the number of people maimed or killed grows.

We have heard from Mr. O'Brien again today about
the worsening plight ofthe Syrian people: over 6 million
people brutalized, displaced and trapped in Syria in
need of humanitarian assistance, and 5 million people
wrenched from their homes and their loved ones to seek
refuge in the region and beyond - if they survive the
journey. Now they are waiting - in besieged towns and
villages and in refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey - waiting for the assistance they need, waiting
for the war to end and waiting for the moment when
they can begin to rebuild their lives.

Unfortunately, it seems unlikely that their wait
will end soon. As we have heard today, rather than
decreasing, there is increased militarization and
violence on the ground, leading to large numbers of
civilian casualties and more internal displacement.
It seems that humanitarian considerations are wholly
subordinate to military objectives. There continues
to be a complete disregard for the laws of war and
obligations to protect civilians. Cynical military tactics
that blatantly violate international humanitarian law
by deliberately targeting civilians are being used to
gain military advantage, in particular by Government
forces. The upcoming Astana meeting on 3 May offers
an opportunity for the ceasefire guarantors to make
progress on de-escalation. We expect that they will
take that opportunity to deliver. A failure to do so also
threatens progress in the upcoming United Nations-led
talks in Geneva.

While emphasizing that the Syrian regime and
its allies bear the responsibility for the overwhelming
majority of violations of international humanitarian
law in Syria, we also note that recent airstrikes on
Raqqa allegedly led to civilian causalities and struck
civilian infrastructure. That compounds the suffering
of the people in Raqqa, who are already the victims of
senseless torture and murder at the hands of Da'esh. We
urge the international coalition against Da'esh to take
greater care in order to protect civilians in Syria.

The reality for many of those who have been
forced to live under siege for years is that, when the
opportunity does arise to leave, they are cruelly moved
to areas scarcely more safe or stable than those they left.
The United Nations has repeatedly expressed concern
about local agreements preceded by besiegement,
starvation and bombardment, and resulting in the forced
displacement of civilians. That tactic of bombing and
laying siege so as to enable so-called local agreements
must stop. We recall the warning from the Secretary-
General that, under international humanitarian law,
forced displacement may constitute a war crime. We
reiterate his call that any evacuation of civilians must
be safe, voluntary and to a place of their choosing.
We urge parties to ensure the full compliance of any
new local agreements with international humanitarian
law. We encourage the United Nations, other relevant
organizations, and Member States with influence to
intensify dialogue with parties and actors, primarily
the Government of Syria and Russia.

We understand the predicament that local
agreements present for the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies. They are not informed of
the terms, have no access, and the security situation
limits the possibility to be present during subsequent
relocations. However, we must make every effort to
avoid another catastrophe like the one in Al-Rashidin.
Until the fighting stops, we must continue to explore
options for increasing civilian safety by using cameras
or other tools as a form of protective vigilance,
for example.

The deplorable situation for those relocated to Idlib
is of grave concern. Regime air strikes on hospitals and
schools in Idlib must stop. Civilians must be protected
and humanitarian access must be granted. We call
on those with influence over armed groups in Idlib,
including Turkey, to use their influence to counter
restrictions on the ability of humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations to do their work.
Until the situation improves, we might all want to
advocate alternative destinations for civilians, ones
with better protection and access. We encourage the
United Nations to inform the Council in its next report
about the situation in Jarabulus, which is another main
destination area.

We want to take this opportunity to express
our strong support and admiration for the tireless
efforts of the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations to deliver assistance to populations
in need in an extremely challenging context. They
continue to encounter unacceptable obstructions and
barriers to the access they need on a daily basis.

We renew our call on the Syrian regime to grant
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to
all those in need of assistance, including in locations
subject to local agreements. Access is a question of
political will. In many cases, a binary choice exists
between agreeing to provide lifesaving aid to women
and men, boys and girls, or not to do so. We fully
support Japan's call, on behalf of the penholders, on the
Syrian authorities to implement the simplified approval
process of the United Nations.

Let me underline our deep concern about the
deteriorating situation in eastern Ghouta, which we also
raised with the Syrian Permanent Mission earlier this
week. We invite Council members to join us in calling
for a pause in the fighting so as to allow humanitarian
agencies to reach all in need through the routes they
prefer to use, as has been requested by the United
Nations since October. In addition to the well-known
access constraints, particularly to areas besieged by the
Government of Syria, we are also increasingly worried
about new access restrictions such as those now being
imposed in Idlib and by local authorities in Kurdish-
controlled areas.

Every additional day that the people of Syria wait
for assistance and an end to the conflict is an indication
of the failure of the international community and
of the Council to show the courage to take the tough
decisions necessary to put humanitarian needs above
political considerations; of our failure to live up to our
responsibility to protect the people of Syria by ensuring
a ceasefire and respect for international humanitarian
law; of our failure to deliver a peaceful end to the
suffering for the people of Syria. How much longer must
they wait? For many, including thousands of children,
their dreams for the future are already shattered; the
least we can do is give them the support they need to
end the nightmare they are living today.

