Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Cameroon in turn wishes to congratulate Sir
Kieran on his very useful and complete briefing made
at the beginning of this meeting. His briefing gave us a
wealth of information that was particularly valuable at
a time when the Bonn process is being established. The
information has opened up to us prospects for action in
the years to come.

Much progress has been made by the Interim
Authority, and we welcome that fact. We are thinking
in particular of the reopening of schools, the
mobilization and sensitization of the international
community and, especially, the return of refugees. We
also think of all that has been done to improve the
status of women.

The establishment of transparent and democratic
institutions that respect human rights and the dignity of
men and women is clearly the key to any hope for a
return to peace. We commend in this respect the efforts
of the United Nations and Member States such as the
United States, France, the United Kingdom and Turkey
for training elements of the police and the army. We
also welcome the United Nations trust fund that has
been set up for this purpose.
We welcome all of those developments because
we believe that everything possible should be put in
place to ensure security throughout the Afghan
territory. The latest fighting in northern Afghanistan, in
Kunduz province, shows how the rivalries among
warlords continue - and will continue - to be an
irritant of the peace process.

The loya jirga, scheduled for 10-16 June, will
appoint a transitional Government, which is an
indication of how important it will be. We have said
that the necessary conditions need to be present so that
the loya jirga will be free from pressure, with a
composition that reflects the geopolitical and
sociocultural situation of the country. We welcome the
return of the former King, Mohammed Zahir Shah, who
appears to be a guarantee of success for the loya jirga.
That success will depend on the continuing political
normalization in Afghanistan after 23 years of war.

Cameroon has also emphasized that these
problems have been immense - true challenges - and
that the new Afghanistan must confront them. We have
particularly stressed the need for the international
community's assistance in rebuilding a country whose
infrastructure and economy have been dismantled -
and that word is not too strong. That is why the donors
conferences, in particular that held recently in Tokyo,
have inspired much hope and, as the Ambassador of
Guinea said, much enthusiasm.

What we expect today is the materialization of
promises made. Certainly, we agree that the Afghan
Government should act with respect for the Bonn
Agreements. At the same time, we should not establish
any linkage that blocks the fulfilment of promises of
contributions made to the Afghan Government. To do
that would be to deprive the Government of the means
to make itself credible in the eyes of its own people
and would therefore compromise the establishment of
the process envisaged in the Bonn Agreements. We
welcome the commitment of Europe of 15, which is
now the premier contributor of funds to help rebuild
the country. Cameroon reiterates that without such
assistance, the Bonn process runs the risk of being
sorely tested.

Before us is a draft resolution that we will
consider shortly. In particular, it extends the mandate
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
for a period of six months after 20 June 2002.
Naturally, Cameroon fully supports the draft resolution.
The challenge that we face is enormous and daunting.
The other success stories that we have heard here are
not merely signs of encouragement but are guarantees
of our commitment and our willingness to attain the
objectives that we have established in Afghanistan. The
Afghan people have already signalled their
determination to reconcile and to rebuild their country.
They want to do that with the international
community's assistance. They deserve all our
admiration, all our confidence and all our support. As
has been said in other forums, we must support them,
not with words, but with actions and with truth.

