Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first of all to tell you, Sir, how
happy I am to see you among us again, now as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November. I wish you every success in that task. I also
welcome the initiative to hold this open debate; it is
fully justified by the gravity of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular in the occupied territories.

Spain fully endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf of the
European Union.
06-61024

The Middle East is presently undergoing the
worst crisis in years as a direct consequence of the
recent war in Lebanon and the prolonged violence in
the occupied territories. We are gravely concerned
about the growing violence between Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as confrontations among
Palestinians. International peace plans and regional
initiatives are at a standstill, which poses serious risks
for international peace and security.

Nevertheless, precisely because the use of war as
an instrument to resolve conflicts in the region has
been shown to be useless, Spain believes it is urgent
that we commit ourselves to working jointly with
regional actors and the international community in
order to achieve a fair, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The situation
brooks no delay. The opportunity provided by
resolution 1701 (2006) will not last much longer.

We believe that two parallel steps must be carried
out: on the one hand, concrete action in the region to
create an atmosphere more propitious to peace through
short-term and medium-term measures; and, on the
other hand, the promotion of international consensus to
launch a peace initiative that addresses all tracks -
Israeli, Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian - and
includes all actors, in order to overcome the current
deadlock.

Among the first set of measures that are more
short-term and should generate trust among the parties,
we think that the immediate liberation of soldiers and
prisoners and the release of Palestinian tax revenues
retained by Israel should be carried out. Moreover, a
border management system should be established that
makes it possible to harmonize legitimate security
concerns with the need to facilitate the circulation of
goods and persons. In addition, there must be support
for the Palestinian Authority in its efforts to form a
Palestinian Government with which the international
community can fully cooperate.

Let us not forget that without preconditioning the
political process on the security situation, we must put
an immediate end to violence through a commitment
by the parties to refrain from striking out against each
other, with a view to reopening the channels for
dialogue.
7

However, we must be realistic and accept that in
the present circumstances, it is unlikely that the parties
to the conflict will take the initiative. Spain therefore
believes that, in the longer term, peacebuilding will
require the convening of an international conference to
demonstrate political commitment to a renewed peace
process. Here, it would also be necessary to reactivate
the Road Map, and to ensure greater participation by
regional actors in the activities of the Quartet.

Spain believes that the meeting of the
Mediterranean Forum, held on 27 and 28 October 2006
in Alicante, Spain, was a good starting point in efforts
to achieve such a consensus. In the final declaration,
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of delegation
from countries on both sides of the Mediterranean,
members of the Forum, agreed on the elements I have
set out, as well as about the need to set in motion a
renewed multilateral process involving all of the
relevant actors to facilitate negotiations among all the
parties on all the tracks.

Such negotiations must be based on the terms of
reference accepted by all of the parties at the 1991
Madrid Conference and on the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, as well as on clearly defined
parameters on the solution of final status issues. That
set of measures, at the local, regional and international
levels and within a political context that makes it
possible to reconcile the parties, are the way to emerge
from the current deadlock and achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

