Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous and Ambassadors Tanin
and Fedotov for their briefings.

Although we welcome recent developments in
Afghanistan, which give room for cautious optimism,
we remain mindful that it continues to face many
serious challenges. For example, while there is an
encouraging trend of fewer civilian casualties overall,
we are particularly concerned by the increasing trend
towards deliberately targeting civilians.

Like others, we applaud the outcomes of last
month's NATO-International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) Summit in Chicago, which highlighted the clear
progress and reconfirmed the commitment of ISAF
contributors to the transition strategy and to the future
of Afghanistan. New Zealand continues to play its part.
We will provide trainers to the Afghan National Army
Officer Academy from 2013 and contribute financial
support for the Afghan National Security Forces from
2015, targeted at rule-of-law initiatives in Bamyan
province. We will also provide ongoing development
assistance to Afghanistan, focused especially on
Bamyan.

The work to train and sustain the Afghan National
Security Forces is vital. We are pleased that we will
be able to continue contributing to that endeavour
after the end of the ISAF mission. In that regard, we
especially support the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, as it highlights the importance
ofa distinct civilian role for the police. We welcome the
Ministry of Interior's national police plan, prioritizing
community-based policing, strengthening crime
detection and prevention, safeguarding human rights
and combating violence against women and children.
Recent experiences in Bamyan suggest that this work
will be vital to ensuring local populations develop
the necessary trust and respect for their police force.
We also take this opportunity to recognize the United
Nations important work in advocating for accountability
mechanisms within the Afghan security forces.

The forthcoming Tokyo conference will
provide - as many others have noted - another
opportunity for the international community to make
different kinds of commitments to Afghanistan's
long-term sustainability. Over the past decade,
the international community has invested much in
Afghanistan. We now hope that, at Tokyo, Afghanistan
itself will be able to make its own commitments to
ensuring that the international community can continue
to invest in the country's future.

We are pleased that Bamyan is on track to complete
transition later this year. There will nonetheless
continue to be a role for the New Zealand provincial
reconstruction team in the months following the
transition. That role will include the final stages of
mentoring the provincial quick reaction force, securing
the substantive completion of development projects, and
supporting local authorities as they lead the province
into its post-transition future.

The New Zealand provincial reconstruction teams
will then complete its work in Bamyan and withdraw
before the end of 2013, thus modeling the full life
cycle of the transition process, while also fulfilling
our commitment to the people of Bamyan. We are,
however, keenly aware that the many serious challenges
still facing Afghanistan must not be understated or
underplayed, We therefore confirm our commitment to
continuing to work with Afghanistan, its international
partners and the United Nations in meeting these
challenges together.
