Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
22 June to 27 September 2019.

During that period, the Committee met in informal
consultations on 16 August to hear the Panel of Experts
on the Sudan present its interim report. The Panel
informed the Committee that, during the reporting
period from 13 March to 3 August, while there was no
large-scale outbreak of Violence in Darfur, the security
situation there was characterized by localized security
incidents, including intercommunal skirmishes, militia
attacks on civilians, tensions in major internally
displaced persons (IDPs) camps and clashes in Jebel
Marra between the security forces, allied militias and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction (SLA/ AW), as well as Within the SLA/AW itself, in addition
to attacks on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and humanitarian agencies.

The Panel also documented Violations of
international humanitarian law, human rights abuses,
rape and sexual violence against communities in
Darfur, including IDPs. The lack of fully functioning
civilian institutions, such as police forces and courts,
contributed to impunity for human rights violations.

The Darfuri armed groups operating in Libya have
engaged in military operations alongside their Libyan
partners. In the light of developments in Khartoum,
those groups are cautiously weighing their options
regarding their return to Darfur. The presence of
Darfuri armed groups in South Sudan was residual,
since the South Sudanese authorities no longer provide
them with any meaningful support.
The Panel provided a brief update on the situation
in Darfur in its second quarterly report, which the
Committee received on 24 September.

Finally, I would like to update the Council about
my intention to Visit the Sudan. I am liaising with the
Permanent Mission of the Sudan regarding the dates for
the potential Visit.

