Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative in convening this debate under the theme
"United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends". It
confirms Russia's role as a great country that is faithful
and committed to peace and international security. I
also thank the Russian delegation for the concept note
submitted to the Council (S/2014/384, annex). It is
comprehensive and raises important questions that are
relevant to today's debate.

While I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, my delegation wishes to emphasize the
following aspects, which we consider essential and
useful in addressing United Nations peacekeeping
issues.

Dynamic in nature, peacekeeping operations have
gradually evolved from missions with limited mandates
to monitor ceasefires, mainly involving inter-State
conflicts, into complex multidimensional operations,
including military, police, civilian and humanitarian
components and often operating in situations of internal
conflict. These new challenges require extensive
discussion on ways to strengthen peacekeeping
operations and make them more effective and efficient.

In that spirit, Morocco - as an African troop-
contributing country that since 1960 has deployed
Moroccan troops in many operations around the
world, as evidenced by the participation of more than
60,000 of our personnel in 13 peacekeeping operations
deployed in four continents - wishes to contribute
to establishing an ambitious goal that can narrow the
gap between New York and the reality on the ground.
This objective can be achieved only through dialogue,
interaction and collective analysis.

Beyond the basic requirements, any successful
peacekeeping operation, whatever its nature, is linked
to interrelated factors such as realistic mandates
established by the Council; triangular cooperation
among the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries
and the administrative body dealing with the planning
and implementation of the mandates; and proper
exit strategies accompanied by measures to ensure
sustainable development.

All these activities and strategies must continue to
respect the basic principles governing United Nations
peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties,
impartiality, the non-use of force except in legitimate
self-defence, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned, non-interference in
their internal, and the consideration of the specificities
of each situation. Furthermore, and in order to ensure
that peacekeeping operations enjoy every possible
chance of success, it is essential that the Council's
mandates be fully respected by all of the affected
parties when they are implemented on the ground.

Turning now to inter-mission cooperation, my

delegation is convinced ofthe growing relevance ofthat
approach. It led us to organize, during the Moroccan
presidency of the Council in December 2012, a debate
devoted specifically with the topic (see S/PV.6886). The
debate highlighted the full potential of such cooperation
and identified the challenges to be overcome. We
concluded that this tool had many advantages in terms
of optimizing the use of resources and filling logistics
gaps in crisis, but that it should not be considered a
long-term solution to the numerous structural problems
that hinder effective peacekeeping.

Regarding the use of new technologies in
peacekeeping operations and stressing the importance
of the potential contributions of such technologies to
peacekeeping operations, we note that this issue requires
further consideration, given that new technologies are
not always operational. Further consideration of the
use of new technologies is therefore important, as is
consensus on the issue in order to clarify all aspects of
using such technology.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to offer a strong
tribute, on behalf of my country, to the peacekeeping
personnel and operations on the ground, who carry
out a noble mission in often difficult circumstances. I
pay particular tribute to those who risk their lives to
save those others. While hoping that today's debate
will inspire useful ideas leading to specific measures
to improve and enhance peacekeeping operations, I
stress that my country's commitment to peacekeeping
is ongoing and has remained so since its independence.
It reflects an ongoing resolve to enshrine the concept
of international peace and collective security that
underlies the existence of our Organization.
