Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank our eminent briefers for their valuable
contribution to today's discussion.

The establishment of relations with the parties
to a conflict is an essential condition for successful
mediation. To gain their trust and confidence,
relationships must be genuine, and partners must feel
that their interests are truly understood. It is hard to
imagine a more reliable and trustworthy group of
people than the Elders, represented today by Ms. Mary
Robinson, former President of Ireland, and Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, our former Secretary-General. It is indeed an
unusual organization, but thanks to its uniqueness, the
members ofthe Elders may possess a unique opportunity
to have access to decision-makers at the highest levels,
creating a safe space for amplified dialogue. They bring
words of wisdom. Ourjob is to keep an open mind and
not shy away from action.

Conflict prevention and crisis management through
mediation are founding principles of the United Nations,
and we cannot overemphasize their significance to our
work in the Council. We should do everything possible
to further enhance the capacity of our Organization. The
changing nature of conflicts and increasing tensions
in our societies demand that we renew our efforts to
make progress in the area of mediation and conflict
prevention. We should collectively be ready to do more
and to act earlier. That means we have to take a further
step by matching early warning with early action. The
Security Council should be a powerful driving force in

advocating for mediation and prevention efforts at an
early stage.

If we are to achieve sustainable agreements it is
vital to involve all parts of society, from relevant local
actors up to top-level officials. It is also invaluable to
include women and youth from the very early stages in
order to accomplish real change on the ground and give
ownership of the process to those who will eventually
implement it. The entire population has to be involved.

Something that we have underlined many times
during our tenure on the Council and will again
today is that the United Nations cannot always be
expected to fulfil its role alone. We live in a world
of multifaceted challenges to peace and stability that
involve countless numbers of different actors and
dynamics. Regional organizations, individual Member
States and non-governmental entities have important,
at times exceedingly important, contributions to make,
depending on the specific features of the conflicts
in question.

We are not alone in thinking that the United Nations
should further strengthen partnerships to ensure greater
coordination and consistency in the mediation activities
of various actors. With no rigid rules, mediation can
be used flexibly and adjusted to a particular conflict.
It is crucial to ensure that negotiators and mediators
consult civil society, including women's groups, on the
design, implementation, and monitoring of any peace
agreement, and that they guarantee the protection of
women leaders at risk of targeted political violence.
Initiatives led by women have frequently helped to
prevent and mitigate the escalation of violence through
their engagement in constructive dialogue and advocacy
for peace.

The United Nations already has the right tools for
advancing mediation. The Mediation Support Unit, the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers and the
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation all provide
exceptional assistance to countries in need. Due to the
delicate and confidential nature of their job, we often
cannot recognize their work or acknowledge their merits.
I therefore want to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to all those responsible for mediation and
prevention efforts in our system and beyond. I would
particularly like to thank the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts to promote mediation as the most cost-
effective and underrated method of conflict resolution.
It is not without reason that Chapter VI of the Charter
lists negotiation and mediation as important tools that

play a vital role in promoting peace.

In conclusion, I would like to call the Council's
attention to the still unfulfilled calls for establishing
a system to improve the financing of mediation and
prevention efforts. Poland supports those efforts with
donations to the Multi-Year Appeal of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and we encourage
others to do the same.
