We would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like to express our appreciation for the informative and comprehensive briefing by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, on the most recent report of his Office (S/2020/1052, annex) on the political, security and humanitarian situation in the country. South Africa welcomes the progress relating to the holding of elections in the city of Mostar in December after a long hiatus. In this context, it is necessary for the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to speedily appoint the Constitutional Court judges and other entities necessary for the effective functioning of the State and to also ensure that the agreement between the Croat Democratic Union and the Party for Democratic Action holds. We wish to take this opportunity to stress that the continued disagreements between the political parties have negatively impacted the fulfilment of the five objectives and two conditions that must be fulfilled prior to the closure of the Office of the High Representative, established by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, which is disconcerting. In addition, the provocative, divisive and nationalistic rhetoric undermines the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State. Therefore, we call on all parties to respect the rule of law and legal instruments that underpin the political structures of the country, as well as to swiftly undertake steps to harmonize the constitutions of some cantons with the national Constitution. We further call for constructive dialogue among the different ethnic groups and entities, as well as among the various Bosnian structures and the High Representative. South Africa believes that it is only through constructive and inclusive political dialogue that outstanding issues can be resolved and trust established between the sides. Therefore, South Africa encourages all the parties to recommit themselves to the full implementation of their obligations under the existing peace accords, agreements and Security Council resolutions. Political will and national ownership remain essential in moving the process of long-term peace, stability and reconciliation forward. South Africa commends the High Representative for showing restraint in instances where he could have applied his executive powers. We believe that his conduct ensures local ownership of the processes in line with the Peace Implementation Commission for Bosnia and Herzegovina and shows his appreciation of the challenging task at hand. Furthermore, we commend the Office of the High Representative for its support to the District Supervisor in Breko, where key milestones are being recorded, including large-scale infrastructure projects. We also take this opportunity to commend all the stakeholders in their efforts to ensure the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy as an important step towards healing Bosnia and Herzegovina. This signals the aspiration of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to live in enduring peace and stability. In conclusion, it is important that the support of the international community to the people and Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina be sustained over the long term. This is critical to moving the country forward in achieving security and stability both internally and in the broader region.
