Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): | would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their detailed briefings, which keep us informed about the situation in Yemen on a monthly basis. The Niger has been following with great interest the recent developments in the conflict in Yemen, in particular the agreement reached in Switzerland between the Government of Yemen and the Houthis on 27 September, including the exchange of more than 1,000 prisoners. In an entrenched war like the one in Yemen, and in view of the escalation observed in recent months, that agreement, which the Niger welcomes, is the glimmer of hope that we have been waiting for in this conflict of disastrous humanitarian consequences. We commend the parties for having reached an agreement. Through that agreement, the Yemeni parties have shown goodwill and, above all, commitment, which is an encouraging sign. Despite the tensions on the ground, it is a promising step forward that could pave the way for the resumption of the political process and an agreement on a joint ceasefire declaration. Faced with this turning point in the conflict, we must do our utmost to maintain that positive momentum and use every opportunity to silence the weapons, stop the bloodshed and bring the parties to make peace in the country. Only a commitment to a truce will enable the parties to maintain the trust they have built, which remains essential for the resumption of peace talks. In that regard, we call upon regional actors and the members of the Security Council with influence on the parties to the conflict to spare no effort to bring them to honour their commitments made in the Stockholm, Riyadh and, recently, Geneva agreements, and to agree to support the Special Envoy's efforts towards a joint declaration of a national ceasefire so that the Yemeni people can enjoy peace, reconciliation and a return to progress. With regard to the humanitarian situation, my delegation remains concerned about the lack of funding for United Nations agencies in the context of aid programmes that ensure the survival of several million people in Yemen. That lack of international assistance is forcing the United Nations to reduce services in health centres, and even to partially or totally close those facilities. We deplore the continuing obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid and the continued fighting in several localities, including Al-Hudaydah, where most of the humanitarian aid and imported goods pass through. In order to avert the looming disaster, we call on the international community to show greater solidarity with the suffering population of Yemen. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its deep concern about the situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, whose advanced state of disrepair, in conjunction with the delay in inspections and repairs, place Yemen and the countries bordering the Red Sea at imminent risk of an environmental disaster with incalculable consequences, exposing Yemen and the countries bordering the Red Sea. Given the situation, urgent action is needed to avert the worst from coming to pass. We call on the Houthis to honour their commitments and issue the necessary authorizations to the United Nations team in charge of the inspection of the tanker.
