Mr. Yamamoto: Today, I would like to focus on
elections and peace and to touch upon the outcomes of
the Geneva ministerial conference.

First, on elections, on 20 October, an estimated
4 million people in Afghanistan voted in the
parliamentary elections. Next year, the people of
Afghanistan will also make a critical political choice
for their president. Those elections are essential
steps on the path towards firmly establishing a
representative democracy.

It has been almost two months since the
parliamentary elections were held in 33 out of 34
provinces. So far, the results for 29 provinces have
been released. Preliminary results show that 28 per
cent of the newly elected parliamentarians are women,
which is above the quota. We commend the courage
and the strong will of the people of Afghanistan in
having defied the threat of the Taliban to exercise their
fundamental right to vote.

When we look at the elections this year, it is necessary
to realize that the preparations and implementation, as
well as the management of security, were primarily
conducted by the Afghan people, with only assistance
and advice from international experts. Compared to the
elections in 2005, when 550 international experts were
responsible for the implementation of the elections, this
year only about 60 international experts participated
in an advisory capacity. Also, the Government of
Afghanistan bore more costs this year than in the
past. The international contribution decreased from
approximately $140 million in 2014 to $60 million
this year.

In the area of security, the threats were real. There
were more than 108 verified incidents, causing 400
civilian casualties, the largest number of casualties
on a single election day since systematic records were
kept in 2009. At the same time, it must be recognized
that the total number of civilian casualties throughout
the electoral period this year was on a par with that
in 2014. We need to acknowledge the efforts of the
national security forces, which managed the security
primarily themselves this year without the significant
international support that they had in 2014.

However, there were major and avoidable
irregularities by the electoral management bodies in the
preparations and implementation of the parliamentary
elections. It is clear that the electoral institutions need to
make significant improvements before the presidential
election. The irregularities in and mismanagement of
the parliamentary elections will be unacceptable for the
presidential election. We strongly urge the Independent
Election Commission (IEC) and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, as well as the Government, to take all
necessary collective measures and to focus intensively
in the coming months in order to complete the reforms
so that the problems are addressed as they prepare for
the presidential election in 2019. It is more important
to conduct credible elections by allowing for reforms
and sufficient preparations to take place rather than to
conduct the elections without implementing the proper
reforms from the lessons learned. The presidential
election is critical to the future of the country.

As part of our commitment to helping the Afghan
institutions deliver a credible presidential election,
the United Nations, in response to the request by the
President and the Electoral Complaints Commission,
will recommend two international experts be appointed
as non-voting members of the Complaints Commission.
We will also reassess the roles of the international
experts in the IEC and determine if more experts
are necessary.

The Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations co-hosted a ministerial conference in
Geneva on 28 November. Ninety-six countries
and organizations participated. The international
community reconfirmed that it will continue to assist
Afghanistan in achieving self-reliance on the basis
of mutual accountability between its development
partners and the Government. The conference
acknowledged the need for improvements in reforms,
while recognizing the commitment of the Government
to mutual accountability and a genuine reform
agenda, in particular so as to counter corruption. The
importance of the private sector and regional economic
connectivity were underlined. A joint communique and
the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework were
unanimously adopted at the end of the conference.
Another key outcome of the ministerial conference
was the assurance of continued international support
in the post-peace phase. The international community
expressed its commitment to continuing to provide
assistance to Afghanistan in the event that a peace
agreement is reached with the Taliban.

In the past 17 years, the possibility of a negotiated
end to the conflict has never been more real than it is
now. On the Afghan side, a peace plan was presented
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
at the Geneva ministerial conference. A team to
negotiate directly with the Taliban was appointed. A
senior advisory board representing a broader group
of Afghan politicians to support the peace efforts was
also announced. On 9 December, a new head of the
secretariat of the High Peace Council was appointed.
In Geneva, there was a dedicated meeting on peace,
where participants reiterated that all international
efforts, including those by regional actors and
neighbouring States, needed to be in concert and
aligned with the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
efforts. The reiteration of that key consensus is timely
and important, as a number of initiatives are under
way to advance the process. For instance, the United
States Special Representative for Afghanistan has been
actively engaging with the various parties concerned.
On 9 November, a meeting was held in Moscow,
where parties from the region participated to discuss
peace. Many countries in the region, including the
neighbouring States, have also expressed their support
for the peace process, which appears to be emerging.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is also encouraged by such
developments. However, we understand that they are at
a delicate stage, where political space must be allowed
for the main actors to formulate their positions and
determine how to react to the recent developments.
The key next step would be for representatives of the
Government and of the Taliban to meet, or at least to
formally initiate what in mediation is referred to as
talks about talks. We hope that the current momentum
will bring those parties together so that they can begin
to explore how they would address the many agenda
points needed to reach a peaceful settlement.

In this forum, I have frequently spoken of the need
to move from sporadic contacts to structured, formal
talks. Efforts are under way to bring about that change.
While fighting and talking are often a reality in the
initial stages of a peace process, it is also the case
that actions on the battlefield can have an impact on
progress in any peace process. I would therefore urge
all parties to the conflict to carefully consider how
they can reduce the levels of violence, in particular the
harm to civilians. I urge all parties to foster trust and
to enable dialogue to take place. I call on the countries
in the region in particular to contribute to creating
an environment conducive to peace talks, thereby
allowing the people of Afghanistan to resolve their
internal differences through negotiations. By moving
from contacts to talks, we can begin to move from a
logic of war to one focused on opportunities for peace.
With that shift we can begin to envisage the benefits of
a stable Afghanistan in the middle of a region full of
promise and potential for growth, rather than continue
to fear threats emanating from an unstable Afghanistan.
As President Ghani has stated, there is a need to change
the perception of Afghanistan from a site of danger
or a battle ground to a platform of cooperation by
location and strategic perspective. This is a moment
of hope and possibility. Like all such moments, when
adversaries begin to engage with one other, it is also
a moment of risk. For the sake of a peaceful future for
Afghanistan, these opportunities must be fulfilled and
the risks managed.

UNAMA's Human Rights Unit has reported that
there were more than 8,000 civilian casualties from
1 January to 30 September. That is the same level as that
of last year. Child casualties remain high, with 2,136
recorded for the same period. Efforts must be made by
all concerned to reduce the casualties. Almost 60 per
cent of the casualties were caused by suicide attacks
and ground engagements. The increase in the direct
targeting of civilians by anti-Government elements this
year is a concern for us. We also note the significant
increase in civilian casualties from aerial operations.
UNAMA also recorded 1,513 civilian casualties from
suicide and other improvised-explosive-device attacks
claimed by Da'esh/ISIL this year. That is a more than
a three-fold increase for the same period last year.
Given the way in which Da'esh/ISIL has expanded
its influence in other parts of the world, we remain
concerned about the threats from that group.

Before concluding, I need to mention the ongoing
suffering that plagues a large proportion of citizens
in Afghanistan. Despite progress on economic
reforms, the country remains one of the world's
poorest, and it is blighted by climate change. Of most
immediate concern are people struck by drought
and violence, and the suffering of 4.5 million people
needs to be alleviated. The United Nations and its
partners are issuing a humanitarian response plan for
Afghanistan. Approximately $612 million is required
for 2019, and I ask the international community for
its immediate financial support to help people in need
across Afghanistan.

