Mr. Okamura (Japan): I thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his comprehensive briefing. I
also welcome Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku to
the Security Council.

I will also start with the Rio Olympics. The gold
medal in the women's 52 kilogramme judo division,
won by Kosovar athlete Majlinda Kelmendi, was
also one of the most emotional episodes in Japan, not
because Ms. Kelmendi defeated the Japanese contestant
in the semi-finals and the Japanese contestant won the
bronze medal, but because all the Japanese people
were moved by her achievement under such adverse
conditions. And we all congratulated her for her gold
medal wholeheartedly. I believe that gold medal made
history at Kosovo's first Olympics, and Ms. Kelmendi's
victory has sent a strong message of hope to the people
of Kosovo.

The latest report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo gave me the impression that Kosovo
has not yet qualified for a medal in its challenge of
institution building. There were dozens of security
incidents alleged during the reporting period. We do
not see as much significant progress as expected in
Serbia- Kosovo relations. The report of the Secretary-
General, like previous ones, tells us that political
tension remains.
We all know well that much more effort is needed
to resolve a conflict once it erupts than to prevent a
situation from turning into a conflict. Kosovo has
performed well in its endeavours following the conflict,
and is deemed to be a good example and precedent to
follow. I am talking in general terms. In the aftermath
of conflict, the society and community are mostly
devastated - violence is all around, criminality is high,
social justice is not assured, corruption is everywhere,
access to public services is problematic and scarce
and internally displaced persons are unable to return
home. Even though political leaders tell the people that
they are doing their utmost to assure democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, human rights and safety
and security, the people do not trust the Government.
What is the remedy?

At the open debate ofthe Council in July on the issue
of peacebuilding in Africa (see S/PV.7750), our Foreign
Minister Mr. Fumio Kishida, encouraged us to focus on
the significant role played by institution-building. That
message can be also applied to Kosovo. For example, in
order to eradicate violence and terror, the police forces
in communities need to be trained. For enhanced rule of
law and human rights, promoting capacity-building for
legal institutions, courts and other judicial structures
is crucial. As described in the report of the Secretary-
General, we see efforts by the Kosovo authorities in the
area of counter-terrorism.

Then comes the question of how to finance and
sustain the institution-building. We know that Kosovo
remains one of the poorest countries in Europe, largely
reflecting its legacies of conflict. However, I would like
to underline that Kosovo is a country rich in resources.
Kosovo has natural resources. There is a coal mine
and a zinc mine, and zinc appears to be the most
promising sector for export. Agriculture is rich. It not
only provides jobs for approximately 40 per cent of the
population, but also remains a main creator of wealth
through the farming of potatoes. Kosovo potatoes are
of a very good quality. And Kosovo has now started
exporting fruit, including berries, to Europe. It may not
be common knowledge that Kosovo wines are good.
The Kosovo wine industry faced a catastrophic decline
in the 1990s, of course, but it is recovering now.

Again, institution-building matters. Measures such
as taxation, revenue reform and fair welfare distribution
are crucial to economic growth in conflict-affected
countries like Kosovo. Effective tax collection ensures
a sustainable budget and the allocation of national
income to deal with the provision of public services.
In a nutshell, the key to peace and security in Kosovo
is the establishment of robust, functional institutions.

In paragraph 47 of the report of the Secretary-
General, UNMIK

"has provided operational assistance to law
enforcement and judicial entities in Kosovo."

In my View, that sort of assistance is crucial.
I encourage UNMIK to further its efforts in
providing assistance to the Kosovo authorities in
institution-building. It is my hope that Kosovo will be
awarded a gold medal in the area of institution-building
and be capable of standing on its own two feet.

In conclusion, I would like to express my strong
expectation that the Kosovar people, who are well-
qualified and well-equipped, will fulfil that challenge
and thereby shape their own future.

