Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and also to thank his Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi, for his briefing.

The refusal of the Taliban movement to fulfil the
conditions of the anti-terrorist coalition has brought
new suffering to the Afghan people. Hundreds of
thousands have left their homes and joined the millions
who have crossed the borders of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Pakistan and are in camps with insufficient
shelter and inadequate food. With winter approaching
and night-time temperatures below zero, the
humanitarian situation is critical, taking into account
the recent drought that afflicted Afghanistan.

To manage the current humanitarian crisis, the
international community should intensify its efforts to
launch more coordinated humanitarian relief
programmes. We note with great satisfaction that this
issue was raised by Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi
during his recent consultations with the interested
countries. In this respect, we welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to reappoint Ambassador
Brahimi, a well-known political figure and highly
skilled diplomat, as his Special Representative in this
complicated region. My Government is ready to
cooperate with him in fulfilling the important tasks
ahead.

The situation in Afghanistan is changing rapidly
but nevertheless remains complicated, seriously
threatening international peace and security. It is
necessary to ensure that the coalition's operations
remain limited in scope and duration in order to
minimize casualties among innocent civilians.

The people of Afghanistan are extremely
exhausted after more than 20 years of intense conflict.
They want to live in peace and security and to rebuild
their own country. We should give unanimous support
to a country that has endured dramatic and tragic
events for so long. We must help the Afghan people
solve their internal problems and build a government
capable of maintaining stability and peaceful
coexistence with the neighbouring States.

We believe that, in order to find a solution to the
Afghan conflict, the principle of sovereignty and
territorial integrity should be observed. Non-
interference from external forces is one of the
conditions for ensuring that the country can return to a
state of normalcy. My Government believes that the
vital role of resolving the conflict in Afghanistan
should be played by the United Nations and the
Security Council.

The President of the Republic of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbaev, addressing the diplomatic
corps on 9 November 2001, emphasized the urgent
need for a settlement of the situation in Afghanistan.
He shares the view expressed by the Secretary-General
that the Security Council should adopt comprehensive
measures in the political, military, humanitarian and
human rights arenas, the outlines of which were
recommended today by Ambassador Brahimi, and
which are based on a careful diagnosis of the current
situation.

It is imperative that, after the victory over
terrorism, we establish a representative and multi-
ethnic Government and make preparations for the
elections in Afghanistan. The next stage should be the
rehabilitation and construction process. We believe that
one of the keys to stabilizing the situation in
Afghanistan lies in the economic development of the
country.

Kazakhstan calls for a special meeting to consider
the situation in Afghanistan and Central Asia in order
to develop common approaches to the issues of inter-
Afghan settlement and to adopt effective measures.
With the intention of playing an active role in the
reconstruction of Afghanistan, we reaffirm our
proposal to hold in Almaty a round of peace talks
between all the parties involved.

In conclusion, I would again like to emphasize
that the solution of the Afghan problem must serve
peace and stability in the region and that all the
interested parties must act in good faith.

