Mr. Winid (Poland): I thank the President for
organizing this meeting and introducing the issue of
protecting the critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks on the Security Council agenda.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier today,
but I would like to add some comments in my national
capacity. While Poland participated in the Arria Formula
meeting on this topic, organized by the Ukrainian
delegation in November 2016, today we take yet another
opportunity to discuss this topic of utmost importance.

Terrorism poses a growing threat to both national
and international security. It also violates and abuses
human rights, including every basic right to life, and
undermines development. The Security Council has
repeatedly underlined that terrorism constitutes a threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

Threats do not respect borders in today's
globalized world. Terrorists can easily infiltrate our
most vulnerable energy and transportation hubs. It is
recommended that we broaden cooperation within a
wider geographical context. The United Nations is a
proper, or even the best, forum to initiate the discussion
of how to do it.

The protection of critical infrastructure is, first
and foremost, the responsibility of national authorities.
The ultimate condition for achieving that protection is
to have efficient national security systems. However,
there is also space for closer international cooperation.
That results from the fact that the potential threats
are of a transboundary nature and that many useful
lessons learned can be shared among States. In that
context, Poland is ready to share its experiences
with partner countries and to support security-sector
reform programmes.

One good example of such cooperation, which
Poland and Ukraine have initiated, concerns chemical
security, including critical chemical infrastructure.
Projects dedicated to that area have also been developed,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, in the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the European Union (EU) and have been supported
by the Group of Seven's Global Partnership: Chemical
Security Sub-Working Group. The continuation of those
efforts is becoming more and more important, owing
to the fact that many chemical facilities are located in
Ukraine, in particular in Donetsk and Luhansk, the
areas affected by the hostilities and the war imposed on
Ukraine from the outside.

Poland and Ukraine also shared close cooperation
in 2012 when we co-hosted the Union of European
Football Associations European Championship.
That collaboration included, among other things,
the protection of transportation infrastructure and
the provision of the safety and security needed for
organizing mass sporting events.

Let me also highlight the growing role of the
international aspects of critical-infrastructure
protection. Regional organizations, such as the OSCE
and the European Union, have introduced programmes
aimed at structured cooperation and the exchange
of information. For instance, the OSCE framework
includes travellers' security and the protection of
energy infrastructure. The EU cooperation envisages
an air-passengers database, cooperation among border
guards and European Police Office reports. It has been
recommended that cooperation in this area be extended
into a wider geographical context. The role of the
State-private sector link is also quite vital.

Finally, let me welcome resolution 2341 (2017) on
the protection of the critical infrastructure, which was
initiated by Ukraine and adopted this morning with the
co-sponsorship of Poland.

I thank you once again, Sir, for organizing
this meeting.

