Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Council and to ensure it
of our full support. I also thank Togo for its presidency
in February. I thank the Secretary-General and Special
Representative Augustine Mahiga for their presentations
and personal commitment to the stabilization of the
situation in Somalia. I align myself with the statement
to be made on behalf of the European Union.

Political and security developments in Somalia in
recent months have rekindled hope. The international
community and the Somali stakeholders must,
however, ensure that these gains are lasting.

On the security level, the stage is now set for the
Somali Government to regain control of the whole
country. The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) gives
the African Union unprecedented resources to strengthen
its Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), enabling it not only
to better secure the capital but also to combat
Al-Shabaab actively in the territories of southern
Somalia that the terrorist group still controls.

To support these efforts, it is now important for
troop-contributing countries to swiftly mobilize the
authorized troop contingents so they can become
operational and consolidate such recent progress as the
taking of Baidoa by the forces of the Transitional
Federal Government and Ethiopia. Moreover, the
African Union will need to swiftly establish appropriate
command structures to enable effective coordination
among troop-contributing countries. In that respect, we
note with interest the implementation of the strategic
concept and of AMISOM's revised concept of
operations.

Strengthening Transitional Federal Government
forces must also be a priority for AMISOM. In
particular, that will require the speedy establishment of
a chain of command to strengthen the capacity of
action of the Somali national forces that will ultimately
need to ensure the stability of Somalia.

AMISOM. currently relies on critical financial
support from the European Union, which pays the
totality of AMISOM. troop salaries. The members of
the European Union are currently considering the
extent to which that financial support can be stepped
up, given that the Union is already engaged at various
levels in the region and the funds initially earmarked
for AMISOM. will not be enough to cover the costs
incurred by increasing the troop ceiling mandated in
resolution 2036 (2012). It is therefore vital, as stated in
the resolution, that new contributors pledge to join the
European Union in providing financial support.

In the political realm, the steps that were expected
have been taken. The two successive Conferences held
in Garowe enabled us to clarify the institutional
architecture of the future Somali State. All of the
Somali stakeholders made significant progress on key
points of the road map. These efforts will have to be
pursued in order to meet the timelines set out,
including the adoption in May of a draft constitution.
We trust that President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed of
the Transitional Federal Government and all Somali
stakeholders will adhere to that timeline. The Council
has said on many occasions that there can be no new
extension of the transition period.

High priority must now be accorded to the
challenge of establishing local and regional
administrations in regions recovered from Al-Shabaab.
Such administrations will be critical to preventing the
fragmentation of the country and the emergence of new
warlords, as well as to offering basic services to the
civilian population. They will have to support the
Government, the Garowe Principles and the road map.
In that context, we welcome the establishment, at the
London conference of 23 February, of a stability fund
for recovered zones that will complement the political
stabilization of the recovered regions by contributing
to their economic revival.

The support of the United Nations is key to
helping Somali institutions implement the road map.
The relocation of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS) to Mogadishu is vital in that respect.
The bulk of United Nations personnel, however, remain
in Nairobi, and we encourage a more general relocation
to Mogadishu as soon as security conditions permit.

I conclude by addressing the issue of piracy off
the coast of Somalia. This global challenge is being
tackled on an unprecedented scale by the European
Union through Operation Atalanta. Numerous pirates
are arrested by Atalanta vessels every year. It is vital
therefore for the States of the region, above all
Somalia, to assume their responsibilities and establish
the necessary arrangements to allow the legal and
penitentiary processing of these pirates. It is utterly
unacceptable that pirates arrested at great cost should
be released without trial. As the final communique of
the London conference stresses, specialized Somali
courts would satisfy these needs. Furthermore, I stress
the absolute need for Somalia to adopt anti-piracy
legislation, in accordance with the road map.

