Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this morning's open debate on
United Nations peacekeeping. Pakistan's outstanding
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping over many
years is appreciated by all Member States.

As our understanding of the relationship between
security and development has strengthened, we have
responded with increasingly complex mandates that
demand more ofour peacekeepers. In particular, we have
come to recognize that peacekeepers can themselves
be early peacebuilders. But to be effective, they
require clarity from this Council about their roles and
responsibilities, and they require the right equipment,
training and support to fulfil their mandates.

Peacekeepers play three critical roles to support
peacebuilding. First, they help Governments articulate
their peacebuilding objectives, as in Liberia, where
the United Nations Mission in Liberia has supported
the Government in determining security and justice
priorities in a national development strategy that itself
forms the basis for international support.

Secondly, peacekeepers enable the wider
peacebuilding community to work by providing a
secure environment, such as in South Sudan, where
peacekeepers are working to drive security to a local
level to enable others to help others to extend State
authority.

Thirdly, peacekeepers may implement peacebuilding
tasks themselves, as in Cote d'Ivoire, where
peacekeepers have demonstrated that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) have to be
a joint effort. The United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) may have the unique skills necessary
to disarm and demobilize ex-combatants, but others
must be involved from the outset in designing and
implementing successful reintegration programmes.

Peacekeepers' efforts to support peacebuilding are
made vulnerable by two factors: first, a lack ofpolitical
will and, secondly, a deficit in civilian expertise.
The UNOCI DDR programme is limited by a lack of
proactive political will, and the innovative strategy to
extend State authority adopted by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan has yet to
be truly tested, in part because of a lack of civilian
expertise.

The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
agreed upon by the Group of Seven Plus, is a commitment
on the part of the international community to supporting
peacebuilding in a coordinated and transparent manner.
But it is also a firm political commitment on the part
of some Members States to achieving sustainable
development and peace. We support that demonstration
of political will.

Since 2009, the Secretary-General has consistently
identified the need for the United Nations to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for critical
peacebuilding tasks, in particular drawing on capacities
from the global South. But recent figures show that
over 20 per cent of civilian rule of law posts in United
Nations missions remain vacant. This shortfall is
unacceptable and we must deal with it.

Specific innovations are being made. Women
protection advisers will increasingly play a critical
role in preventing further horrific incidences of sexual
violence, in protecting vulnerable populations, and
in promoting the participation of women in peace
settlements and political life. My Foreign Minister is
personally committed to supporting such endeavours,
and we warmly welcome the Secretary-General's call
for greater representation of women in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict and in peacebuilding.
We look forward to discussing his broader proposals
for addressing a shortfall in civilian expertise in the
General Assembly over the coming months.

As conditions change on the ground, peacekeeping
missions will cede their initial comparative advantage
on some tasks to other actors, and the system must
respond accordingly. An integrated response is
particularly important as peacekeeping missions
draw down. To achieve successful transitions from
peacekeeping missions, such as that in Timor-Leste,
we need a well-coordinated United Nations system
that plans strategically from the outset of a mission's
deployment. We look forward to seeing in the next few
months the emerging policy in this area led by Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous.

Today's draft resolution (S/2013/27), the first
of its kind on peacekeeping in more than 10 years,
captures how we have reformed peacekeeping to
meet the challenges of effective peacebuilding. It
further underlines the importance of peacekeepers
in containing, managing and resolving conflict in a
manner coordinated with those that will ultimately
lead to longer-term reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development, and ensure that national authorities are
placed at the centre ofthose efforts. The United Kingdom
is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolution.

I would like once again to thank Pakistan for this
initiative, which recognizes how far we have come and
demonstrates the Council's continued commitment to
peacekeeping as a means, not only to contain conflict,
but also to build peace for all.

