Mr. Antonio: Allow me first of all to congratulate
you, Sir, upon your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month, and for convening
this important and very timely debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his very
insightful briefing.

Today's debate is taking place against the backdrop
of ever-increasing challenges in the area of peace
and security due to the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism. The recent terrorist attacks in many capitals
of the world, which shocked the conscience of the
international community, came as a further illustration
of the magnitude of the challenges at hand. I reiterate
the African Union's strong and unequivocal rejection
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as
well as its strong condemnation of all terrorist acts,
which cannot be justified under any circumstances. I
once again express the continent's solidarity with the
affected countries and victims, whose plight should
be fully acknowledged and addressed. It is also our
strong belief that terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality or civilization.
Likewise, terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggle of peoples under foreign occupation
to achieve their inalienable right to self-determination.

In Africa, terrorism and violent extremism
still represent the most serious threat to peace and
security. This threat has, in the past decade, assumed
greater proportions by expanding geographically and
displaying unprecedented levels of violence in various
parts of the continent. In the face of these challenges,
the African Union (AU) and its regional mechanisms
have remained committed and actively engaged in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
The relevant AU policy organs have articulated a
comprehensive framework for the implementation of
AU and international counter-terrorism instruments
in Africa. The 1999 Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and its 2004 Supplementary
Protocol, as well as the 2002 plan of action and the
establishment of the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism, continue to provide a sound
legal and institutional basis for enhanced cooperation
among member States.

The African Union has also undertaken numerous
capacity-building initiatives to enhance the capacity of
its member States to combat terrorism. The commitment
of the African Union was further demonstrated during
the recent Summit of the AU Peace and Security
Council, held on 29 January, which, among other
things, reviewed the AU efforts against terrorism.
The Summit reaffirmed the continued relevance of the
instruments adopted by the Organization of African
Unity and the AU in past years and called for renewed
efforts to combat extremism and radicalizing religious
interpretations that foster intolerance and violence.

The Summit also agreed to pursue and intensify
efforts to support the establishment of regional
cooperation mechanisms aimed at addressing specific
transnational threats in different parts of the continent.
In that regard, it is worth recalling that a number of
security cooperation mechanisms have already been
established to encourage better coordination and
information exchange among member States, notably
within the frameworks of the Nouakchott Process, the
Sahel Fusion and Liaison Unit, the Djibouti Process
for Eastern Africa, and the Eastern Africa Fusion and
Liaison Unit. In that regard, the progress made on
the ground by the troop-contributing countries to the
African Union Mission in Somalia in the fight against
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab should be acknowledged
and fully supported in every way by the international
community. Any reduction in its resources will have a
very bad impact on the gains realized so far. The recent
operationalization of the African Mechanism for Police
Cooperation will also greatly enhance the continent's
capacity to address the threat posed by terrorism and
transnational organized crime.

With regard to the issue of financing terrorism,
the African Union has frequently expressed its deep
concerns about the reported financial flows coming
from outside the continent in support of terrorist and
extremist groups, and has stressed the importance of
investigating the matter in order to determine the extent
of the problem and make recommendations on how to
address it comprehensively. It should also be noted that
the African Union prohibits the payment of ransoms in
exchange for hostages and requests that such acts be
considered crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the AU to fully shouldering its share
of the responsibility in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. We should also be mindful of the
fact that we all have that responsibility and that we
must act collectively to confront this scourge, which
not only undermines international peace and security
but also the very values and principles that have long
characterized our diverse and democratic societies.

