Mr. Ramazani Baya (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As I address this plenary
meeting of the Security Council, allow me to extend
my congratulations and encouragement to your
country, Madam, and, like the representative who
spoke before me, to highlight the outstanding role
played by the United Republic of Tanzania in the
search for solutions to the conflicts in the Great Lakes
region.

I also wish to express the great appreciation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the initiative
taken by you and the Security Council in organizing
this special meeting on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. We thank the
United Nations for its sustained interest and efforts to
transform the Great Lakes region into a true
community in which confrontation, mistrust, fear and
hatred will give way to peace, trust, solidarity, security,
democracy and development.

Through various follow-up and monitoring
mechanisms and the implementation of resolutions and
recommendations that have led to numerous meetings
on the Great Lakes region - culminating in the Dar
es-Salaam Declaration of 20 November 2004 - we
can say most assuredly that a new awareness is
gradually developing in the region. We welcome the
partnership that has been established between the Great
Lakes States and the international community to find a
new way of living together in our region. That positive
development is due, in part, to the initiatives of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and his
Special Representative, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, whose work
we welcome and support.

That momentum is based on the hope for a new
regional security order, greater economic and
commercial integration, democracy and good
governance, stabilization and improved collective
management of social and humanitarian problems. The
new understanding is to be crowned by the signing this
year of a regional pact for stability, security and
development, but we still have a long way to go. Much
remains to be done, everyone must contribute and each
of our countries must adapt internally and to the rules
of the new peaceful coexistence among States. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, considerable
progress has been made in meeting the commitments
we have undertaken to establish a new domestic
political order and to normalize relations with
neighbouring States.

The electoral process has now reached cruising
speed. Some 25 million citizens have been identified
and registered as voters to participate in the general
elections to be held by June this year. On 18 and 19
December 2005, the Independent Electoral
Commission organized a constitutional referendum
throughout the national territory. The Congolese people
voted overwhelmingly and in accordance with
democratic norms in favour of the draft constitution.

To mark national reconciliation following the
trauma and upheavals caused by years of war, the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Joseph Kabila, following its adoption by
Parliament, on 19 December 2005 enacted a law
providing amnesty for acts of war, political infractions
and crimes of dissent. The electoral law has been under
discussion this month and will be adopted by the two
chambers of Parliament in the near future. The path is
now open for the holding of transparent, democratic
and free elections.

On another front, and in accordance with
commitments undertaken by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we are focusing on strengthening our
domestic security. With the support of the international
community, we have concluded the initial phase of
brassage for troops from the various warring factions
in order to create a restructured and integrated army.
Six integrated brigades are now ready to go to work.
The second phase of brassage has begun and will
result in the training of six additional brigades by the
end of February. By the time the elections are held, the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC) will have 18 integrated brigades. We
understand that the brassage of troops is a long and
slow process and must be pursued long after the
elections are held. I would point out, moreover, that
similar brassage and integration operations have been
undertaken for our country's national police, which
now have professional and well-trained units to
maintain order and ensure the security of goods and
persons.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo understands that, without significantly
improved living conditions for the military and the
police, it will be unable to strengthen security. Action
has therefore been taken to make salary payment
mechanisms more efficient and transparent. They are
no longer under the army's chain of command. The
Government has decided to implement the guidelines
on peace and the distribution of rations to the military
drafted by experts of the European Union mission to
provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform. That series of provisions will improve the
functioning of the army and the police and enable us to
guarantee security in the forthcoming electoral
operations.

In Ituri, the FARDC, in cooperation with troops
from the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), have
successfully launched operations to neutralize the
Congolese militias that remain active in a few pockets
of resistance in the Mahagi and Djugu territories.

In tandem with security operations for the
internal political process, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has also acted in fulfilment of its
commitments to ensuring its neighbours' security. I
note the establishment in Beni, in North Kivu, of an
office of the Ugandan amnesty commission in order to
facilitate the return to Uganda of Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) and National Movement for the
Liberation of Uganda (NALU) combatants. In
December 2005, faced with the refusal of the ADF and
NALU forces to respond to the appeal for voluntary
repatriation through the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme organized by our
Government, the Congolese armed forces, with the
support of MONUC, dismantled their positions in the
North-East Beni communities of Benim-Mbau,
Watalinga and Ruwenzori, and in the Bashu
community in South-West Beni. A cache of arms and
communications equipment was collected and the
FARDC took more than 40 combatants prisoner.

In August and September 2005, in South Kivu
province, 200 combatants of the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), under the command
of Colonel Amani, laid down their weapons and were
repatriated to Rwanda. In the first two weeks of
December 2005, at the initiative of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 149 additional
FDLR combatants led by Colonel Amani were
repatriated to Rwanda, with the assistance of MONUC.
Since the beginning of the year, 150 FDLR combatants
and civilians have been regrouped in the Mulengwe
camp with a view to repatriation.

In North Kivu, dismantling operations were about
to begin when the political/military leadership of the
FDLR requested a delay in order to set an agreement
on modalities for repatriating FDLR elements and ex-
combatants and their dependants.

I would point out that, within the framework of
the Tripartite Plus One Commission that unites
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, as well as Burundi, a unit for the collection
and dissemination of information has been set up in
Kisangani, where shelters are ready.

I cannot close this chapter on security without
referring to the most recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On Monday, 23 January, eight
Blue Helmets from Guatemala were killed in an
ambush in the Garamba Park in the Upper Uele, in the
Eastern Province, when MONUC forces carrying out
search operations encountered some of the armed
groups that are still active in that part of the country.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo once again extends its heartfelt condolences
to the Government of Guatemala, to MONUC and to
the families of those soldiers who fell on the field of
honour serving peace and security in the Congo and in
the Great Lakes region. That tragedy gives our
Government the opportunity to once again welcome the
commitment of MONUC in actions to make that
province safer, side by side with the Congolese armed
forces.

That unfortunate event is painful proof that
MONUC and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are doing everything they can to end the presence of all
armed groups on Congolese soil. We must point out
that, unfortunately, those armed groups still have some
capacity to cause harm and could again bring about a
tragedy like that we mourn today, with the death of the
eight Guatemalan Blue Helmets.

Far from discouraging us, that sort of tragedy can
only further strengthen our determination to eradicate
all the armed groups creating insecurity along the
eastern border of our country. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo will spare no effort to identify
those responsible and to bring them to justice.
Another regrettable event took place during
military skirmishes in North Kivu, in the territory of
Rutshuru, in mid-January. Thanks to the rapid
intervention of the coalition forces of the FARDC and
MONUC, calm has been restored. Without doubt, we
must welcome the cooperation existing today between
MONUC and the FARDC, and their growing capacity
to respond more rapidly to such situations.

Our Government welcomed the publication on
1 November 2005, by the Security Council committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of a list of persons
and entities subject to sanctions for violating the arms
embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
also welcomed resolution 1649 (2005), adopted on
21 December 2005, which provides for the
implementation through 31 July 2006 of individual
sanctions against those responsible for the armed
groups, and which prohibits countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from illegally
exploiting the natural resources of our country. Our
hope is that those resolutions will be strictly
implemented in order to discourage any attempt to
disrupt the transition process taking place in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Although we are aware of the improvement in
relations with neighbouring States, our Government
nonetheless deplores the fact that cooperation remains
insufficient and permits some of those States to
continue to harbour criminals whose extradition the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had requested, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions
and decisions taken during other, regional meetings.
Here we wish once again to request the Security
Council to exert further pressure on those States to
cease, if not their support to the militias, then at least
the understanding and tolerance shown to them.

We welcome the establishment by the United
Nations, on 20 December 2005, of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Our hope is that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will be one of the first and one of the
main beneficiaries.

On 19 December 2005, a page of history was
turned in the Great Lakes region with the ruling by the
International Court of Justice in The Hague
condemning Uganda for military acts against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our Government
welcomes that judgment. Can true reconciliation be
established if we do not mention the evil, if we do not
recognize the errors committed, if we do not shoulder
our responsibilities and if we do not right the wrongs?
We therefore believe that judicial decision, rather than
interfering in the momentum of the new relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda, will instead place our future relations under
the light of the law, and no longer under the influence
of force and weapons.

Concerning development - also one of the main
themes of the present meeting - let me point out that
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have paid a heavy toll for the conflicts that have
troubled the Great Lakes region - as noted, among
others, by the ruling of the International Court of
Justice. Thus, the main Victims should be the main
beneficiaries in the reconstruction efforts in the Great
Lakes region. Our people must clearly see what the end
of the wars, and the negotiations in the region among
the countries of the region and with the international
community, have brought them.

Therefore we reaffirm our hope that the
humanitarian and economic problems will be taken into
consideration in the framework of the fund for regional
reconstruction that has been discussed since Dar es-
Salaam and that should be implemented from the
perspective of the proposed Stability, Security and
Development Pact.

We are aware that the signing of that fundamental
act is of concern to all States in the region, as well as
to our partners. The deferral of the timeline has been
justified. Many countries in the region, in particular
Burundi, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, were occupied with carrying
out their internal electoral processes.

Our Government, taking account of the crucial
time we are going through with the organization of an
historic election, after almost 40 years, does not see the
possibility of preparing for a summit, even if it is held
next June or July. We believe the summit for the
signing of the Pact should take place at the beginning
of September 2006. The Congolese delegation can then
legitimately be present and can commit itself with
other States of the Great Lakes region in that ambitious
project to create a zone of peace, understanding,
cooperation and economic integration from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Indian Ocean. Until then, we must maintain
contact through meetings of this type, and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo commits itself to be present.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the determination of
our Government to pursue the peace and stability
process in the Great Lakes region to the end. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo renews its
commitment to participate in establishing conditions of
peace and security for its people and for the fraternal
peoples of neighbouring States.

As our people prepare to enter fully into the
delicate and crucial period of the voting process to
choose the future leaders of our country's institutions,
we expect of all the neighbouring States an attitude of
active solidarity so that no outside threat of any kind
will disrupt that process.

We reiterate our gratitude to the international
community for the attention and sustained efforts in the
birth of a new era of relations of trust, security and
mutual benefit for the States of the Great Lakes region.
That is something that not only the people of the region
wholeheartedly wish, but the people of the entire
continent as well.

