Mr. Cardi (Italy): Thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict. Let me
also take the opportunity to commend your country's
chairmanship of the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

I join the other speakers in welcoming the launch
of the campaign "Children, not soldiers" by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. I wish also
to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and UNICEF Executive
Director Anthony Lake for their commitment to
defending and promoting the rights of children who are
victims of armed conflicts.

Italy endorses the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

As a constant advocate of greater Security Council
action to address the scourge of children in armed
conflicts, Italy welcomes the progress made in recent
years to strengthen the protection framework. The
resolution presented by Luxembourg and adopted today
(resolution 2143 (2014)), which Italy has sponsored,
confirms that trend. Yet there is still much to be done.
We therefore call on Security Council members to
remain committed to advancing this critical agenda.

Italy concurs with the assessments of the Secretary-
General contained in his report (A/68/267), regarding
increasing deliberate attacks on schools, teachers and
students. We are also concerned about the widespread
use of schools for military purposes, including as torture
sites. By rendering schools legitimate targets of attack,
children and teachers are put at risk and students' right
to an education is denied.

In too many parts of the world, violations against
children are carried out in a climate of impunity.
Impunity undermines the credibility of the protection
system created by the Security Council. The Council
must step up its political engagement in that field.
Cooperation with national and international courts is
crucial. In that regard, Italy recalls that, in cases of
serious crimes of international concern, State parties
to the Rome Statute should consider referring such
cases to the International Criminal Court when national
judicial systems are unwilling or unable to deal with
such situations.

The engagement of the entire United Nations
system is critical to ensuring the implementation
of the architecture developed since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). That is why we commend the
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
in cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and non-governmental organizations, to
develop a comprehensive and systematic training
programme on child protection and child rights for
all peacekeeping personnel - an initiative Italy has
supported since its inception.

I conclude by repeating the call for firm and united
action by the international community and by the
Security Council. We have a solid protection framework
to implement. Any boy or girl whom we save from the
scourge of war represents hope for a better future.

