Mr. Annabi: Since the last briefing provided to
the Security Council by Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on 9
June, last month, the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
have focused on several key areas. At the forefront of
the Mission's agenda has been the ongoing effort to
improve security throughout Kosovo. Special measures
have been taken to enhance and improve security
throughout Kosovo. Special measures have been taken
to enhance security for minority communities, and
UNMIK considers that the situation is showing some
signs of stabilization.

UNMIK also continues to concentrate on the
advancement of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structures process and on ensuring maximum
involvement in that process by all political groups.
Significant progress was achieved here with the return
of the Kosovo Serbs in the Interim Administrative
Council, the IAC, at the end of June. However, this
success has been tempered by the current suspension of
participation of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, the
PDK, in the same body.
Finally, preparations for elections have continued.
In general, registration results have been encouraging,
but the Kosovo Serb community and much of the
Kosovo Turkish population are not participating.

I will now touch on the various aspects of the
situation. I apologize in advance for what will be a
somewhat lengthy briefing, but there have been a
number of significant developments over the last
month.

I will first touch on the political situation.

In the face of escalating violence in late May and
early June, the Serb National Council of Gracanica
(SNC-G) temporarily suspended its participation in the
IAC and the Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC). The
suspension was lifted on 25 June when the SNC-G
voted to resume participation in the Joint Interim
Administration structures institutions for an additional
three months. The decision came in the wake of a
number of concerted steps on the part of the
international community to encourage the SNC-G to
resume its participation.

As part of the agreement concluded with the
SNC-G to resume its participation, on 29 June Bishop
Artemije and Special Representative Kouchner signed
a joint understanding that outlined steps to be taken in
order to further improve the security and living
conditions of the Kosovo Serb population. In reaction,
the Kosovo Albanian community expressed fears that
the implementation of that joint understanding might
lead to a delegation of security powers by UNMIK to
the Kosovo Serb population. Citing similar concerns,
Mr. Thaci decided to freeze his participation in the
IAC, and that of his party, PDK, in the KTC.

The meetings of the IAC and of the KTC at the
end of May and at the beginning of June focused
heavily on the upsurge of violence against Kosovo
Serbs. But both the IAC and the KTC issued statements
condemning in the strongest possible terms what in
many cases appears to be systematic violence against
members of minority communities. The three Kosovo
Albanian members of the IAC - Mr. Thaci,
Mr. Rugova and Mr. Qosja - also issued separate
statements supporting ethnic tolerance. In addition, the
Special Representative, together with the Kosovo
Albanian political leaders, visited the sites of two
egregious attacks against Kosovo Serbs in order to
publicly condemn all ethnically motivated violence.
The day after, the discussions of the IAC and the KTC
focused on the debate over the design of the electoral
system to be used in the proposed municipal elections.

On 8 July, the Special Representative signed the
regulation on the conduct of the municipal elections,
which accepted the central election commission's
recommendations for a proportional system of voting
with open lists of candidates. This was opposed by Mr.
Thaci's PDK party.

On 11 July, the IAC endorsed a draft regulation
on the structure and functions of municipal
administrations throughout Kosovo. The draft
regulation establishes provincial institutions for
democratic and autonomous self-government at the
municipal level and is, in UNMIK's View, an important
step in the progressive transfer of administrative
responsibilities from UNMIK to the local authorities.
The endorsement by the IAC of this draft regulation
came in the absence of Mr. Thaci, who has indicated
that he does not support it. In addition, Mr. Qosja
opposed the draft provision establishing local
community offices.

Despite the recent violence and the general
refusal on the part of the Kosovo Serb community to
engage in the civil registration process, Kosovo Serb
representatives in some municipalities have begun to
participate in recent municipal board meetings. For
example, board meetings in Vitina and Novo Brdo, in
the region of anilane, have been attended by Kosovo
Serb representatives since the end of last month.
However, in the mixed municipalities of the Pristina
region Serb representatives continue to refuse to
participate in the deliberations of the municipal
councils.

Turning to the security situation, the first two
weeks of June witnessed an increase in the frequency
of ethnically motivated attacks, primarily targeting
Kosovo Serbs. Between 31 May and 15 June, a total of
6 Kosovo Serbs were murdered and 10 injured in a
series of attacks. During the second week of this
month, there were also four grenade attacks against
members of the Kosovo Roma community. These
attacks, which took place at Stimlje, in the region of
Prizren, and in Mitrovica, left four Roma injured,
including, regrettably, two children.

UNMIK reports that the number of threats against
non-Serb families residing in northern Mitrovica is on
the rise. UNMIK continues to conduct home visits to
isolated Kosovo Albanian and Slav Muslim families to
identify needs for humanitarian aid, medical services
and security. Minority communities in urban Pristina
and north of the city also continue to report lack of
freedom of movement and access to essential services.
Beginning in the third week of June, Kosovo saw
several incidents of violence and unrest within Kosovo
Serb communities. One such incident took place in
northern Mitrovica on 21 June following the arrest by
UNMIK police of a Kosovo Serb suspected of stoning
a garbage collection truck driven by a Kosovo
Albanian. A crowd quickly formed and became violent
following the arrest, and 11 Kosovo Serbs and 8
UNMIK police officers were injured in the ensuing
fray. Seven vehicles belonging to UNMIK and four
belonging to non-governmental organizations were
damaged or destroyed. In the wake of the incident, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) temporarily suspended most of its
humanitarian activities in northern Mitrovica.

On 23 June, another violent incident took place in
Strpce, in the region of anilane, following the
disappearance of a Kosovo Serb. A well-organized
group of Kosovo Serbs ransacked and vandalized the
UNMIK municipal building in Strpce, targeting the
offices of international employees. The body of the
missing local Serb was later discovered, revealing that
he had been murdered.

In response to this incident and other violent
protests in which the lives of Kosovo Force (KFOR)
soldiers were endangered, KFOR's Multinational East
Brigade suspended protection for convoys entering and
leaving the town on 3 July. However, the suspension
was lifted three days later following the arrest of a
local Kosovo Serb charged with leading the crowd in
the 23 June incident, as well as the issuance of an
announcement by the local community leaders
declaring their readiness to cooperate with KFOR and
UNMIK in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

On 5 July explosions were reported in the Kosovo
Serb village of Velica Hoca, again in the region of
Prizren, Following those explosions, violent protests
erupted in which two United Nations vehicles were
destroyed. Members of the Serb community barricaded
the main road leading into the village. When UNMIK
police and KFOR arrived to investigate, local Kosovo
Serbs put their children on top of the barricades to
prevent KFOR and UNMIK police from proceeding.
The blockade was eventually dismantled and the crowd
dispersed.

A KFOR weapons search, which began on 15
June, resulted in the discovery of two concrete bunkers
filled with a large number of weapons, as well as a
training site close by, near Klecka village in the central
Drenica valley. Another cache of weapons was
discovered on 18 June. One of the bunkers showed
signs of having been recently accessed. The weapons
discovered included a large number of grenades,
mortars, small arms, ammunition and other explosives.
According to documents found at the site of the cache,
the weapons belonged to the former Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). Mr. Ceku, the Commander of the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC), has denied all knowledge of
the weapons caches and stated that it was "good for
Kosovo" that the caches had been discovered. An
investigation into the incident is under way.

In the early morning of 7 July, a violent
altercation occurred in the town of Streoc, in the Pec
region, involving Ramush Haradinaj, a former KLA
commander and founder of the new political party
known as the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo,
several members of the Kosovo Protection Corps,
Sedik Musaj, formerly associated with the Armed
Forces of Kosovo (FARC) and now aligned with the
Democratic League of Kosovo, and possibly other
individuals. Having been wounded in the incident, Mr.
Haradinaj sought medical assistance some hours later
from KFOR and was subsequently transported to the
United States hospital at Camp Bondsteel. It was
determined that his injuries could not be treated in
theatre, and he was evacuated to Landstuhl Regional
Medical Centre in Germany. UNMIK police is
conducting a full investigation with the support of
KFOR. Owing to his medical condition, Mr. Haradinaj
has yet to be interviewed by police investigators, and
UNMIK investigators will travel to Germany to
conduct the interview as soon as it is feasible.

The incident has received extensive coverage in
the local and international press, with widely varying
speculation being put forth regarding the possible
circumstances of this incident. UNMIK has cautioned
all concerned not to prejudge the ongoing extensive
police investigation. An international prosecutor and an
international investigating judge will be assigned to
handle the case.

I should like now to touch on the measures that
have been put in place by UNMIK to improve security.
In response to last month's violence, UNMIK and
KFOR have continued to explore all possible avenues
for improving the security of minorities and increasing
their access to municipal services.

In anilane, UNMIK has been working with
KFOR to assist Kosovo Serbs during the harvesting
period by enhancing security and enabling farmers to
purchase fuel, to which they have had limited access.
In that same region, speed-deterrent obstacles, which
are designed to prevent drive-by shootings, have been
introduced in Kosovo Serb villages and in mixed
villages. In northern Mitrovica, where low-level
harassment of Kosovo Albanians and Bosniacs
continues, the design and implementation of UNMIK
police and KFOR joint security operations has
continued to be refined. A total of 13 local community
officers, whose role is to facilitate the access of
Kosovo minority groups to a full range of municipal
services, have been deployed to this region.

In line with the joint understanding signed
between the Special Representative and Bishop
Artemije, UNMIK police has concentrated in recent
weeks on developing a special security task force
which is designing additional measures to combat
ethnically targeted violence. Its first priority is to
address the threat facing the Kosovo Serb community.
This task force is working in close cooperation with
KFOR to plan measures to enhance the application of
joint security operations.

Emphasis is being placed on building what is
called a partnership for security at the local community
and neighbourhood level. UNMIK police will assist in
educating the local population about crime prevention
and general security practices and will strengthen
information-sharing and cooperation at the local level.
This task force will also develop recommendations for
preventive investigation and law-enforcement
measures, taking into account available UNMIK police
and KFOR resources.

Measures were also enacted by the Special
Representative to curb the threat posed by irresponsible
behaviour on the part of the local media, such as the
publication of inflammatory articles that might
endanger the lives of individuals. Two regulations
designed to govern the licensing and regulation of both
broadcast and print media have been promulgated by
Mr. Kouchner. The regulations include a code of
conduct and provide for sanctions for violations of the
regulations or of the code as well as an appeal process.
The regulation governing print media has already been
used against Dita, following that daily newspaper's
publication of the names of Kosovo Serbs whom it
accused of war crimes.

As regards relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, UNMIK has proposed the establishment of
a Joint Consultative Committee (JCC) in order to
facilitate dialogue on practical problems of mutual
concern with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
terms of reference of this Joint Consultative Committee
are now under intensive discussions between UNMIK
and the Committee for Cooperation of the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in Pristina.
UNMIK believes that the putting in place of the Joint
Consultative Committee will be of considerable
importance, and it plans to focus its consultations
initially within that Committee on concrete issues of
immediate relevance to both sides, such as transport,
communications, postal services, trade, finance,
education and travel. UNMIK is hopeful that this Joint
Consultative Committee will be able to commence
activities shortly.

As regards the situation in southern Serbia, there
have been reports in the last few weeks of an increased
Serbian police presence throughout the ground security
zone, and on 21 June 13 families totalling 103 people
left Ternovci Vogel and crossed into Kosovo. These
newly displaced persons indicated that their flight was
prompted by a fear of reprisals after two elderly Serb
residents in their village were killed by unknown
assailants. Although this displacement was less
dramatic than the internally displaced flows
experienced in February and early March, it does
indicate that the situation in southern Serbia remains
fluid.

I should now like to turn to the election
preparations and to the registration process. The civil
registration process is now coming to a close, and
UNMIK reports that significant progress has been
made in the effort to register the population. As of the
end of last week, as of 7 July, 893,281 applications had
been received. Of these, 100,912 have been reviewed,
and UNMIK has been able to substantiate close to one
third of these cases. The total number of names placed
on the civil registry now stands at 812,644.

The campaign to register "habitual residents" of
Kosovo who are currently living abroad has also met
with marked success. The total number of approved
applications submitted outside Kosovo now stands at
55,352, with an additional 44,824 cases still under
review.

Despite the active participation of the Kosovo
Albanian population in the registration process, the
Kosovo Serb community and much of the Kosovo
Turkish community are continuing to boycott the
process. In the latest of many efforts made by UNMIK,
the Institution Building Pillar of UNMIK organized a
major meeting on 7 July in Leposavic with 42 Kosovo
Serb leaders from all over the province to discuss the
civil registration process and the upcoming elections.
All of the Kosovo Serb representatives present at that
meeting, including those of the SNC-Gracanica, the
SNC-Mitrovica and the Serb National Assembly,
agreed that Kosovo Serbs should not register until such
time as significant progress has been made with respect
to security and the return of Kosovo Serbs to their
homes in Kosovo.

For their part, most Kosovo Turk leaders have
preconditioned their support for the registration process
on a guarantee by UNMIK to reinstate the rights of
their community as set forth in the 1974 federal
constitution. Intensive efforts have been made by
UNMIK to find a compromise solution to this
particular issue, but with little success so far. UNMIK
has proposed a series of measures, many of which go
beyond the guarantees found in international
instruments such as the European Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
and the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities adopted by the United nations General
Assembly. These measures included the use of the
Turkish language on future identification cards and the
translation of all UMNIK regulations into Turkish.
UNMIK is making a special effort in areas where
Kosovo Turks live to keep registration centres open for
longer hours until the end of the registration process.

On 8 July the Special Representative signed into
force Regulation 2000/39 on the municipal elections in
Kosovo. This Regulation establishes the basic
provisions governing the conduct of the upcoming
municipal elections. Under the Regulation, the Special
Representative is given the authority to determine the
date for Kosovo's municipal elections, after
consultation with the Secretary-General. The first
municipal officers elected through these municipal
elections will serve two-year terms. Another important
element aimed at ensuring at even representation of all
segments of Kosovo society is a provision that at least
every third candidate be a woman.

I now turn briefly to humanitarian issues. Since
the beginning of June more than 11,460 persons have
returned to Kosovo voluntarily from various countries
in Western and Central Europe. To date - that is, since
the establishment of UNMIK last year - a total of
some 860,740 individuals have voluntarily returned to
Kosovo, that is, since June 1999.

Forced returns to Kosovo continue on a daily
basis, with more than 1,425 persons sent back during
the month of June and more than 350 returned during
the past week. These returns, mainly from Germany
and Switzerland, have included 50 persons with
criminal records. The high rate of forced returns has
stretched the capacity of the airport and reception
facilities as well as the absorption capacity of the local
public services and the host communities.

Following the creation of the Joint Committee on
Returns in May, a steering committee was established
under the chairmanship of UNHCR. The role of this
steering committee is to conduct joint assessments of
potential return locations, through small teams of
representatives from UNMIK, KFOR and SNC-
Gracanica. Joint assessments have so far been
undertaken for three locations proposed by the SNC-
Gracanica. Progress, particularly in regard to what are
called "go and see visits", has been set back by an
increase in violent attacks against Kosovo Serb
communities. However, the steering committee was
tasked on 29 June with coordinating the first go and see
visits of Kosovo Serbs to the province. The destination
of the visit is to be Slivovo.

A letter to Oliver Ivanovic of the SNC-Mitrovica
was also signed by the members of the Joint
Committee on Returns. It asked him to join the
Committee. However, so far he has not accepted that
offer.

The issue of prisoners and missing persons
remains, of course, a pressing concern for all
communities. On 2 June representatives from the KTC
working group on prisoners and missing persons met
with a delegation of ministers from the European
Parliament. The Kosovo Albanian representatives of
the working group expressed their concern regarding
the situation of Kosovo Albanians who are currently
held in prisons in Serbia proper. Representatives of the
Kosovo Serb community explained that they supported
the release or transfer of Kosovo Albanian detainees
held in Serbia proper.

At its meeting held during the first week of July,
the working group expressed its concern regarding the
treatment of Kosovo Albanians held in the Nis
detention facility, and it officially transmitted this
concern to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

Turning to civil administration, work is
continuing on re-equipping the judicial system.
Bilateral support has played a key role in this effort. In
June, last month, the United States Government
donated a number of quick-start packages consisting of
essential office supplies and equipment. These
packages are being distributed to courts in four
municipalities, and further deliveries are planned for
the near future. The Swiss Government has also
confirmed the provision of 1 million deutsche marks
for Dubrava prison, and the Government of the
Netherlands has agreed to provide and pay for four
correctional officers for leipjan prison.

A further 62 new local recruits have joined the
Kosovo Correctional Service since June. Appointments
to fill the vacant positions of local professional judges
and local lay judges in Kosovo will be approved by the
Special Representative by the end of this month. In the
meantime, to date the Special Representative has
appointed a total of five international judges and three
international prosecutors, who are now serving in the
district courts of Mitrovica, Pristina and anilane.

Since the beginning of March, the Kosovo
Protection Corps has completed some 28 field projects
in which 1,450 of its members have participated. These
projects included refurbishing schools, infrastructure
repair and general cleaning up activities. Thirteen
additional field projects are currently ongoing and
planning for a further 50 projects is under way.

As regards the police component of UNMIK, as
of 8 July it had reached a total strength of 3,895 out of
an authorized strength of 4,718. This number includes
over 700 specialized police officers from six different
specialized police units and two additional specialized
police units are scheduled for deployment within the
next two months.

I would like to say a word about economic
reconstruction. Discussions within the Working Level
Steering Group, including major donors, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank, were held on the Kosovo Consolidated Budget.
The Central Fiscal Authority estimates that there will
be a further requirement of up to DM50 million in
undesignated budgetary support and up to DM7.9
million in designated grants for the Kosovo Protection
Corps activities. No firm commitment on the level of
additional funds was given by the Working Level
Steering Group, but this issue will be considered
further at another review meeting in September.

On revenue collection, last week's revenue
collection from customs, sales taxes and excise duties
stood at DM4.5 million. This was a very good week for
UNMIK, as this total exceeds the weekly target of
DM3 million.
The white paper on enterprise development
strategy has been presented to and received strong
support from representatives of major donors, the
World Bank and the IMF. The first steps in
implementing the strategy in this regard will be to
establish a basic commercial legal framework and an
ownership adjudication tribunal. An agreement for the
lease the Sharra cement factory was signed with
Holderbank, a Swiss investor, on 13 June. The tender
for the lease was the first of its kind in Kosovo.

Turning to utilities, on 20 June, the supervisory
board of the Kosovo Power Company approved the
action plan presented by the electricity company. The
action plan aims at improving the general financial
situation and management of the company. The power
situation in Kosovo has been severe over the past week
due to serious problems with generation capacity at
both power stations. These problems were exacerbated
by low coal production and the temporary absence of
power imports from other countries in the region.

To conclude, I would like to say that UNMIK will
continue in the coming weeks to concentrate on two
pressing issues: first, the security situation and,
secondly, the preparation for the municipal elections.
Members of the Security Council are encouraged to
provide both personnel and political support for the
UNMIK police component. As is clear from the
numbers I have given, international police officers
continue to be needed. Statements of support for ethnic
tolerance and denunciations of violence would also
help to underscore the international community's
abhorrence of continued and targeted attacks on
minorities and the international community.

As regards the municipal elections, Kosovo Serbs
and Kosovo Turks should be encouraged to register, to
participate and to understand that UNMIK is
determined to continue the process of building
democracy and the best possible institutions in Kosovo,
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by this
Council.

