Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on children and armed
conflict (S/2006/826), which was submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005). We also thank
Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their insightful presentations
today. In addition, we thank the Security Council for
its efforts, in cooperation with the relevant United
Nations bodies, to put an end to the suffering of
children in armed conflict, as well as violations and
exploitation perpetrated by parties to conflicts.

Despite the fact that the report acknowledges the
escalation of violence against children in the Middle
East, including in Lebanon, the occupied Palestinian
territory and Israel, which has resulted in thousands of
child victims, mostly as a result of the ceaseless Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and Palestine, the report
makes no reference to any measure taken by the United
Nations to put an end to that shameful situation. To the
contrary, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has not yet had the opportunity to visit
Lebanon and Israel to assess the situation on the
ground and to submit a report to the Working Group of
the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict.
Moreover, no monitoring and reporting mechanism has
been established to monitor the deteriorating situation
there. In contrast, such mechanisms have been
established to follow up on progress made in the seven
other designated conflict areas, despite the fact that the
situations in Palestine and Lebanon figure on the
Security Council's agenda. Those two situations are no
less important than other conflict situations for which
the Council has established monitoring and reporting
mechanisms, although they are not included on its
agenda and are thus outside the Council's purview,
such as the situations in Nepal and Sri Lanka.

Therefore, Egypt stresses the need to give a broad
mandate to the fact-finding mission to be sent to the
Palestinian territory pursuant to General Assembly
resolution A/ES-10/16 - which was adopted at the
Assembly's tenth emergency special session after the
Security Council had failed to take action in that
regard- to prepare a detailed report on violence
against Palestinian children and to determine Israel's
responsibility for the situation. We also call on the
Secretary-General to send his Special Representative to
Lebanon on an urgent mission to report on the
deteriorating situation of Lebanese children as a result
of the most recent Israeli military aggression. We look
forward to receiving detailed information on both
important situations in the next report on children and
armed conflict.

Furthermore, it is urgent that the United Nations
play a significant role in dealing with the ever-growing
number of Iraqi child victims, regardless of whether
they have been victimized as a result of sectarian
violence or of excesses by the multinational force,
whose mandate is regularly extended by the Security
Council. Accordingly, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should undertake a field mission to
Iraq to identify the causes underlying the deteriorating
situation of children there and prepare a separate report
on that subject. In addition, a special mechanism
should be established to ensure that the multinational
force abides by the same code of conduct and moral
standards that apply to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, particularly in dealing with children and
combating their sexual exploitation, abuse, killing or
maiming and all other forms of violence against them,
as detailed in section C of the report. That section
should be expanded to ensure that the multinational
force bears responsibility for all violations its
personnel commit against children in Iraq.

With regard to the preparation and
implementation of action plans to put an end to the
violations committed against children in situations of
armed conflict, which is addressed in part VI of the
report, Egypt would like to stress that the preparation
of such plans should not be left up to the parties
concerned, because that makes implementation a
voluntary matter, undermines the comprehensive
approach required for the implementation of such plans
and fails to attain the desired objectives. In that regard,
despite our appreciation for the achievements
accomplished with regard to the situations in Burundi,
Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Somalia, South Sudan and Uganda,
we must note that the report before us does not refer to
any effective efforts to implement action plans in
Liberia, Myanmar, Palestine or Lebanon and other
areas. That raises questions as to the criteria used for
selecting situations to be addressed.

Here, Egypt would like to highlight the close link
between the elaboration by the United Nations of
effective action plans for conflicts, on the one hand,

and achieving comprehensive political settlements for
those conflicts, on the other, particularly in situations
involving child exploitation. For the Security Council
to ignore the need to achieve a political settlement, to
the extent of using the veto power against draft
resolutions calling on parties to achieve political
settlements, while the United Nations is at the same
time asking those parties to draw up action plans to
protect children, is a contradictory and ineffective
action that defies sound logic. The Security Council
should not proclaim itself the only player and as solely
responsible for children in armed conflict. The report
deals with situations that should be dealt with by the
General Assembly and its Third Committee, not the
Security Council, since such situations are not on the
agenda of the Council and do not constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

Finally, Egypt agrees with the assessment
contained in part VII of the report, on the role and
activities of the child protection advisers, especially
the ideas expressed in paragraph 132 on proposals to
improve their work with the aim of protecting children
in situations of armed conflict, including by adopting
effective policies supported by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and including them in all
peacekeeping mandates.

