Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia): Allow me first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Council
this month and providing such excellent stewardship of
the work of the Security Council. I should like to take
this opportunity to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Georgia, Mr. Dieter Boden, as well as the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General, for their tireless
efforts in the process of achieving a comprehensive
settlement ofthe conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia.

In the words of the Secretary-General, no number
of resolutions or statements can change reality; only
actions can do so. It is important to make sure that the
draft resolution before the Council does not fail that
test. In this context, I should like to make some brief
comments regarding the draft resolution on the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia.

In his most recent report, the Secretary-General
outlined the following essential issues for the peace
process: determining the future status of Abkhazia
within the State of Georgia; the improvement of the
security situation in the zone of conflict; the return of
refugees to the Gali district as a first step towards the
return of all refugees and internally displaced persons;
the economic rehabilitation of Abkhazia; and
confidence-building measures. Indeed, the draft
resolution extensively addresses all these issues.

I should like to take this opportunity to extend
our gratitude to the Government of Ukraine for its
initiative to host, in Yalta, the third meeting on
confidence-building measures. During this meeting, the
Georgians and Abkhazians intend to address important
outstanding issues relating to the settlement of the
conflict, and the success of these discussions will make
an important and timely contribution to the peace
process. However, the introduction of a new
paragraph - paragraph 4 - into the draft resolution's
operative part might jeopardize the upcoming meeting
in Yalta and put the entire peace process on hold.

As we have publicly stated on several occasions,
the draft protocol and the draft agreement on peace and
guarantees referred to in that paragraph are
unacceptable to the Government of Georgia. The draft
agreement on peace and guarantees is dubious in many
respects. It is not referred to in the Secretary-General's
report; neither has its content ever been discussed by
the members of the Security Council. Furthermore, I
am not convinced that paragraph 4, as proposed, should
not be interpreted as exerting Security Council pressure
upon a United Nations Member State to enter into a
peace agreement with a separate region, thus setting a
dangerous precedent from the standpoint of
international law.

The parties to the conflict have already signed
several agreements on renouncing the use of force in
the settlement of the conflict. Therefore, we consider
that the stress should be placed on the necessity of
accelerating work on the issues of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to the Gali
district, the economic rehabilitation of the region and
guarantees ofthe non-resumption of hostilities.

