Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): This public meeting is being held at a
particularly critical time, when the Middle East region
is once again going through a very dangerous and
uncertain period of turbulence. The events of the past
few days provide ample proof of this.

We have just seen the Israeli army use combat
aircraft under the pretext of eliminating a senior
official of Hamas accused of terrorist acts. That
disproportionate reaction led to the death of innocent
civilians, most of them children, in additional to
considerable material damage.

Israel certainly has the right to ensure the security
of its people. However, it must be recognized that the
excessive use of force is totally counterproductive and
can lead only to the opposite of the desired result -
that is to say, an exacerbation of the violence.

This is all the more worrisome because tangible
signs of improvement in the situation had been seen.
President Arafat had undertaken the reorganization of
Palestinian security services, and negotiations were
under way with Hamas officials to reduce tension. All
of this attests to the fact that there is a determination on
the part of the Palestinian side to take the actions that
are necessary to resume dialogue with the Israeli
authorities. The resumption of contacts between the
Palestinian and Israeli security services was part of this
ongoing process.

In addition, my delegation would like to recall
that the meeting of the "quartet" held on 16 July in
New York with the participation of high-level
representatives of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan
came out staunchly in support of a definitive solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict within a three-year
time frame, leading to two States living side by side
within secure and recognized borders.

These initiatives, which follow on the heels of
many others, attest to the fact that the international
community, far from sitting idly by, is resolved to put
an end to the suffering, which has gone on for far too
long.

Against this backdrop, we must once again send a
strong signal to the protagonists, so that they will
understand that the only honourable way out is mutual
acceptance and the establishment of a climate of trust
conducive to a negotiated peace based on compliance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

