Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Peru on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. The
United States stands ready to support you in every way
possible. I thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.

We often talk about chemical weapons. However, I
am concerned that we sometimes lose sight ofthe human
side of those attacks. I want to begin by providing some
insight into what such attacks are like for the people
actually on the ground who experience them. We have
two different accounts. This is the first account:

"Something hit me on the head I was dazed,
knocked down I got several breathes [sic] of the
strong solution right from the shell My eyes were
running water and burning, so was my nose, and
I could hardly breathe. I gasped, choked and felt
the extreme terror of a man who goes under in
the water."

This is the second account:

"The situation is more desperate than I can
describe. There are no words. It was like Judgment
Day - the apocalypse. You just cannot even
describe the scene. You cannot even begin to
scratch the surface of explaining what happened.
We did not have any protective equipment for gas."

The first account is from the diary of an American
soldier, Stull Holt. He was gassed on the First World
War battlefield Verdun, France, in 1917. The second
account comes from a doctor named Mamoun Morad.
On 4 April 2017, he was one of the only doctors on duty
in the small Syrian town of Khan Shaykhun. A hundred
years had passed between what Lieutenant Holt and
Dr. Morad experienced, but the horror and the terror of
experiencing the use of chemical weapons are exactly
the same.

Chemical weapons were first used in the First
World War. However, over the decades that followed,
an international consensus grew. The world saw the
unique destructive power of such weapons and rightly
turned away in disgust. As early as in 1925, the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods ofWarfare banned the use ofchemical weapons
in armed conflict. Decades later, the Chemical Weapons
Convention banned their production, stockpiling and
use. It was an unambiguous ban. We dared to believe
that one day, chemical weapons would be something
that we would only read about in history books. We
dared to believe that we could banish the threat forever.

Then came Syria. The Al-Assad regime used
chemical weapons against its own people. In 2013, the
world reacted with horror at the pictures of hundreds
of men, women and children dead as a result of the
regime's use of sarin on the outskirts of Damascus.
Although we disagreed about almost every aspect of
the war, we once again found consensus on chemical
weapons. Our shared disgust led us to act together.
In 2013, we adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
mandated the destruction of the Al-Assad regime's
arsenal ofchemical weapons. In 2015, we established the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism so that
we could identify anyone who used chemical weapons
in Syria. The United Nations found definitively that the
Al-Assad regime, as well as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, had been responsible for such use.

Once again, we dared to believe that, despite all
our differences over Syria, the consensus against the
use of chemical weapons by anyone would persist. Of
course, we know what happened next. The Al-Assad
regime continued to use chemical weapons against the
Syrian people. One member of the Council shielded
the Al-Assad regime from any consequences, and then
prevented us from renewing the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Our consensus broke down.

Today, the world is a far more dangerous place
because of that. The Al-Assad regime continues to drop
chlorine bombs on innocent men, women and children.
In only the past few weeks, when the regime seized
eastern Ghouta, there were credible reports of chlorine
gas attacks. It is a sad fact that just a few years ago, a
single chemical weapons attack would have united us
in shock and anger. That would have been enough for
us to take immediate action. We now have a regime that
uses chemical weapons practically every second week.

Our lack of action has consequences. When we let
one regime off the hook, others take notice. The use
of nerve agents in Salisbury and in Kuala Lumpur is
testament to that point and reveals a dangerous trend.
We are rapidly sliding backwards and moving back into
a world that we thought we had left. No one wants to
live in a world where chemical weapons are used. No
one wants to live in fear that a colourless and shapeless
gas will suddenly seep into their lungs and leave them
gasping for air. If we do not act and do not stop and
change the course, that is the world that we could be
fast approaching.

Even as the Security Council has remained
deadlocked, some have stood up to demand
accountability for the use of chemical weapons. The
General Assembly overwhelmingly endorsed the
establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which is
collecting evidence for future prosecutions. The United
States also fully supports the International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons,
initiated by France. Such efforts are vital.

However, we must not forget that, while we sit
here debating chemical weapons, there are people on
the front lines in Syria who face the terrifying reality
of those heinous weapons. Dr. Mamoun Morad, whom
I mentioned earlier, is among them. A year ago, he
was on duty in Khan Shaykhun, where the Al-Assad
regime used sarin gas in an attack that killed nearly 100
people and injured more than 500 others. Dr. Morad is
a humanitarian. He saw that his countrymen were in
need. He risked everything, including his own life, to
help save others.
Dr. Morad is no stranger to working under the
toughest circumstances. In 2015, the hospital where
he worked was struck by a missile. Nevertheless, he
continued to save lives. In 2016, Dr. Morad ran out
through the door of a hospital hit by an airstrike only to
see the building completely destroyed by another strike
moments later. Nevertheless, he continued to save
lives. In 2017, a missile struck the entrance of the clinic
where he worked. He was hit by debris. Nevertheless,
he continued to save lives. On 4 April 2017, just
after leaving the town's hospital, Dr. Morad saw the
warplanes over Khan Shaykhun. He did what he had
always done - he told his driver to turn around and to
go back. What Dr. Morad saw was a living hell - one
victim of the sarin attack after another kept arriving.
He recalled:

"A boy arrived gasping for breath, with foam
coming out of his mouth and with pinpoint pupils.
We washed the boy. We washed and we washed and
we washed. We gave him what treatment we could,
and tried to resuscitate him, but he did not make it."

Even as he felt himself being contaminated by
sarin, Dr. Morad did not stop. He was just one person,
with almost no staff. The hospital had almost no
medicine. Much of what was left had expired years ago.
However, Dr. Morad did not stop. He did whatever he
could to revive the unconscious and to clean off the
toxic chemicals from their bodies before they died. He
never ceased trying to save lives. Dr. Morad is a hero.
He has made the journey to be with us today. I ask him
to stand up.

We salute Dr. Morad for his bravery, courage and
determination to help any Syrian who is in need. Dr.
Morad is here today to be an inspiration to all of us. He
works to save the lives of the Syrian people even after
living through missile attacks and air strikes - even
after being gassed at Khan Shaykhun. Dr. Morad does
not stop; he does not give up. And if he is not going to
stop, we must not stop. We must not stop working to rid
this world of chemical weapons and holding to account
anyone anywhere who uses them.

We have done this before. We have committed to a
world without chemical weapons. We have signed the
treaties banning them. We have destroyed stockpiles.
We have launched truly independent and impartial
investigations to know who is responsible for using
them. As Dr. Morad once said, "I do not care about
politics". What he wants is for the world to speak out
about the suffering of the Syrian people and for us to do
our jobs and make the suffering stop. We owe him and
the Syrian people that much.

On 4 April 2017, the people of Khan Shaykhun
suffered an unspeakable tragedy. On this day, 4 April
2018, let us reflect on this tragedy. Let us remember
what Dr. Morad witnessed, and let us use this meeting
as the start of a renewed partnership and a renewed
commitment to putting an end to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We have done it before. Even with all
of the profound divisions on the Security Council, the
United States refuses to believe that we cannot come
together once again to stop chemical weapons, not just
to protect the Syrian people but to protect us all.

