Mr. Bliss (Australia): I thank Presidents Meron
and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for
their briefings today. I also thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate, which provides
us with an opportunity to reflect on the contribution
to peace and security made by international criminal
justice in general, and more particularly on the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

We welcome the progress made by the three
bodies in relation to their respective mandates in the
latest reporting period. Achievements include the
successful launch of The Hague branch of the Residual
Mechanism on 1 July, good progress in transferring
the ICTR's archives to the Mechanism, the delivery
of five judgements by the ICTY and the signing of a
host-State agreement between the United Nations and
the Government of Tanzania for the Arusha branch
of the Mechanism. We also welcome the fact that the
ICTY will shortly be returned to its full complement
of judges.

As the reports before us and today's briefings make
clear, the work of the ad hoc Tribunals is not yet done
and will clearly extend beyond 2014. Key trials and
appeals remain before the ICTY. The last appeal before
the ICTR is still to be finalized. Victims and witnesses
require ongoing protection. Fugitives from the ICTR
must be found and apprehended. The ongoing support
and cooperation of the international community is
therefore essential to the successful completion of the
work.

The Council must also play its role in addressing
the challenges that remain before the ICTY and the
ICTR. Specifically, Australia considers it necessary for
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to give further consideration to how the Council can
support the ICTR's efforts to relocate the 10 acquitted
and released persons currently in Tanzania, some of
whom, as we have heard, have been effectively confined
to safe houses in Arusha for over 10 years.

In light of the impending closure of the ICTR,
the time has come to elevate diplomatic and political
efforts to identify a solution and we urge all Member
States to enhance their cooperation with the ICTR on
that critical matter. We also consider it imperative that
the Council renew those mandates of ICTY judges
that will shortly expire, in accordance with the request
made by President Meron, in order to ensure that the
ICTY's remaining cases can be concluded as efficiently
as possible.

Much has been said about the achievements of
the ad hoc Tribunals and the legacy that the Residual
Mechanism has been established to preserve. It is no

overstatement to say that the work of the ICTY and the
ICTR has been ground-breaking. Most obviously, the
Tribunals have played a major role in the development
of our understanding of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. But beyond that, the Tribunals
have won the cooperation of States that is necessary to
conduct investigations, obtain evidence, and arrest and
transfer indictees to Arusha and The Hague. They have
developed rules ofprocedure and evidence, constructed
legal aid systems, and found solutions for how and
where their sentences could be enforced. And they have
developed the means to protect victims and witnesses
in order to encourage them to let their voices be heard.

The Tribunals have also shared both evidence and
experience with national courts. In doing so, they have
helped to foster the type of national accountability
processes that are essential to truly ending impunity,
and in that way have made a major contribution to
strengthening the rule of law. It is crucial that the
experience of the Tribunals be shared and their legacy
promoted. To that end, Australia is pleased to be
supporting the ICTR's international workshop on sexual
and gender-based violence, to be held, as we heard
earlier, in Kampala in January 2014. The workshop
is aimed at sharing international best practices in the
investigation and prosecution of sexual Violence.

Twenty years ago, the Security Council breathed
life into the international community's wish that those
alleged to be responsible for serious international
crimes be held to account. The Council's power to
refer situations to the International Criminal Court
underscores the fact that it remains a key player in
accountability matters. As the work of the ad hoc
Tribunals winds down, it is more important than ever
that the Council fulfil its responsibilities regarding
ending impunity, including by providing ongoing
political and diplomatic support to the International
Criminal Court. Otherwise we will be failing to live up
to the vision that the Council established 20 years ago.

Finally, we wish to recognize and thank Guatemala,
Ambassador Rosenthal and his entire team for their
outstanding leadership of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals over the past two years.

