Ms. O'Brien: I am delighted that the Secretary-
General is here this morning, and I am honoured to

have this opportunity to present this report
(S/2010/394) on his behalf.

Before introducing the report, I wish to endorse
the views expressed here this morning by the
Secretary-General. He has painted a very clear and
stark picture of the situation off the coast of Somalia
and the wider implications of piracy in the region.

As many of us know, the Secretary-General has
been consistently advocating for the international
community to counter piracy and to respond in the
most coherent way possible. The Secretary-General has
never shied away from the problem despite the
complexity and the challenges it poses. He has pressed
the United Nations and other international
organizations to do more to contribute to a solution. He
takes every opportunity he can at internal senior
management meetings to maintain momentum. In my
own case, he dispatched me on a mission to Kenya as
far back as March of last year to discuss the issue with
the Kenyan authorities and to engage with the United
Nations offices active on the ground. Additionally, he
strongly supported the informal meeting of the General
Assembly on piracy in May this year, and he ensured
that piracy was an important part of the discussion at
the United Nations Istanbul Conference on Somalia in
May.

For my Office, the piracy dossier is an active and
important one, as it should be. The human cost of
piracy off the coast of Somalia is incalculable, with
killings and widespread hostage-taking of sailors
whose daily jobs are already filled with risk. The
10-49378
commercial cost is also very high. The problem clearly
demonstrates the increasing interdependence of States
and people in a globalized world. The number and
diversity of States and organizations with a stake in
finding a solution provide strong evidence of this, with
human welfare and commercial and security interests
under threat.

Against this background, the Secretary-General's
seven options are a very timely and important basis for
Security Council consideration. The report has had
input from my Office, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Department of
Political Affairs, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations offices.
In responding to the Security Council's request in
resolution 1918 (2010), we have taken into account
United Nations practice in establishing and assisting
criminal tribunals, experience from non-United Nations
tribunals such as the War Crimes Chamber of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and the work of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

I hope the Security Council will find it useful if I,
in introducing the report, briefly set out the
international legal framework applicable to piracy. I
believe that this legal context is instructive and that it
provides an important backdrop for the options
identified in the report, which I will then describe in a
little more detail.

The legal framework for the repression of piracy
under international law is set out in the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which also
reflects customary international law. Other instruments,
such as the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation - the SUA Convention - may also be
relevant to combating piracy, since some elements of
the act of piracy may also constitute offences under
such instruments.

In the context of Somalia, the legal regime is
complemented by a number of Security Council
resolutions. The Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning
the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of
Aden is also an important vehicle for cooperation
among regional States.

Piracy, as defined in the Convention on the Law
of the Sea, includes any illegal act of violence,
detention or depredation committed for private ends by
10-49378
the crew or passengers of a private ship against another
ship or persons or property on board that ship. It is a
crime that can only be committed on the high seas or in
the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of a State. In other
words, it is committed outside the territorial sea.

The Convention on the Law of the Sea and
customary international law provide for universal
jurisdiction over acts of piracy. That is, all States are
entitled to exercise criminal jurisdiction over acts of
piracy, no matter where they occur and no matter what
the nationality of the suspect or the victim. No
connection between the prosecuting State and the act of
piracy is required. It is the broadest possible legal basis
for States to exercise jurisdiction under international
law. Any State may seize a pirate ship or a ship under
the control of pirates, any State may arrest the suspects
and any State may prosecute them.

On the other hand, the crimes of armed robbery at
sea or armed robbery against ships have the same
elements as piracy but are committed within the
territorial sea of a State. Those crimes are generally
within the jurisdiction only of the territorial State,
although this regime has been modified to an extent
with respect to piracy occurring within the territorial
sea of Somalia by a series of resolutions of this body.

In the repression of piracy, States remain bound
by other applicable rules of international law. Clearly,
apprehension, detention, prosecution and imprisonment
must all take place in accordance with a State's
international human rights and other obligations.

The Secretary-General has identified seven
options for furthering the aim of prosecuting and
imprisoning persons responsible for acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. Before describing these options,
I should underline some of the important preliminary
matters that the Secretary-General identified in the
introduction to his report.

First, in the absence of a host State for a potential
judicial mechanism, the report analyses the options in a
general way, setting out the advantages and
disadvantages of each, as well as information related to
the time and resources necessary to achieve and sustain
substantive results. To assess the feasibility of any of
these options would require dialogue with an identified
host State to determine its wishes and needs, and to
determine what form United Nations participation
could most effectively take.
5

Second, given the large number of suspects being
detained at sea by naval forces, it is clear that putting
in place adequate prison arrangements is equally as
important as considering the options for prosecution. It
is only fair to say that the potential size of the piracy-
related prison population and the fact that most of the
suspects are not nationals of the prosecuting States
contribute to the difficulties associated with finding a
potential host State.

Third, the Council's request emphasizes the
important goal of achieving and sustaining substantive
results. The challenges in achieving this goal include
the large number of suspects, the fact that any judicial
mechanism would be addressing a symptom of the
situation in Somalia, not its causes, and the lack of any
defined completion date for the mechanism's work. It
is for these reasons that sufficient political and
financial commitment by States would be necessary not
only to establish a new mechanism but also to sustain
it.

Turning to the options set out in the report, the
first is one that is already ongoing through the work of
UNODC, UNDP and others to assist prosecutions and
imprisonment in regional States. In the report we
identify a number of actions which the Security
Council may wish to consider to enhance the important
role that the United Nations is already playing.

Option 2 draws on the example of the Lockerbie
court. That is, it would involve the establishment of a
Somali court applying Somali law, sitting in the
territory of another regional State. That would certainly
require assistance from UNODC and others and would
enable Somalia to play a direct part in efforts to
counter piracy. However, as underlined in discussions
in the Working Group on legal issues of the Contact
Group, the Somali judicial system faces a number of
challenges, and this option may therefore be one for
the future rather than the present.

Options 3 and 4 involve special chambers
embedded in a national jurisdiction. The distinction is
that Option 3 would be a purely national court,
whereas Option 4 would be a national court with
international participation, perhaps in the form of
judges selected by the United Nations sitting with
national judges.

Option 5 would consist of a regional tribunal and
therefore would not be embedded within the national
jurisdiction of a State. This would be a new jurisdiction
6
requiring an agreement or statute to establish the
crimes. What is not clear, of course, is whether a group
of regional States cooperating to establish such a
tribunal would want or need United Nations assistance
or participation by United Nations-selected judges.

Option 6 would be a tribunal on the lines of the
Sierra Leone and Lebanon tribunals. That is, it would
be an international tribunal with participation by
national judges and prosecutors. This option perhaps
demonstrates most clearly why the report says that any
of the judicial mechanisms identified would be
different from the existing tribunals.

The Sierra Leone and Lebanon tribunals were
established by the United Nations in partnership with
the affected States. In other words, those tribunals were
established with the States that had been affected by
serious international crimes and acts of terrorism but
were unable to prosecute them nationally. We need to
bear in mind that a tribunal established under option 6,
or indeed under any of the options in the report, would
not address the situation in Somalia other than with
respect to piracy and would thus not be analogous to
the existing tribunals.

Option 7 would involve the establishment by the
Security Council of an international tribunal under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Important
questions under this option would include whether
such tribunal should be established in the region and
Whether it should include regional judges to the extent
possible.

Finally, a brief word about the process. Any of
these options that involves the establishment of a new
judicial mechanism with United Nations participation
would require a mandate for the Secretary-General.
Such a mandate has usually been given in the form of a
Security Council resolution requesting the Secretary-
General to negotiate a suitable agreement with the
State concerned. That has been followed by
negotiations conducted by the Legal Counsel on behalf
of the Secretary-General and by a report to the Security
Council setting out the recommended judicial
mechanism. In the case of a Chapter VII resolution, the
Council would, of course, establish the tribunal
directly itself and would request the Secretary-General
to take the necessary steps for the tribunal to function.

I am looking forward to the debate and would be
happy to take any questions.
10-49378
