Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. We
welcome the confirmation by the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) that the Secretariat has verified the
destruction of all 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities declared by the Syrian Government. As the
Secretary-General states in his letter,

"the long-awaited completion of the issue constitutes
an important step towards the full implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013)" (S/2018/804, p. I).

We understand that the OPCW has continued its
endeavours to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Government. We
also note that the OPCW is still analysing the response
of the Syrian Government regarding the outstanding
issues. While we await the report, we reiterate that all
remaining matters should be resolved through continued
and more productive communications between the
Syrian Government and the OPCW.

After its interim report on the alleged use of
chemical weapons in Douma, we note that the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(FFM) has continued to collect and analyse information
related to the incident. We stress that all parties should
cooperate with the FFM. in its investigative work. In
that regard, we look forward to the final report of the
FFM. In addition, we note that the FFM. is currently
translating and analysing the documents it requested
and received from the Syrian Government with regard
to four incidents.

Our positions on the use of chemical weapons are
well known. We strongly condemn any use of chemical
weapons by any actor - State or non-State - under
any circumstances. There cannot be any justification
for using chemicals as weapons. Their use is a threat
to international peace and security and endangers
the global non-proliferation system. Those who use
chemical weapons must be identified, based on robust
evidence, and held accountable. We still believe that
the unity of the Security Council is vital in that regard.
Acting together, according to the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council relevant
resolutions, we believe, is the best and most sustainable
way to discourage and stop the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and elsewhere.

