Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to start by commending in particular the participation
in this meeting of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and of the Vice-President of the United States.

The briefers, whom I wish to thank, painted a picture
that is absolutely clear. Venezuela has been plunged
into the worst humanitarian crisis in its history. The
crisis, which is massive and systemic, is having major
consequences across the American continent. Contrary
to what we are going to hear, there is no so-called
foreign plot behind the chaos. The Venezuelan regime
is the sole and only culprit ofthis tragic situation, which
has recently deteriorated even further owing to the
large-scale breakdown of the electrical-supply system,
followed by a water-service interruption.

But the Venezuelan people have not yet seen the
worst of it. Increased indicators of deterioration, such
as those measuring poverty, violence and mortality,
might be only the prelude to an even deeper crisis
unless something is done to ease the suffering of the
Venezuelan people and move towards a political and
peaceful solution. The question that we should be
considering together is: how can we reverse the tragic
dynamic that is under way?

I will therefore focus on three urgent,
complementary matters.

The first urgent issue is the need to ensure
and facilitate access by humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations, while fully respecting
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. Indeed, the outer limits of cruelty
seem to constantly be pushed outward, seeing that the
regime's allies are prepared to divert humanitarian
assistance. Political instrumentalization, whatever its
source, should be condemned in every case.

The position taken by the Venezuelan regime of
denying the existence of a humanitarian crisis and
restricting access by humanitarian actors is taking an
increasingly high toll in terms of human life. I will
simply mention the impact of the breakdown of the
health-care system on the most vulnerable people, as
well as increasing malnutrition and higher mortality.

France's position has been clear since the beginning
of this tragedy. We stand shoulder to shoulder with the
Venezuelan people. France, in its national capacity and
through the European Union, has a prepared a response
that is commensurate with the scale of the crisis. The
European Union announced on 27 March an additional
€50 million in humanitarian assistance in Venezuela.

It is equally urgent to provide assistance to the
more than 3 million Venezuelans who have had to
take the path of exile owing to the chaos and violence.
I welcome the measures taken by all the countries of
the region, whose solidarity has been exemplary, in
particular Columbia, which is shouldering the heaviest
burden, with some 1.4 million refugees and migrants.
Here I wish to welcome the presence here of the
Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs. This sustained
engagement deserves our deep admiration, even as we
observe a continued flow of people leaving the country
7 more than 5,000 people a day 7 as indicated by the
Special Representative.

Let us make no mistake: unless there is a radical
change in the position of the Venezuelan authorities,
and unless they fully cooperate with humanitarian
agencies, this exodus could accelerate and have a very
negative impact on the stability and development of
neighbouring countries. I would therefore reiterate
France's full solidarity with the countries affected.
Meanwhile, we strongly urge the Venezuelan regime
to seize the opportunity created by the International
Contact Group, which is striving, with France's active
participation, to find a humanitarian and political
solution to the crisis.

Lastly, the third urgent matter is to begin a political
and peaceful transition in Venezuela in the form of free,
fair and transparent presidential elections, overseen by
the international community. On the question of the
causes of the humanitarian crisis, we will undoubtedly
hear the Venezuelan authorities once again accuse
foreigners of being responsible for the tragedy of the
Venezuelan people. Yet it is the Maduro regime that
is both the author and the main actor of that tragedy.
By trying to hold on to power by organizing mock
presidential elections, repressing the opposition and
dissenting voices and monopolizing Venezuela's wealth,
the current regime has brought an entire country and
people to the brink of collapse.

Many countries, including France and its European
partners, have drawn the necessary conclusions from
that situation. The President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaido, has become the interim President not
as a result of foreign support but by upholding the
Venezuelan Constitution and with a view to organizing
free, credible and transparent elections.

It is unacceptable that the survival of a regime
should be at the expense of the lives of a people. We
urge the Venezuelan authorities to allow humanitarian
staff access to Venezuelans and to move towards a
peaceful, democratic and sustainable solution. The
Security Council will need to demonstrate its unity to
play the role that it must in that situation. The goal is
to promote a negotiated and peaceful solution to the
crisis. The use of force and violence must be avoided
in Venezuela - a point that France especially wants to
drive home. There can be only a political and peaceful
solution, which requires that democratic presidential
elections take place at the earliest date.

While Venezuela teeters on the verge of collapse,
our role is not to serve as a substitute to the Venezuelan
people, but to the contrary, to allow the Venezuelan
people to speak freely and express their wish to decide
their future by re-establishing democracy and the rule
oflaw in Venezuela. That is the essence and meaning of
France's efforts in that regard.

