Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
First, please allow me to extend my Government's
deepest condolences to the Government and the people
of Burundi for the tragic loss of life and property as a
result of the flooding and landslides in Bujumbura this
week. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims
and their families during this difficult time.

Burundi has made consisderable progress since
its years of civil conflict came to an end. The United
States has been and remains one of Burundi's strongest
partners, in particular as Burudi has become an exporter
of peace and security through its deployment in
international peacekeeping and stabilization missions.

While acknowledging that significant progress in
peace, stability and development, the current political
stalemate and heightened tensions point to a continuing
need for the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB)
to maintain a presence to continue to help consoldiate
peace, democracy and national reconciliation. Last
year's media law, the recent dismissal of the First
Vice-President and the constitutional amendments
proposed threaten the delicate power-sharing
arrangements that have enabled Burundi's progres
since the Arusha accords were signed, in 2000.

The United States strongly supports BNUB'S
mandates and the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General as crucial to Burundi's continued
progress in fully establishing democratic governance
and ensuring stability. The Government's continued
partnerships with the United Nations mission and the
Special Representative, as well as the internationl
community more broadly, will be increasingly
important in the lead-up to the 2015 elections, when
inclusive political dialogue and compromise will be
required of all political leaders and parties.

We welcome the Burundian Government's call for
a United Nations presence through the entirety of the
electoral process. We see this mission as playing an
important good-offices role as a confidence-building
and diplomatic incentive and look forward to its
independent assessment of the overall political and
technical conduct of the elections. We urge the
Government not to attempt to go it alone through this
crucial and sensitive electoral period, but to welcome the
partnership and support of the international community
through this United Nations presence. We look forward
to the Secretary-General's regular reporting to the
Council in that regard, including on the agreed-upon
benchmarks.

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the Government and the people of Burundi
as a partner in the country's peace, stability and
development.

