Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Serry for his comprehensive briefing
on the peace process in the Middle East, including
Palestine.

Today's debate takes place in critical circumstances,
given the efforts of Mr. Kerry, under the auspices of the
United States Administration, to revive negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. These efforts
have led to an agreement in principle to relaunch the
peace process, which has been frozen for more than
three years.

It is no secret that I attend this meeting in the
personal hope of hearing a new statement of optimism
concerning the prospects for resumed negotiations that
are focused on success and a refusal to blame others
for failure. Morocco has acknowledged and supported
the United States initiative, and today we place great
hope in it, in the light of the circumstances surrounding
a possible resumption of serious negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive and just peace based
on a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict that will
guarantee Israel's withdrawal from the Arab territories
it has occupied since 1967, and the establishment of a
Palestinian State with its capital in East Jerusalem.

Everyone here knows that the Arab and Palestinian
side has demonstrated staunch political resolve and
responsibility towards achieving peace in the Middle
East. They have contributed to crystallizing an
Arab initiative known to be open, courageous and
peaceful, as affirmed in Washington, DC, by the Arab
ministerial committee. We hope that Israel willjoin this
dynamism, contribute to its progress, and reverse the
intensification of its occupation with a view towards
achieving the two-State solution.

The United States initiative has opened a window
of change that may be the last. The two parties
must therefore embrace it with a view to resuming
negotiations, building on prior achievements to bring
the two sides closer together. We hope that both parties
will demonstrate strong and determined political will
to prepare for and resume the negotiations, and avoid
any actions that could impede them.

The ongoing occupation and its daily repercussions,
as well as the siege imposed on the Palestinian people,
generate violence and radicalism and fuel hatred, thereby
undermining any hope for peace. The construction and
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, run counter
to the principle of negotiations and also serve to
undermine the peace process. That applies as well to
Israeli measures in the Holy City of Jerusalem and to
the repeated attempts to Judaize the city and change
its character as a city of coexistence among the three
divine religions. Given his responsibilities as Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, His Majesty the King of
Morocco has condemned those measures and called
upon the Council to ensure respect by Israel of the
status of Jerusalem and to avoid negatively impacting
Christian and Muslim holy sites.

The preparations for the negotiations must be
coupled with good-faith steps that are conducive to the
success of such negotiations. Most important among
them are the lifting the blockade of the Palestinians in
Gaza, who are part and parcel of the Palestinian people,
and the release of Palestinian prisoners. The unjust
blockade that has for years been imposed by Israel
against Gaza must be lifted. The siege serves to deny
Palestinians their dignity and basic human rights. In the
current circumstances, achieving Palestinian national

reconciliation is a necessity that must be met, for it will
serve the interests of the Palestinian people as a whole
and strengthen their negotiating position.

Sixty-five years since the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), whereby the United
Nations called for the establishment of two States, five
wars have taken place, from which all peoples have
suffered. The Palestinian people suffered and paid a
price: displacement and the denial of their fundamental
freedoms and human rights. Achieving the two-State
solution makes it necessary for both parties to find a
common vision. Such a vision must exclude narrow
interests and must take into consideration the shared
interests of both States, so as to achieve a genuine, just
and forward-looking peace in the region.

To that end, it is necessary that the international
community abide by its commitments towards Arabs
and Palestinians, so as to fulfil the promises made with
regard to the establishment ofa viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and enabling Syria
and Lebanon regain their occupied territory. In that
way, all the countries of the region will be able to enjoy
stability and peace and be able to begin a new chapter of
cooperation. We are convinced that any progress in the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will serve the interests
of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples alike. That will
also contribute to restoring stability and security for all
States of the Middle East region.

That stability also requires that there be an
immediate halt to violence and finding a way out of
the political crisis for which the brotherly people of
Syria are paying the price. The increasing number of
victims of that tragedy, as well as the resulting painful
humanitarian situation, makes the Syrian parties
responsible for the unity of their country. At the same
time, it is unacceptable for the Council to remain silent
in the light ofthe worsening crisis in Syria. That silence
is counter to its important and historic responsibility
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
convening of the "Geneva II" conference is a moral,
political and human duty for all those with influence
on the Syrian parties. We sincerely hope that everyone
will assume their responsibilities.

