Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and thank you for
convening this important open debate. Indeed, we
must take advantage of the opportunity that holding
this meeting at such a fragile time affords us to move
forward on the path to peace and stability in the Middle
East and in the world. We would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.

Today, tensions around the world are increasing,

and that is particularly true with regard to the Middle
East. That has a serious impact on the region and the
world in general. Every day we see the horrifying
and painful images that are the result of those crises
and their intensification, as well as of non-respect for
international law and human rights. International action
today does not keep pace with events on the ground, and
that has given rise to the spread ofterrorism. The Middle
East, as well as the world in general, is consequently
paying a high price. We therefore believe that this open
debate must help the Security Council move forward
on the path towards peace in the Middle East and that
it is absolutely necessary to save the region's resources
and people, who are in dire need of international peace
and security.

The State of Qatar understands full well what the
international community's responsibility is. We are
actively working in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations to strengthen
international peace and security and addressing the
challenges confronting us. But that is also tied to the
commitment of the concerned parties, who must uphold
and follow international law, as well as human rights law
and international norms in general. The international
community has established mechanisms and criteria
that we must respect so as to reach a just and lasting
solution to the crisis in the Middle East.

There is no doubt that our effort to achieve peace
must have an effective impact on a number of crises,
in particular on terrorism. We have a great deal to gain
if we manage to overcome terrorism. The crisis has
continued for several decades, and to overcome it we
need to try to stop wanting to impose certain realities
and to go against international law. In fact, that type of
actions only undermines international efforts aimed at
reaching peace in the Middle East. If we want to strictly
adhere to international law, then it will be possible for
us to make progress.

The State of Qatar would like to express its
profound concern about the current impasse in the
Middle East peace process. We have made significant
efforts in trying to relaunch the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine so that those States can coexist
side by side - especially the Palestinian State, which
should exist within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the various
resolutions ofthe Security Council and also on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative. However, to achieve that,
the Israeli occupation of various Arab territories must
end, particularly in the Syrian Golan. Additionally.
settlement-building has to end. The blockade of
Gaza must end. Palestinian refugees must be allowed
to return.

My country is aware of the complexities and
dangers related to the Middle East situation. We believe
in peace and the need to make every possible effort to
achieve it.
The use of chemical weapons against civilians in
Khan Shaykhun in Syria has only deepened the crisis
that our Syrian brethren have been experiencing for six
years. The impact of the attack has been very serious,
and it has proven that the international community is
powerless and incapable of changing the situation, even
as crimes against humanity are committed on a daily
basis. The State of Qatar condemns in the strongest
terms those unacceptable acts. Such barbarism needs to
be ended. and we support the American military action
against military targets in Syria.

We call on the international community to shoulder
its responsibility for putting an end to the crimes
committed by the Syrian regime. The attack using
chemical weapons clearly proves that the situation in
Syria is a danger to the international community. So
far, we have failed to find a solution to the Syrian crisis,
even as the Syrian regime continues to commit crimes
and to attack civilian populations and civilian targets.
The regime creates obstacles in order to block the
delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance to the
Syrian people. That has had an impact on demographics
and has allowed terrorism to spread in the country.

There is a real problem of impunity in Syria, which
encourages criminals to continu committing their
crimes. It is a real problem because we have not been
able to prevent those criminals from committing those
crimes. That is why the international community must
understand its responsibility. The State of Qatar has
tried, with the help of Liechtenstein, to establish an
international independent mechanism that could make
it possible to prosecute those responsible for the serious
crimes in Syria. It is an important step forward, and
Qatar has offered $1 million for that mechanism.

In the tragedy experienced by the Syrian people,
and in particular the attack in Khan Shaykhun, we see
that they are alone in facing such terrible violence. We
want to try to contribute in some way to to resolving
the crisis. On that point, we believe that the use of
chemical weapons, as exhibited in Khan Shaykhun, is a
particularly serious crime. We ask the Security Council
to take necessary steps to put an end to those very
serious violations. We need to reach a peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis in order to allow the Syrian people
to realize their legitimate aspirations, particularly in
accordance with the first Geneva communique. We
need to set up a transitional Government.

In conclusion, Qatar reiterates its principled
position to support all international efforts to achieve
peace and security in the Middle East and strengthen
international peace and security.

