Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): Mr. President, my
delegation commends your initiative in convening this
open meeting of the Council to discuss an issue of
importance not only to Africa, but also to the
membership of the United Nations. The African
continent challenges the international system in many
ways, not least through the many conflicts it has
spawned over the years. Little wonder, therefore, that
the Council has had to devote so much of its time to
conflict, peace and security issues affecting Africa. It
is therefore fitting that we pause to take stock and to
decide on new ways forward.

The fact that there have been such frequent
eruptions of conflict on the African continent is really
a matter of concern. It is important to undertake a
special analysis of the antecedents and causes of these
conflicts in order to identify the common strands, with
a view to addressing the causal factors at the root. It is
true that there has been an ongoing debate on the broad
causes of conflict globally. What is now required is an
effort focused specifically on the peculiarities of the
African scene, from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to C6te d'Ivoire, to Sudan and elsewhere.

Some conflicts have been satisfactorily resolved,
as was the case in Angola and Mozambique. Others
have been stuck in a "no-war/no-peace" state of limbo,
while yet others keep raging on. It is important to
ascertain what the countries in each of these three
categories have in common, with a view to drawing
lessons that would help us prescribe more effective
antidotes to African conflicts.

From the outset, we must acknowledge the
important initiatives taken by the Council, the effects
of which on conflict situations have been very positive.
The measures taken to curb the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in West Africa stand out for
special mention. My delegation hopes to see these
measures strengthened even further, perhaps to
culminate, ultimately, in an international convention
binding on all States.

The Council did collaborate well with the
Economic Community of West African States in
elaborating the small arms initiative. It did the same in
mediating the situation in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.
Elsewhere in Africa, we have seen the tremendous
promise that collaboration of this type with regional
and subregional bodies holds for conflict resolution
and peacekeeping. Perhaps this strategy should be
employed more systematically, not only in resolving
conflicts, but also in peace-building and conflict
prevention.

Post-conflict interventions need to be given more
attention. Programmes for disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating combatants have to be better conceived,
planned and resourced if they are to endure. In
addition, consideration should be given to the need to
evolve such programmes on a subregional basis, in
recognition of the strong subregional dimensions of
most conflicts in Africa.

The way certain conflict situations have erupted
suggests that the Council should be more pro-active in
its handling of emerging conflict situations. We must
strengthen our early warning systems and our response
capacities. Above all, the Council must be able to
intervene to ward off conflicts before they flare up.
Ways must be found to engage adversaries in dialogue
and negotiation before they slide into violence.

Finally, my delegation would like to see this
exercise undertaken on a regular basis to afford us an
opportunity to evaluate our efforts in order to improve
our impact and effectiveness in mediating conflicts on
the African continent.

