Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your country, the United Kingdom, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. Palestine is pleased to see you,
Minister Howell, presiding over our debate today. I
want to assure you that the Palestinian leadership -
especially President Abbas - is doing everything it
can to secure the release of the BBC journalist Alan
Johnston. I express our appreciation to South Africa as
well for its skilful leadership of the Council last month.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council today on the current situation. I
should also like to place on record our thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his service and
the role he has played. Our leadership will express
Palestine's gratitude to him in due course.

This is also an opportune moment to express our
appreciation to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his recent visit to the occupied Palestinian
territory, where he witnessed first-hand the difficulties
on the ground, including, inter alia, the encroachment
of the settlements and the wall on all aspects of life and
the humanitarian crisis being faced by the Palestinian
people under Israeli occupation.

As highlighted during today's briefing, multiple
efforts are being made by several parties -
particularly the Arab countries, the new Palestinian
National Unity Government and the members of the
Quartet - to revive the peace process with a View to a
resumption of direct negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides and, ultimately, a just and
peaceful resolution of this tragic conflict. Those efforts
have rekindled the hopes of the Palestinian people and
all concerned parties for a breakthrough that will stem
the deterioration of the situation and create an
environment more conducive to dialogue and
substantive peace negotiations.
Regrettably, however, while these efforts are
taking place, Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
actively carry out illegal policies and practices aimed
at sustaining its nearly 40-year-old occupation of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. While
everyone else talks of peace, Israel's colonization
campaign continues, its military aggression on the
Palestinian civilian population continues and its
collective punishment of the Palestinian people as a
whole continues. Such actions are in stark
contradiction to the peace efforts and exacerbate the
dire situation on the ground, inflaming tensions and
cynicism and undermining the resumption of dialogue
and negotiation.

Indeed, the backdrop for the current peace efforts
remains that of a crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in which the
Palestinian people continue to suffer from the serious
violations and grave breaches of international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, that
continue to be committed by the occupying Power on a
daily basis. Thus, while hopes are rising among the
Palestinian people, and while their leadership makes
efforts to improve living conditions and revive the
peace negotiations, the critical situation that they face
daily as a result of the occupying Power's actions,
along with the unjust international sanctions imposed
on them, tempers and threatens to extinguish those
hopes.

The reality in the occupied Palestinian territory is
a depressing one, but it is one that must be discussed.
While we believe that it is necessary for all of us to
focus efforts on reviving the peace process and
promoting a positive climate, we also believe that it is
necessary to draw attention to that reality in order to
provide a complete picture of the situation the
Palestinian people are actually facing, for no peace
effort can succeed under such conditions.

In recent days, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued carrying out destructive and deadly military
attacks throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
further terrorizing and traumatizing the besieged
civilian population and inflicting more human and
material loss on the Palestinian people. More
Palestinian civilians, including children, were killed
and injured by the Israeli occupying forces during this
period as a result of the continued use of excessive,
indiscriminate and lethal force. Glaring proof of
Israel's continuing disregard for Palestinian life are the
acts of aggression committed by it within a 24-hour
period this past weekend, which resulted in the killing
of nine Palestinians, including two children. In
addition, the threat of a massive Israeli invasion of
Gaza continues to loom, as indicated by the
declarations of several Israeli officials.

The Israeli occupying forces have also continued
to carry out arrest campaigns and raids throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, disrupting the daily
cycle of life and recklessly endangering the lives of
civilians. In that regard, the occupying forces have
continued the deplorable practice of using Palestinian
civilians, including children, as human shields during
door-to-door searches in some of those raids.

The result of such roundups and arrests has been
a rapid increase in the number of Palestinian civilians
imprisoned or detained by Israel, the occupying Power.
At present, there are more than 11,000 Palestinian
prisoners, including more than 100 women and at least
300 children, being held in Israeli jails and detention
centres, most in inhumane conditions and many subject
to torture. This month, the Palestinian people solemnly
marked the passage of yet another Prisoner's Day,
calling for the release of all those being arbitrarily and
illegally imprisoned by Israel and for their humane
treatment until the achievement of their freedom.
Regrettably, the occupying Power has rejected one
initiative after another aimed at releasing Palestinian
prisoners, including efforts that would facilitate the
release of the captive Israeli soldier and surely reduce
tensions between the two sides.

As stated earlier, Israel, the occupying Power, is
also intensifying its colonial settlement campaign and
its construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in grave breach of
the Fourth Geneva Convention and other provisions of
applicable international law, in flagrant violation of
United Nations resolutions, and in total disrespect for
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. The land grab continues, expansionism
continues, and attempts to de facto annex large areas of
Palestinian land, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, continue. The occupying Power
continues to illegally expand and construct settlements,
to build Jewish-only bypass roads to serve those
settlements, and to allow the illegal Israeli settlers to
act with impunity towards the Palestinian civilian
population. Palestinian civilians, including children,
continue to be subjected to violence, harassment,
intimidation and vandalism perpetrated by armed,
fanatical Israeli settlers, particularly in the area of Al-
Khalil. None have been held accountable for their
criminal acts, further emboldening them to continue
terrorizing the Palestinian people.

The occupying Power is also still confiscating
Palestinian land and destroying Palestinian property for
its unlawful construction of the wall - an apartheid
wall that has completely walled in several Palestinian
cities and towns into isolated Bantustans, destroyed
thousands upon thousands of livelihoods, and
devastated entire communities. It is obvious that the
occupying Power continues to pursue such practices
with the direct intent of entrenching and fortifying its
illegal settlements and its illegal measures of de facto
annexation in the Palestinian territory. It is also
obvious that the continued colonization of Palestinian
land Via the settlements and the wall is shredding the
territorial integrity of the Palestinian territory and
gravely threatens the prospects for physically
achieving the two-State solution in accordance with
United Nations resolutions and the Quartet road map.

In that regard, the more than 500 checkpoints and
roadblocks erected by the occupying Power in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, have totally bisected the territory and
continue to severely restrict freedom of movement
throughout the territory, as well as into and out of it.
Even humanitarian and medical personnel, including
those of the United Nations, continue to be subject to
such restrictions on movement and harassment. The
security pretext cannot justify those checkpoints, which
are intended to completely control the movement of
persons and goods and clearly function as part of the
occupying Power's attempts to constantly dehumanize,
humiliate, harass and subjugate the Palestinian people
under its occupation. Moreover, it is undeniable that
the checkpoints have devastated the Palestinian
economy and deepened the humanitarian crisis.

In addition, the occupying Power has continued
to impose frequent closures on the occupied Palestinian
territory as a whole, subjecting in particular the Rafah
crossing in the Gaza Strip - the only point of entry
and exit for Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip - to
repeated and arbitrary closures. Such actions have
worsened the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza -
with the poverty rate now over 70 per cent and
dependency on food aid widespread - and serve only
to further fuel frustrations and tensions among the
imprisoned civilian population in Gaza.

Overall, such illegal and unjust Israeli practices
constitute collective punishment of the Palestinian
people and have had a devastating impact on the socio-
economic situation and far-reaching humanitarian
consequences. Those policies have prevented any
normalcy of life for the Palestinian people and have
only brought more misery and hardship for Palestinian
families to bear. Additionally, the Palestinian people
continue to suffer from the international sanctions
imposed on them and Israel's unlawful withholding of
millions of dollars of Palestinian tax revenues
following the democratic election of their
representatives last year.

The Palestinian reality is harsh and depressing.
Yet, despite all the foregoing and despite the internal
difficulties we have had to face in terms of law and
order on the ground, the Palestinian leadership, widely
supported by the Palestinian people, continues to
earnestly pursue peace. A National Unity Government
has been formed, representing the Palestinian political
spectrum, and has given President Mahmoud Abbas the
mandate to pursue a final peace settlement. Moreover,
the agreement among Palestinian factions on a
ceasefire and calm remains in force, but Israel, the
occupying Power, has yet to reciprocate in any
meaningful way, instead continuing to pursue its
violent, illegal policies and continuing to promote its
distortions of the reality on the ground.

In that regard, we must ask: Why has Israel not
accepted the Palestinian offer to extend the ceasefire to
the West Bank? Why has Israel not accepted the hand
of peace extended to it? Clearly, there is an ongoing
phenomenon in Israel wherein the victimizer - the
occupier - promotes a culture for its people to live in
fear of their victims. The occupying Power violates the
human rights of the Palestinian people on a daily basis,
including violating their right to life, and then
somehow perpetuates the perception that the Israeli
people must be afraid and live in fear of those whom
they are occupying and subjugating. That distortion is
promoted in Israel by those pursuing a narrow
extremist agenda, who believe that a ceasefire in the
West Bank will undermine support for that agenda. If
there is calm, how can they continue to shore up
support for such unjustifiable and criminal actions in
the occupied Palestinian territory? How can they
continue to muster support for the wall, the
settlements, the checkpoints, the siege of Jerusalem
and the collective punishment of the Palestinian people
from the majority of the Israeli populace, which seeks
peace?

Those promoting this culture of fear continue to
oppose any ceasefire and any steps that may revive the
peace process. They are the same ones who support the
policies intended to make Gaza a massive prison, for it
is clear that those seeking peace would not lock in the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, further
impoverishing them, compounding their suffering and
pushing them to the brink, fuelling violence and
extremism. Doing this is not in the interest of peace,
but will certainly feed the culture of fear necessary for
promoting their twisted and illogical agenda.

This unlawful situation must be brought to an
end. It is unjustifiable, unethical, illogical and
dangerous and will sabotage any progress made,
whether by the Palestinian Authority itself on the
ground or by any of the parties concerned, vis-a-vis the
peace process.

There is a window of opportunity before us. On
the Palestinian side as well as on the Arab side, efforts
are being made to seize this opportunity and to move
forward. A key component on our part has been the
formation of the Palestinian National Unity
Government, the political platform of which affirms,
among other things, respect for all previous
agreements. President Abbas has been mandated by
that Government, and thus by all political groups -
including Hamas, which is significant and
unprecedented - to negotiate with Israel, the
occupying Power, a just and final peace settlement.

A second component constitutes the efforts being
exerted by the Arab countries. The Arab Peace
Initiative, first adopted by the Arab Summit in Beirut
in 2002, was reaffirmed by the recent Arab Summit
held in Riyadh under the leadership and encouragement
of the Saudi Government. Full peace and normalization
of relations are being offered to Israel in exchange for
full withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel
in 1967 and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, along with a just and
agreed upon solution for Palestine refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

A follow-up Arab Ministerial Committee meeting
took place last week and decided on some practical
steps to invigorate the Arab Peace Initiative, including
plans to meet with the members of the Security

Council, the Secretary-General and the members of the
Quartet. The Ministerial Committee also decided to
call for an international conference, under the auspices
of the United Nations and the other members of the
Quartet, for all parties to the conflict to attend.

Those two components provide us - Palestine,
Israel, the international community, the members of the
Quartet and, of course, the Security Council - with a
historic opportunity. This opportunity should not be
lost like so many before it. We must build upon the
momentum generated and proceed with peace efforts in
a serious manner, with the fortitude to overcome the
obstacles that will inevitably arise to the achievement
of a final peace settlement.

On the Palestinian side, we are willing and ready.
President Abbas, with support and a mandate from all
Palestinian political groups, is prepared to negotiate
final status issues unconditionally. If there is a partner
for peace on the Israeli side to negotiate with us
without conditions, we are ready. It is at the
negotiating table where both sides can bring their
concerns and it is there that real dialogue can take
place, understandings be reached and solutions found.
Those who continue to impose conditions before
negotiations do not want peace, for such conditions are
just empty excuses to delay and avoid peacemaking.

Because we want negotiations to be fair and to be
successful, we believe in the benefit of conducting
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides
in the framework of an international conference.
Negotiations in the presence of common and
supportive friends would best promote the peace
process, by, inter alia, encouraging dialogue, holding
both parties to their obligations and compelling them
not to leave the negotiations until an agreement is
signed. All successful negotiations between the Arab
and Israeli sides, and other negotiations in
contemporary history, have been conducted with the
help of a third party who encouraged the parties
through the stages and assisted them to reach
agreement. That option, as recently proposed by the
Arab Ministerial Committee, should be seriously
considered and widely supported.

The Security Council, as the United Nations
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the Quartet members as a
whole, should not allow this historic opportunity to
escape us. The opportunities provided by the
relaunching of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
formation of a Palestinian National Unity Government
should be seized upon. The Road Map should be
revived. International law and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations, which remain the foundation of
any peace process, should be respected and not pushed
aside. Such efforts will ensure the establishment of a
positive environment for dialogue and fair negotiations
between the two sides towards the realization of the
two-State solution of Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-l967
borders.

Of course, such efforts must also include urgent
measures to address the situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. We reiterate that no peace effort can
succeed if that crisis situation is allowed to continue.
The international community, including the Security
Council, must take steps to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to cease its human rights violations
and grave breaches against the Palestinian people.
Furthermore, the Palestinian people should not
continue to be punished and burdened with endless
conditions and unjust sanctions. How can that be
tolerated while the occupying Power continues to act
with impunity and without accountability on all fronts?
The sanctions should be lifted immediately, allowing
for the resumption of needed assistance to the
Palestinian people to alleviate the humanitarian crisis,
to assist in the rebuilding of institutions and to support
the Palestinian Authority's serious efforts to promote
stability on the ground and progress towards a
negotiated peace.

All of that is necessary to keep hope alive and to
support the momentum recently generated for the
promotion of efforts aimed at achieving the just, lasting
and final peace settlement we all so desperately seek.
We should all uphold our responsibilities in this regard.
The Palestinian side reaffirms today its commitment to
do so and appeals once again for the support of all
concerned parties in this urgent endeavour.

