Mr. lein (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
welcome the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan Terzic.

I would also like to thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling,
the High Representative and European Union (EU)
Special Representative, for his briefing today and to
commend him and his colleagues for their tireless
efforts.
Turkey has already aligned itself with the
statement made by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I shall
confine myself to making brief comments on a number
of points.

Turkey has close historical, cultural and human
bonds with Bosnia and Herzegovina, and our political
relations have always been inspired and strengthened
by those ties. From the first day of the civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Turkey has been actively
involved in the efforts to defuse the crisis and has been
contributing to the efforts to establish peace, stability
and prosperity in that country. Within that framework
and in that spirit, Turkey contributes to both the
European Union force - operation Althea - and the
European Union Police Mission.

We welcome the considerable progress Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made in recent years with regard
to reforms in the fields of taxation, customs,
intelligence, security, defence and the judiciary. Turkey
will continue to support those reforms, aiming at
ensuring an efficient State structure in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that will eventually bring the country
closer to the Euro-Atlantic institutions.

Turkey attaches great importance to the
harmonious coexistence of different cultures, religions
and ethnic identities. The desire and success of the
three peoples who founded the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to live together in a multi-ethnic and
multicultural society will not only contribute to
national and regional stability, but will also set a
shining example for other countries and communities
facing similar experiences.

Turkey, as an active member of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council, will
continue to closely follow the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

