Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President,
for convening today's meeting on non-proliferation,
which remains a cornerstone of international peace
and security and a top priority for the international
community.

In that regard, the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA,) on the Iranian nuclear issue,
and resolution 2231 (2015) are crucial to nuclear
non-proliferation as well as regional and international
security. We are encouraged by the broad international
support for the Plan and the resolution. Their full and
effective implementation is key to ensuring the peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme and to securing
tangible economic benefits for the Iranian people.

We therefore regret the withdrawal of the United
States from the JCPOA, in May 2018, and the recent
steps taken by Iran to reduce its nuclear-related
commitments under the plan. Certain actions taken by
the United States since its withdrawal from the plan are
contrary to the goals of the plan. The reimposition of its
national sanctions, lifted under the plan, as well as its
decision not to extend waivers for the trade in oil with
Iran and certain non-proliferation projects, may also
impede the ability of Iran and other Member States to
implement the plan and resolution 2231 (2015).

Since July, under the monitoring of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran has surpassed
JCPOA-stipulated limits on its uranium enrichment
level, as well as limits on its stockpiles of heavy water
and low-enriched uranium. It has taken steps related to
centrifuge research and development, and commenced
injecting uranium hexafluoride gas into the centrifuges
at the Fordow facility. Iran has stated that all those steps
are reversible and that it intends to remain in the plan.
It is important that Iran return to full implementation
of the plan and refrain from further steps to reduce its
commitments.

We welcome the initiatives of the other participants
in the JCPOA, which should be given full effect as a
matter of priority. In that regard, the recent decisions by
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden
and Norway to join the Instrument in Support of Trade
Exchanges are positive developments. Those actions
can contribute to the goals of facilitating legitimate
business with Iran and the preservation of the plan.
The Secretary-General encourages Member States and
others to work with JCPOA participants to achieve
those important goals. At the same time, Iran should
carefully consider and address the concerns expressed
by Member States about its activities in relation to the
restrictive measures set out in annex B to the resolution.

Over the course of this year, tensions in the region
have, worryingly, escalated. We witnessed attacks
against oil tankers, strikes against a civilian airport
and a highly sophisticated and synchronized attack
against oil facilities in Saudi Arabia. Combined with
acrimonious rhetoric, those developments have brought
the region dangerously close to a serious confrontation.
Such an eventuality would be devastating and must be
prevented at all costs. The Secretary-General continues
to call on Member States to exercise maximum restraint
and prevent further escalation amid heightened tensions.

I will now turn to the measures set out in annex B
to the resolution, as outlined in the Secretary-General's
eighth report (S/20l9/934) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and subsequent information
obtained during the reporting period.

First, on the implementation of the nuclear-
related provisions, we have not received new reports
on the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclear and
nuclear-related dual-use items contrary to paragraph
2 of annex B. It is vital that the procurement channel
work effectively and efficiently to promote increased
international engagement with Iran. All Member States
and the private sector are encouraged to fully utilize
and support that channel.

In that connection, we recall the 3 May 2018
announcement by the United States that involvement in
certain nuclear-related activities set forth in paragraph 2
of annex B may be exposed to its national sanctions. We
also note the announcement by the United States that,
effective 15 December, it will terminate the sanctions
waiver related to the nuclear facility at Fordow.
Exemption provisions in resolution 2231 (2015) allow
for the transfer of items, materials, equipment, goods
and technology required for the nuclear activities of
Iran under the plan, subject to the relevant notification
requirements.

Secondly, several Member States have provided
divergent views on Iran's test-firing of ballistic missiles
during the reporting period, as well as a reportedly
failed launch of a space-launch vehicle in August.
Paragraph 3 of annex B calls upon Iran not to undertake
any activity related to ballistic missiles designed to
be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using such ballistic missile technology.

France, Germany, Israel, the United Kingdom
and the United States viewed the missiles reportedly
launched by Iran to be category I systems under the
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), and are
therefore designed to be capable of delivering nuclear
weapons. By contrast, Iran and the Russian Federation
stressed the lack of any reference to the MTCR regime
in paragraph 3 of annex B. They further stated that
Iran's ballistic missile activities were not inconsistent
with paragraph 3, as those missiles were not designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.

Related to ballistic missiles activities, the
Secretariat also received information from the United
States that several shipments of hydroxyl-terminated
polybutadiene, a substance that can be used in solid
missile fuel, were transferred to Iran in July and
August 2017. We are examining that information and
will update the Council accordingly.

Thirdly, regarding arms-related restrictions, the
Secretariat confirmed that 23 optical sights for RPG-7-
type rocket propelled grenade launchers, part of a larger
consignment seized in Aden in December 2018, were
delivered to end-users in Iran in 2016. That suggests
that those optical sights may have been transferred
from Iran to Yemen after 16 January 2016, which would
be inconsistent with Iran's obligations under resolution
2231 (2015). We had already indicated in our previous
report (S/2019/492) that the grenade launchers found in
that seizure had characteristics similar to the Iranian-
produced RPG-7-type launchers, such as markings and
heat shields.

Further on the arms restrictive measures,
the Secretariat - at the invitation of Saudi
authorities - examined the debris of the weapons
system used in the 14 May attack on the oil facility in
Afif, the 12 June and 10 August attacks on the Abha
international airport and the 14 September attack on the
Saudi Aramco oil facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais.

Although the Houthis claimed responsibility for the
attacks on Abqaiq and Khurais, their announcements
on the number and type of weapons systems used do not
correspond to the information that we have seen. The
Houthis claimed that the attacks involved 10 unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs). However, the number of impact
points observed by the Secretariat shows that the
attacks involved a larger number, and different types,
of weapons systems - which is consistent with the
information provided by Saudi authorities. According
to them, the attacks involved at least 18 UAVs and
seven cruise missiles. In addition, since the publication
of the report, the United States has shared additional
information with us regarding the debris of one of
the UAVs, which indicated that that UAV traversed a
location about 200 kilometres north-west of Abqaiq
shortly before the strike.

At this time, we are unable to independently
corroborate that the cruise missiles, or the recovered
components we inspected, are ofIranian origin. I would
like to stress, however, that that is our preliminary
finding. We are still very much in the process of
reviewing the components and subcomponents
recovered, as well as collecting and analysing
additional information on those cruise missiles. For
example, we recently received confirmation that some
of the cruise missile components were in fact not made
by the identified manufacturers, but could have been
copies. The Secretary-General intends to report back to
the Security Council on our further findings.

Regarding the UAVs, the Houthis in Yemen are
not known to be in possession of the specific delta
wing-type UAVs used in those attacks. The UAVs were
found to be equipped with a type of vertical gyroscope
that had been observed on an Iranian UAV reportedly
recovered in Afghanistan in 2016. Parts of the UAVs
were also produced and transferred between Member
States after 16 January 2016, and as recently as 2018.
Based on our preliminary assessment, the Secretary-
General is also unable to independently corroborate that
the UAVs, or the recovered components we examined,
are of Iranian origin. As with the cruise missiles, the
Secretariat is still actively reviewing the components
and subcomponents recovered, as well as collecting
and analysing additional information on those UAVs.
The Secretary-General intends to report back on our
further findings.

In addition, I would like to bring to everyone's
attention to the arms-related information that had
become available since the publication of the Secretary-
General's report. At the invitation of the United States,
the Secretariat travelled to examine arms and related
materiel alleged to be of Iranian origin, which the
United States seized in international waters off the
coast of Yemen on 25 November 2019. The seized items
included anti-tank guided missiles, surface-to-air
missiles, as well as parts ofcruise missiles and anti-ship
missiles. The anti-tank guided missiles that we saw had
production dates as recent as 2018. Their container-
launch units also had characteristics consistent with the
Iranian-produced Dehlavieh anti-tank guided missile.
We had made a similar observation of other anti-tank
guided missile container-launch units seized in Yemen
in our sixth report (S/2018/1089) to the Council. The
Secretariat is still reviewing the information and will
report back to the Council with additional details.

Finally, we were informed of additional travel
allegedly undertaken by the Commander of the Al-Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, Major
General Qasem Soleimani, to Iraq in October 2019. We
also were informed of alleged cooperation between a
Member State's academic institution with an entity on
the 2231 list, as well as several ongoing cooperation
agreements in the construction sector between foreign
entities and other entities on the list. The Secretariat
has requested clarification from Member States and
will report back to the Council.

The Secretary-General considers the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by all
Member States as an integral component of our
collective prevention efforts. That has assumed greater
importance in the context of current tensions in the
Gulf. The Secretary-General therefore calls on Member
States to avoid confrontational actions and explore
avenues for dialogue and cooperation in the interest of
international peace and security.

Let me conclude by acknowledging the leadership
of His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
in his role as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and to assure him once again
of our full support. I would also like to thank the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission for our continued cooperation.

