Ms. Malcorra (spoke in Spanish): I take great
pleasure in coming before the Security Council today
as Under-Secretary-General of the Department of Field
Support in the first of what I hope will be a series of
discussions on the future of peacekeeping operations in
the United Nations. In that context, I am grateful for
the opportunity to inform members about some of the
challenges facing us in the area of field support.
Undoubtedly, a process of cross-fertilization of ideas
regarding support issues, on the one hand, and
substantive issues, on the other, is What is needed at
this time, and it is absolutely critical that we address
that.

(spoke in English)

My friend and colleague, Alain Le Roy, has
clearly articulated that we in the United Nations
peacekeeping community are at a new watershed after
a decade of unprecedented expansion. Structurally,
Secretary-General Ban recognized that soon after he
had taken office, when he proposed the creation of a
new department specifically dedicated to the staffing
and equipping of United Nations field-based peace
operations. The newest United Nations department -
the Department of Field Support - now supports 16
peacekeeping missions and 18 special political
missions and oversees more than 22,000 international
and local civilian staff. It operates and maintains more
than 250 medical facilities, 300 aircraft, 18,000
vehicles and 40,000 computers.

There is a growing recognition that field support
issues are gaining in prominence and stature. The

Department now sits at the table as an equal partner in
crucial discussions at every stage of the mission life
cycle: planning, deployment, sustainment,
reconfiguration and, eventually, liquidation. When
problems are encountered, we are able to engage at the
political level with Member States and partner
organizations to find solutions. As it happens, I just
returned two days ago from precisely such an
engagement: a third round of discussions with the
Sudanese Government and the African Union to
facilitate the free flow of people and materials for our
mission in Darfur. I am happy to report that as a result,
we have thus far been able to meet the agreed-upon
deployment targets.

The creation of the Department has also led to
greater clarity of purpose, with an improved focus on
the delivery of service to the field - becoming field-
centric, if you will. The political direction is
determined by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations - in partnership with Member States, of
course - and it is up to my team to focus "simply" on
getting the right staff on board, securing sufficient
financing and providing the equipment and the
logistics necessary for the operation. The beauty of
having a narrow mandate is that it is easier to establish
baselines and measure progress. One of our current
challenges is how to calibrate that support to the
increasingly varied size and nature of various field
presences. I believe that there is an opportunity for a
more targeted and nuanced approach.

In addition, we are making good progress in
developing capacities in the various support streams.
For example, we will soon have a specialized in-house
capacity to advise both departments on how to manage
and mitigate risk - a badly needed source of
expertise. The establishment, several years ago, of a
Conduct and Discipline Unit at Headquarters - it is
now housed in the Department of Field Support - and
of related teams within the missions is starting to pay
dividends. We are also developing the capacity to
introduce "greening" aspects into all our operations.

The challenges laid out by Alain are indeed
daunting - even intimidating - and no less important
for DFS: the rapid expansion in breadth, scope and
complexity of missions; an increasingly hostile
security landscape in a number of different locations;
and the gap between the scope of the mandates and the
resources available to perform them.

From the support perspective, I would also add to
that list the difficulties of working within a regulatory
framework not designed for fast-paced operations
deployed in high-risk environments. The resulting
tension is simply unfair; either we comply with the
existing rules, but face the ire of this body when we do
not deliver services in a timely manner, or we get the
job done by testing the limits of the rules, risking
censure from the oversight bodies. We must be able to
find a way to reconcile results with compliance and
getting things done with due process.

While I agree that we are not in a crisis, we are
nevertheless under great strain. We need to reflect, take
stock and think deeply about the way forward. I will be
the first to acknowledge that the new DFS is still
finding its feet and that we have some way to go. A
more elaborate assessment of the restructuring exercise
will be put before the General Assembly this spring,
but let me just say at this juncture that putting in place
a new structure, new staff and new systems and
properly embedding these changes takes time and
perseverance under any circumstances. The fact that
this process has taken place at the same time as
peacekeeping has undergone a 30 per cent increase in
the authorized strength of its personnel has truly tested
the limits of the new structure.

The new missions - the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad - are two of the most complex and difficult
operations ever contemplated by the United Nations.
The task of moving materiel and people in these
regions would challenge the most solid, stable and
mature of structures. With a new and untried support
concept emerging from the recent resolution 1863
(2009), on Somalia, a country even more challenged by
security and infrastructure constraints, DFS has an
even more daunting task ahead in the year to come.

Perhaps one of the advantages of having DFS at
the table is that it can provide a reality check to
discussions. In this spirit, I would like to offer some
concrete illustrations which I hope demonstrate the
magnitude of the support challenges before us. In
Darfur, thousands of kilometres from the nearest
seaport, we must move heavy equipment and supplies
for the construction of 35 camps, which are required to
house our almost 26,000 troops and police. The road
networks are unreliable and unsafe; the existing
airfield infrastructure is poor and the wet season halts
movement and construction progress for up to four
months a year. At a certain point during the
deployment, we had 8,000 containers making this
journey.

We face an even greater test in neighbouring
Chad. Abe'che' is 2,400 kilometres from the nearest
port, roughly the same distance as between London and
Moscow. The sea-land route, known as the Douala
corridor, connecting the Cameroonian port of Douala to
Abeche', is approximately the same distance - 2,400
kilometres - of which only 900 kilometres have
railroads. Aside from poor road conditions, the Douala
corridor is, in relative terms, one of the world's most
expensive commercial transportation routes.

In Somalia, without prejudging the outcome of
the technical assessment mission, we can well imagine
that supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
will require logistics, resources and efforts that surpass
even those being made in Darfur and Chad. In addition
to challenges posed by infrastructure, security, terrain,
climate and social fabric, for the first time the United
Nations has been requested to provide logistical
support to a regional organization with a significant
level of resources attached to it.

On a systemic level, we often struggle with the
competing priorities of deploying troops, setting up the
necessary infrastructure and negotiating with the host
nation. Sometimes, troops are deployed prematurely
because of mandate commencement pressures, but
without having first secured the necessary agreements,
for example, on usage of land. At other times,
sequencing questions arise over whether an
engineering company should deploy first to establish a
battalion campsite or whether security elements move
in first to protect the engineers and the list of
challenges goes on.

I am, however, afraid that with the magnitude of
the operational challenges before us, the urgent ones
often trump a more thorough assessment of the
important ones. By this I mean finding a more strategic
approach to doing our business; exploring new, more
efficient and effective ways of working; doing it right
and fast; achieving the kinds of economies of scale one
would expect from a global operation of more than
$7 billion; partnering with Member States, others in the
United Nations family, regional organizations, civil
society and others in meeting the support challenge;
and finding a regulatory framework which is strong yet
agile, and prudent yet reasonable.

To address those concerns, we are making a
concerted effort to develop the details of the support
strategy. The strategy, which we intend to share with
Member States later this year, will explore a number of
themes.

First, the notion of support hubs could provide
logistics and administrative support services from more
secure locations to missions in the region, rather than
attempting to recreate a full support structure in each
and every mission.

Secondly, there could be greater delegation of
managerial and administrative authority to managers in
the field, while ensuring that appropriate training is
provided in advance and that predefined monitoring
and oversight mechanisms are in place.

Thirdly, there could be a diversified approach to
sourcing goods and services required for field missions
from local, regional and international sources through
greater use of partnerships and a broader set of
suppliers and service providers.

Lastly, there could be a smarter approach to
technology by using different applications in the
provision of aviation tasks, equipment usage, military
support and rapid response. Technology must be an
enabler of business, particularly in the environments
where we deploy.

These are, I believe, fully in line with the first
track of issues Alain mentioned on which concrete and
urgent actions are required this year. In addition, we
intend to move quickly in implementing the provisions
of the recent General Assembly resolution, which, we
hope, will pave the way for a more flexible, mobile
workforce and address the excessive vacancy and
turnover rates we are experiencing in critical field
positions. With the Department of Management, we are
also working to develop a framework for procurement
governance more suited to the supply needs of the
field.

Finally, I think we may want to pursue a more in-
depth examination of the funding arrangements for
peace operations, the use of trust funds, memorandums
of understanding and partnership models.
On that last point, I would like to return to the
idea of United Nations peacekeeping as a complex

international partnership in which many different
actors play an important role. From my corporate
background, I might call that a joint venture: a shared
enterprise in which we all have equity and a share of
the resources, direction and control. This joint venture,
as Alain mentioned, must be strengthened to better
ready ourselves for challenges both today and
tomorrow.

Support is not an end in itself, and DFS is not an
island. The support concept works only as a key
component in this wider partnership. Without strong
working relations with troop- and police-contributing
countries and the broader United Nations family, and
without the full support of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee, the support lines to peacekeeping quickly
crumble.

In the support business - perhaps more than for
anyone else in this equation - we will only ever be as
effective as the common vision that guides this joint
venture. If we are not clear on the nature of the
enterprise we are supporting, the challenge of finding
the most appropriate support models is compounded. If
mandate makers, policy setters, budget developers and
troop and police contributors do not share a vision of
what the joint endeavour is, then the mixed signals
become extremely difficult to resource and organize
around, and building a most effective and efficient
support mechanism will probably remain as elusive as
ever. The costs of a lack of common vision are high
and efficiencies harder to find. As in all enterprises,
support strategists and resource providers are at their
most effective when treated as strategic enablers and
brought into the dialogue early. On top of that, we must
be able to agree on a contract of mutual trust as the
basis of our work together.

Today's discussion should also be the start of a
dialogue that is sustained across the various organs of
the United Nations. The Secretariat, of course, meets
each of the Member States represented here today in
different guises, in different chambers and at different
times of the year. All too often, though, the messages
received may be mixed and even inconsistent,
depending on the forum. And, of course, the Secretariat
is often chastised for exactly the same sin - sending
different messages through different people in different
forums. We can all improve our game on this front. My
team and I are personally committed to improving the
quality, frequency and form of exchanges with Member
States in formal and informal ways alike.

In conclusion, I join Alain in commending to the
Security Council the notion that the different actors in
the international partnership for peacekeeping are at a
critical moment. Recent history has seen rapid and
unrelenting growth. This is perhaps a vote of
confidence in United Nations peacekeeping, but the
challenges are gathering ever more quickly. The
magnitude of the peacekeeping enterprise requires an
investment in strategy. It requires that we move
together in concert, with a shared purpose and in full
recognition of the challenges ahead.

