The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.

First of all, let me join the previous speakers in
thanking High Representative Petritsch for his
comprehensive briefing and report covering the
activities of his Office and the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina over the past six months.

Ukraine welcomes the undeniable successes of
the international community, represented in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by Mr. Petritsch, in assisting the peoples
of that country to implement the Dayton/Paris Peace
Accords. We are encouraged by the positive tendencies,
proving that the general situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is becoming increasingly stable. In
particular, we are satisfied with the increase in refugee
returns, a continuation of the development of political
pluralism and growing support among the population
for more moderate political parties, which was clearly
demonstrated during the general elections in November
2000. We also believe that the formation last month of
the non-nationalist Council of Ministers is also a
favourable factor for further progress.

We commend the efforts by the High
Representative over the period under review in pursuit
of implementation of the peace, specifically in the
three key strategic areas of economic reform, refugee
return and the consolidation of the common
institutions, as identified by the Peace Implementation
Council in May 2000. We welcome the Office of the
High Representative's focus on the implementation of
the decision by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court, known as the "constituent
peoples' case", as well as the decision to restructure
the constitutional commissions in the parliaments of
the Federation and the Republika Srpska.

In our view, the advancement of economic
reforms should continue to be a key element of the
international community's strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this respect, we welcome all the steps
made by the High Representative in pursuit of
economic reforms in the financial, labour and pension
sectors, in creating a favourable environment for the
effective functioning of industry and trade and in
promoting the privatization process.

While noting the remarkable progress on the
returns of minorities over the past year compared with
1999, we believe that more should be done to ensure
conditions of security for their return and equality of
their citizen rights. In this respect, it is of particular
importance to make the property laws effective, to
promote further comprehensive judiciary reform and to
establish human rights institutions. My delegation
applauds measures taken by the High Representative in
this regard.

I would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring respect for the human rights not only of the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also of its national minorities. For example, the
Ukrainian national minority constitutes the fourth
largest ethnic group in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
following the Muslims, Serbs and Croats. Along with
other peoples, the Ukrainians experienced considerable
suffering during the war in Bosnia, victims of ethnic
cleansing. At present, conditions for their national,
political and cultural revival in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are far from being satisfactory. In our
view, this situation could be partly remedied if the
necessary additional legislation that would ensure full
respect for the rights of national minorities was passed.
Therefore, we invite the High Representative to give
proper thought to this idea.

This delegation is convinced that only the
consistent and continued commitment of the parties to
the implementation of the Peace Agreement in all its
aspects will pave the way towards further progress and
economic reconstruction in Bosnia. Therefore, we
cannot support any attempts to revise the Dayton
process. In our view, any amendments to that process
would risk destabilizing the situation, both in Bosnia
and in the region as a whole.

We are seriously worried at the recent
aggravation of the relations between the High
Representative and the Croat political parties of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Federation, united in the Croat
National Congress. Of particular concern is the fact
that the conflict is developing in the light of the results
of last year's general elections. These developments
could seriously destabilize the situation in the whole
country, threatening to reverse the positive changes of
last year's elections, in which moderate forces
overtook nationalists for the first time since the signing
of the Peace Agreement.

We reject any unilateral attempts to establish any
parallel structures or governing bodies on the territories
dominated by the Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
which are inconsistent with the Dayton Agreements
and the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Thus
we support the intervention of the High Representative
in this situation. There is an obvious need to avoid any
further escalation of tensions in the current situation.
We call on the leaders of the Croat National Congress,
the international community and the legitimate
governing institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
engage in a constructive dialogue, with a view to
reaching compromise decisions.

However, being supportive of the activities of the
High Representative, we would caution him to weigh
once again all of the pros and cons of the possible
decision to impose economic sanctions on the areas
populated by Croats. This step could have negative
consequences for all the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In our view, a constructive mediatory role in
working out the differences between the Croatian
political leaders of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation and the international community can be
played by the Republic of Croatia, as a country which
has clearly demonstrated its European aspirations and
its devotion to democracy and peace and stability in the
region and to the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.

We also encourage the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which has recently signed a special
relationship agreement with the Republika Srpska, to
do its utmost to ensure the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the sake of
promoting the consolidation of democracy, stability
and national reconciliation in that country.

It is our belief that the final goal of the
implementation of the Dayton Accords should be the
creation of a multi-ethnic, multicultural, united state of
Bosnia and Herzegovina that is based on the
democratic and humanitarian ideals of modern Europe
and oriented in its development towards integration
into the European Union and friendship and
cooperation with other democratic States of the region.

We hope that the presidential statement to be
adopted shortly will serve to achieve this goal.

Finally, my delegation reconfirms its support for
the activities of the High Representative and wishes
him and his staff every success.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to whom I
give the floor.

