Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to demonstrate with some numbers the
level of the so-called extremism that exists in Ukraine,
which apparently only people in Russia seem to know
about. Last year, two electoral campaigns were held
in Ukraine. The first was to elect the President of the
country, and the second to elect members of Parliament.
The Russian side, at least in as far as I understand their
position, seems to mean by the term "extremist" two of
the political parties in Ukraine. One is called the Right
Sector and the other is known as Freedom. I would like
to recall that, with respect to the presidential elections,
the candidate for the Right Sector, Mr. Yarash,
received only 1.6 per cent of the vote, which put him
in 10th place, and in 11th place with 0.7 per cent of
the vote came Mr. Tyahnybok of the Freedom Party.
In the parliamentary elections, in which those parties
also were represented, neither of those parties made it
into Parliament. I would like to stress that 29 parties
participated in the parliamentary campaign.

So what kind of extremism are we talking about
here? We can take a look back at history. Unfortunately,
it is very difficult for me to speak about this, because
my country, in recognition of this difficult page in our
history, adopted a law establishing that on 8 May we
remember the victims of the World War II. That is a
normal and civilized approach for any State. On 9 May,
we celebrate our victory.

I would also like to recall that in August 1939 the
Soviet Union signed a pact with Nazi Germany with
respect to the de facto division of Europe. Moreover,
on 17 September the Soviet Union attacked Poland.
Then they held a joint parade in Brest to celebrate
with the fascists. It is even more painful to speak
about this, but on 22 March of this year, in the city of
Saint Petersburg, something momentous took place:
a gathering of various European ultra-radical and
extreme rightist parties, about which the Federation
of Jewish Communities of Russia issued the following
statement. "We are extremely concerned and puzzled
that permission was given for a large gathering of
the most extreme nationalistic forces in Europe to be
held in Saint Petersburg, a city that lived through all
the horrors of the fascist blockade". The forum was
attended by representatives of various ultra-nationalist
parties of Europe, including such heinous parties as the
Greek Golden Dawn party, the National Democratic
Party of Germany, whose leader, Udo Voigt, also took
part in the forum and who earlier and unambiguously
stated that his party was a successor to Hitler's National
Socialists. Also present were the Austrian Freedom
Party; the Party of the Swedes founded by the National
Socialist Front in Sweden; the British National Party,
whose ex-leader, Nick Griffin, also participated in the
forum and denied the Holocaust; and the Italian New
Force and its leader Roberto Fiore, who calls himself
a fascist. All of that was organized under the aegis of
the Rodina Party or the Motherland-National Patriotic
Union. So, what kind of fascism are we speaking of in
Ukraine?

