The Secretary-General: This has been a serious
challenge for all of us. I am quite sure that everyone
must have experienced pain. In that regard, I appreciate
the pain felt by Their Excellencies Presidents Tadie and
Sejdiu. Now, turning to our mission, my overriding
priority and concern is how to bring peace and security
and maintain this peace and security in the region. That
is what I am going to do as Secretary-General, and I
need the support, cooperation and sympathetic
understanding of participants in order to do it. This is
part of a broad mandate which is given to me by the
Charter of the United Nations and by resolution 1244
(1999), which Security Council members adopted in
1999.

I have shared with the Security Council my
assessment of the situation in Kosovo and have
described my intensive efforts, with the sides and key
stakeholders, to reach a compromise solution. These
efforts have resulted in an idea for the international
civil presence, which is before the Council today. This
package is a practical and workable solution, a
concrete and sustainable response to a complex and
difficult situation. It is founded on the imperative,
overriding need, as I have said, to maintain
international peace and security and stability in Kosovo
and the region, while responding and adapting to
changing circumstances on the ground.

The package furthers the objectives of the United
Nations in Kosovo. Its aim is to consolidate the
significant achievements of nine years of interim
administration. It takes into account the profoundly
changed reality in Kosovo, while also addressing areas
of concern for Serbia and for Kosovo's minority
communities.

The package is strictly status neutral and is fully
within the framework of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), which remains the legal framework for
UNMIK until and unless the Security Council decides
otherwise. It recognizes the importance of an enhanced
role for the European Union in Kosovo as part of the
European Union's efforts to promote progress and
stability in the Western Balkans.

While no solution is ideal, this package is, I am
convinced, the result of an effort at compromise and
has benefited from extensive consultations. It is
supported by all my senior advisers, who have worked
tirelessly and intensively with me in its development. It
is, therefore, the view of the United Nations that this
package constitutes the best possible way forward to
manage the situation in Kosovo. Today's meeting has
provided the Security Council with an important
opportunity to consider the package.

Finally, the Secretariat and I myself as Secretary-
General, are ready to brief the Council on operational
developments in Kosovo and to share with it the
challenges on which our mission has been focusing,
including the one related to Mitrovica, referred to by
the representative of Russia.

