Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): May I, at the
outset, echo the comments made by others about our
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, here in the Chair today. It is
appropriate not only because of Singapore's role in the
region and as a member of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN), but also, as others have
said, because of the role that Singapore has played
within the Council on East Timor. I would again wish
to express our appreciation to Ambassador Mahbubani
for his role in this respect.

Today, 20 May, does indeed mark a historic day,
as we welcome the most recent member of the
community of nations. As we meet here in New York to
mark this occasion, more than 80 country delegations
have gathered in Dili to participate in and celebrate
East Timor's passage to independence. The New
Zealand Prime Minister is very pleased to be amongst
them.

Achieving this day has not been without
significant cost to the people of East Timor. Vivid
memories remain of the violence which followed the
ballot in which the East Timorese people expressed
their overwhelming desire for independence. How far
East Timor has come in that short period is testament
to the will of its people and to the commitment of the
international community, through its support for the
United Nations role of partnership with the East
Timorese people. That partnership will continue after
today but will change in nature as the overall United
Nations footprint is reduced with regard to security,
governance, reconstruction and development support
functions.

The people of East Timor should rightly savour
this new-found sovereignty. Political sovereignty is
however interwoven with the pursuit of economic
independence. It is as much these economic challenges
that will test the East Timorese leadership as the need
to entrench and nurture its fledgling democracy.
It is clear, however, that on both the political and
the economic fronts, East Timor has many friends in
the region and around the world. The entire United
Nations operation - from the International Force in
East Timor (INTERFET) through the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and now to United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) - could not have made the
progress now evident without the United Nations
membership showing its clear willingness to support
and directly assist East Timor.

Those friendships will, over the next two to three
years, take on a different dimension as countries
establish relationships directly with the Government of
East Timor. Those relationships will form the core
around which East Timor will find its place in the
global community, and will go some considerable way,
particularly in these early years, in helping East Timor
chart its own path towards political and economic
sovereignty. We very much welcome the news which
the Deputy Secretary-General gave us this morning
about East Timor's application for United Nations
membership.

Others before me have referred to the crucial role
played by individuals in Dili and here in New York in
getting us to the point where we are today. I shall not
repeat their names, but I would very much like to
express our appreciation for the key role that United
Nations staff have played in getting us here. The
Government and the people of New Zealand have been
pleased to play a part in this process. We very much
wish East Timor well.

