Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Chinese presidency's
initiative to convene this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Secretary-General reported on the political and
security situation in the region in his briefing, and I
would like to thank him for that. The situation justifies
the Security Council's regular discussion of it.

At the outset, may I, on behalf of my Government
and the people of Senegal, express my condolences and
solidarity with the people of Japan and Ecuador, hard
hit during the recent earthquakes.

With regard to terrorism, I would like to recall that
Senegal condemns all violence, regardless of where it
comes from.

Our meeting this morning comes once again at a
time characterized by continued settlement activity, an
exacerbation of violence and an absence of a political
horizon in the occupied territories of Palestine. The
stalemate in the political process is undoubtedly the
basis for the spike in violence on both sides, with a
large number of casualties, especially on the Palestinian
side. Since October 2015, the escalating violence has
led to the death of over 200 Palestinians, including 48
children, and 30 Israelis, not to mention the thousands
of wounded. It bears repeating that the systematic and
disproportionate use of force is not a solution to the
crisis, especially in the absence of a political horizon.

We must deplore the incitement to violence and
hatred that certain Palestinian factions engage in. We
must also condemn the unacceptable acts of terrorism
committed by Israeli settlers in the West Bank, including
in Jerusalem. Those acts are likely to aggravate the
already deep divisions between the two peoples and
to undermine the prospects for reconciliation and
sustainable peace.

The punitive policies carried out by the occupying
Power in the Palestinian territories are also a source
of concern. Since the beginning of this year, hundreds
of Palestinian homes and structures, some built with
the help of international partners, have been destroyed,
and the number of demolitions this year far exceeds that
of 2015.

Similarly, the unacceptable policy involving the
geographical, demographic and cultural modification
of Jerusalem risks turning the political crisis into a
religious conflict with serious consequences for the
whole region and beyond. In addition to constituting
violations of international law, the increasing settlement
activities challenge the two-State solution, to which the
Israeli State has nonetheless reiterated its commitment.

One cannot ignore the worrisome situation of the
Palestinian economy, in particular in Gaza. In addition
to being an unacceptable humanitarian disaster, the
blockade against the Gaza Strip is a potential threat
to Israel's security, in that it increases the already real
risk of having the Palestinian cause coopted or used
by other actors, such as the Islamic State, with all the
negative consequences that that may bring about. In that
respect, we call upon the Israeli Government to take the
necessary measures, particularly in the economic field,
to alleviate the suffering of the affected populations.

Palestine has a school enrolment rate of
approximately 99 per cent, one of the highest rates
in the world, and gender balance is deeply rooted in
the education system, thanks to the commendable
efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
However, with an unemployment rate of over 40 per
cent among graduates, it is easy to understand the sense
of desperation that drives people, especially young
people. In addition, the impact of the Syrian crisis on
Palestinian refugees, especially children, is worrying.
It should be recalled that 42 per cent of the 118 schools
run by UNRWA in Syria, which were attended by
67,300 students, have been forced to close. In total, no
fewer than 460,000 Palestinians have directly suffered
the consequences of the war in Syria.

In awaiting the recent efforts of the Quartet,
including the forthcoming issuance of the report on
the status quo, based on a decision taken at the high-
level meeting in Munich on 12 February with a view to
overcoming the current impasse, my country remains
willing to consider any initiative that would lead to
a resumption of the negotiations, including that of
France to organize an international conference on the
Palestinian issue.

For its part, Senegal calls for the resumption
of negotiations between Israel and Palestine on the
basis of clear elements, with a specific time frame for
reaching a final solution based on international law
and the relevant resolutions. The time has come for a
Palestinian State to be established within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the United Nations partition plan of 1948. A solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of two
States, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine,
would clearly lead to better management of the security
and socioeconomic challenges in the Middle East. In the
meantime, the Council should plan for precautionary
measures to enforce the status quo at the holy sites
in Jerusalem, without forgetting the solution of the
international protectorate for the Palestinian people.
The practical elements identified by the Secretariat,
based on historic precedent, at the request of the State
of Palestine, seem absolutely worthwhile, pending a
lasting solution to the crisis, which we eagerly await.

In concluding, I must renew our appeal to the
Palestinian political actors to join the Cairo agreement,
committing in good faith to the Doha negotiations so
as to work towards the formation a Government of
national unity, which would facilitate the revival of a
political process with Israel.

The conference on the issue of Jerusalem, which is
to be convened on 3 and 4 May in Dakar on the initiative
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People in cooperation with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, will provide an
opportunity, I hope, to contribute to the development of
practical solutions to the issues facing that city, which
is a symbol of the three monotheistic religions. I take
this opportunity to renew our invitation to all States
Members of the Organization to actively participate in
the meeting.

With regard to the situation in Syria, my delegation
appeals to the parties to the conflict to continue, with
the support of influential stakeholders, including
countries in the region and the International Syria
Support Group, to uphold the cessation of hostilities,
pursuant to resolution 2268 (2016), which was itself the
result of the joint efforts of the task force on the truce
in Syria, which we commend.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria, our
full support for his efforts to restore lasting peace in
Syria, where the conflict has already led to the death
of more than 260,000 people and generated 4.6 million
refugees and 13.5 million displaced persons.

Finally, with regard to Yemen, we reaffirm
Senegal's support for the initiatives of the Special
Adviser on Yemen aimed at promoting a credible
political process and lasting peace in the country. We
appeal to the parties to uphold the ceasefire in order to
facilitate the discussions in Kuwait.

