Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, who
briefed us on the findings of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). On behalf
of the United Kingdom, I would also like to thank the
OPCW and its staff. The Security Council invited
us to keep it updated. I thank you, Mr. President, for
agreeing to this meeting today. We wish to brief the
Council on the most recent stage in the investigation.
I will also cover briefly findings, attribution and a
refutation of some of the public statements that have
been made by Russia against my country. This meeting
is being held immediately after the meeting of the
OPCW Executive Council in The Hague to which the
High Representative referred.

If I may, I would just like to stress that the report
itself has been circulated without any redaction or
amendment to the States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). To underscore that
point, I would like to underscore that the report to
the members of the Executive Council is exactly the
same report as the United Kingdom itself received. As
the High Representative set out, the findings of the
OPCW confirm the United Kingdom's analysis of the
identity of the toxic chemical. It supports our finding
that a military-grade nerve agent was used in Salisbury.
As our investigation has found and as the OPCW has
verified, the highest concentrations of the agent were
found on the handle of Mr. Skripal's front door. It is
therefore the chemical that we said it was. That has
been confirmed by an independent mechanism.

I would like to say a word about the use of the term
Novichok. It is a term that we use to describe such
chemicals. We use the Russian term for such nerve
agents. The OPCW report itself does not use the term
Novichok. However, the point that I wish to make is
that it is the chemical that we said it was. There should
therefore not be any lack of clarity on that point.

The report sets out the full forensic chain of custody.
It sets out how there could be no contamination. It
explains how the environmental samples are analysed
by two laboratories and the biomedical samples by two
further laboratories. Finally, the report notes the absence
of any significant amounts of impurities in the chemicals
that were detected. High purity is the description given
in paragraph 11 of the executive summary. That in turn
suggests that a highly sophisticated laboratory - that
is, a State laboratory - made the chemicals.

The identification of the nerve agent used is an
essential piece of technical evidence in the ongoing
investigation. However, the Porton Down analysis
and the OPCW report do not identify the country
or the laboratory of origin of the agent used in the
attack. I would like to explain the wider picture that
has led the United Kingdom to assess that there is no
plausible alternative explanation than Russian State
responsibility for what happened in Salisbury. In our
View, only Russia had the technical means, operational
experience and motive to target the Skripals.

First, if I may turn to the technical means, a
combination of credible open-source reporting and
intelligence shows that in the 19805 the Soviet Union
developed a new class of fourth-generation nerve
agents. In Russia, and then more broadly, they were
known as Novichoks. The key institute responsible for
that work is a branch of the State Scientific Research
Institute for Organic Chemistry and Technology at
Shikhany. The code word for the offensive chemical
weapons programme of which Novichoks were one
part was "Foliant". It is highly likely that Novichoks
were developed to prevent detection by the West and
to circumvent international chemical weapons controls.
The Russian State has previously produced Novichoks
and would still be capable of doing so today. Within the
past decade, Russia has produced and stockpiled small
quantities of Novichoks.

Russia's chemical weapons programme continued
after the collapse of the Soviet Union. By 1993, when
Russia signed the Chemical Weapons Convention, it
is likely that some Novichoks had passed acceptance
testing. That meant that they could be used by the
Russian military. Russia's declaration under the CWC
failed to report work on Novichoks. Russia further
developed Novichoks after ratifying the Convention.
In the mid-20005, President Putin himself was closely
involved in the Russian chemical weapons programme.

It is highly unlikely that any former Soviet Republic
other than Russia pursued an offensive chemical
weapons programme after independence. No terrorist
group or non-State actor would be able to produce that
agent in the purity described by the OPCW testing.
That is something that Russia has acknowledged.

Secondly, I would like to refer to operational
experience. Russia has a proven record of conducting
State-sponsored assassination, including on the territory
of the United Kingdom. The independent inquiry
into the death of Alexander Litvinenko concluded in
January 2016 that he had been deliberately poisoned
with polonium; that the Federal Security Service of
the Russian Federation had directed the operation; and
that President Putin probably had approved it. During
the 2000s, Russia commenced programmes to test
means of delivering chemical warfare agents and to
train personnel from special units in the use of such
weapons. That programme subsequently included the
investigation of ways to deliver nerve agents, including
by application to door handles. Within the past decade,
as I said, Russia has produced and stockpiled small
quantities of Novichok under this programme.

Thirdly, there is motive. Sergei Skripal was a
former Russian military intelligence officer from the
Main Intelligence Directorate. He was convicted of
espionage in 2006. It is highly likely that the Russian
intelligence services view at least some of its defectors
as legitimate targets for assassination. We have
information indicating Russian intelligence service
interest in the Skripals, and this dates back at least as
far as 2013 when email accounts belonging to Yulia
Skripal were targeted by Main Intelligence Directorate
cyberspecialists. None of those stocks and production
have been declared in Russia's chemical weapons
declaration. It is clear that Russia is in breach of its
obligations to declare its chemical weapons programme.

If I may, I would now like to turn to an update on
the Skripals themselves, their medical condition and the
consular situation, before turning to the investigation
itself. The Russians asked us to pass on the offer to
provide consular services to Yulia, as well as their
request to see her, and we have done that. Yulia herself
said in a statement on 11 April:

"I have access to friends and family, and I have
been made aware of my specific contacts at the
Russian Embassy who have kindly offered me their
assistance in any way they can. At the moment, I
do not wish to avail myself of their services, but
ifI change my mind I know how to contact them."

According to the medical update from the Medical
Director at Salisbury District Hospital, in the four
weeks since the incident in the city centre, the Skripals
have received round-the-clock care from clinicians, and
they have been able to draw on the advice and support
from world-leading experts in this field. Because of
the Skripals' right to privacy, I will not go into great
detail about the treatment we have been providing.
However, we can say the following. Nerve agents
work by attaching themselves to a particular enzyme
in the body, which then stops the nerves from working
properly. That results in symptoms such as sickness,
hallucinations and confusion. The hospital, in treating
the patients, was able to stabilize them, ensuring
that the patients could breathe and that blood could
continue to circulate. They then needed to use a variety
of different drugs to support the patients until they
could create more enzymes to replace those affected
by the poisoning. The hospital also used specialized
decontamination techniques to remove any residual
toxins. Both patients have responded exceptionally well
to the treatment that we have been providing, but both
patients are at different stages in their recovery.

Turning to decontamination and the investigation,
as we have said before this has been one of the most
comprehensive and complex investigations into the use
of chemical weapons ever undertaken. It has involved
250 police detectives. They have been supported by
a range of experts and partners, and they have gone
through more than 5,000 hours of video footage.
They have interviewed more than 500 witnesses.
The British Government announced on 17 April that
decontamination work in Salisbury is starting this
week, and it will take some months to complete. In
total, nine sites, including three in the city centre, have
been identified as requiring specialist decontamination.
That will involve a complex process of testing, the
removal of items that could be contaminated and that
might, in turn, harbour residual amounts of the agent.
It also involves chemical cleaning and retesting. All
waste will be safely removed and incinerated. Each site
will not be released until decontamination is complete.

We have heard a number of allegations against
the United Kingdom and against the findings from
the Russian Federation. If I may, I would like to deal
briefly with some of the most egregious.

One accusation that we have faced today and in
recent days was that Yulia had not been poisoned - that
the British Government had in fact drugged her, put her
in a coma and then injected her with the poisons that
were found. That is more than fanciful; it is outlandish.
That sort of thing may happen in Russia, but I can
assure the Council that it does not and will not happen
in the United Kingdom.

Secondly, the Russian Foreign Minister, Mr. Sergei
Lavrov, has claimed that traces of the toxic chemical BZ
were found in the samples analysed by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and
this disclosed the location of one of the independent
laboratories that the OPCW used. The OPCW itself
has not disclosed the identity of the labs, nor have they
published any information about BZ samples in the
executive summary that they released to the public. So,
it is an interesting question: How and why does Russia
think it knows who tested the samples and what result
they found? By making that confidential information
public, Russia has in turn breached the confidentiality
that States parties owe the OPCW under the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC).

On the substance of that allegation, the Director-
General of the OPCW explained in his statement today
that a sample separate from the samples taken from the
Skripals and their environment was sent along with
the samples taken from Salisbury to the designated
laboratories for testing. That is called a control sample,
and it is a routine procedure carried out in these tests
so that the OPCW can test whether the labs' findings
are accurate. The Director-General has confirmed
unreservedly that there was no B2 in any of the samples
taken by the OPCW in Salisbury. I believe that Russia
is fully familiar with this procedure, so I would be
grateful to know what motive Mr. Lavrov had in setting
out this obfuscation.

Russia continues to be asked to be involved in the
United Kingdom's independent investigation. It is quite
clear both that it is suspected of involvement and that
its behaviour has undermined its credibility on this.
As I said before, this is an arsonist and firefighter
trying to investigate his own fire. Russia has failed to
establish any good reason under the CWC or otherwise
why it should be involved in the United Kingdom's
independent police investigation. I repeat what I
said at the first Council briefing in which I took part
concerning Salisbury (see S/PV.8224). We did go to the
Russian Federation before we went to the OPCW to ask
if this was a rogue attempt by one of its agents, and if
so to cooperate with us in trying to get to the bottom
of it and resolve the case. The Russian Federation did
not agree to that request. Rather, it refused to take
it seriously.

On 13 April, the Russian Federation transmitted to
the United Kingdom a list of questions under article
IX of the CWC. We will respond as soon as possible
and certainly within the 10 days stipulated in the
Convention. We will respond to Russia, which made
the request, but we will share our response with all
States parties. Furthermore, if the CWC allows, I will
of course share it with members of the Council. Russia
said that its requests were urgent, and it has asked us
for an answer by no later than 17 April, which we have
not done because we have 10 days to respond. However,
we regret that Russia did not consider it urgent when we
asked it for an explanation on 12 March. Our questions
remain unanswered.

That concludes the briefing I have to offer the
Council today. We are at the disposal of the Council
to answer any questions. We are also very willing to
continue to keep the Council updated if the Council
would like that. We are happy to do that in person, or
possibly, so as not to disrupt the timetable, in writing.
I should mention also that we held an open briefing for
all Member States yesterday at the General Assembly,
and there were a number of questions that we were able
to answer.

