Ms. Landgren: The present report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/453) presents a
discouraging picture of the state of Nepal's peace
process and of the failure of the political parties to
invest in its revival. The disagreement between the
Government and the opposition over the continued role
of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) in
the peace process is also reported.

At the time of my most recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.6308), Nepal was in the fourth day
of a national strike called by the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) seeking to compel
the resignation of Prime Minister Madhav Kumar
Nepal. Party supporters thronged Kathmandu and other
urban centres, raising fears of confrontation. After six
days, the strike was called off and the demonstrators
made an orderly retreat. Fresh national anxiety arose
within weeks with the imminent expiry of the two-year
tenure of the Constituent Assembly with the new
constitution still far from complete. The country was
on the brink of an uncertain and dangerous
constitutional dilemma. After intensive negotiation and
an eleventh-hour threat of revolt within the third-
largest party, the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (UML), all but five parliamentarians
supported a year-long extension of the Assembly until
28 May 2011.

The three-point agreement that extended the
Assembly also committed the parties to moving ahead
in consensus and cooperation in the remaining tasks to
bring the peace process to its logical conclusion, and
clarified that the Prime Minister was ready to resign
10-50627
without delay to pave the way for the formation of a
national consensus Government.

This agreement averted a potential collapse of the
peace process, but the critical extension of the deadline
for completing the constitution has not moved matters
forward. Since then, the Constituent Assembly has met
only to adopt the calendar for constitution-drafting.
Prime Minister Nepal stepped down on 30 June, but
continues to head a caretaker Government pending the
election of a new Prime Minister by the Legislature-
Parliament. Negotiations to form a national consensus
government failed, and the Legislature-Parliament has
voted seven times since 21 July on two candidates:
Maoist former Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal
"Prachanda", and Nepali Congress parliamentary party
leader Ram Chandra Poudel. The Maoists have
obtained a high of 259 votes, some 42 short of a simple
majority, while Nepali Congress has reached a
maximum of 124 votes. An eighth round is tentatively
scheduled for 26 September.

A primary reason for the deadlock is the UML
decision to remain neutral in the balloting, which is at
least in part a result of internal party tensions. Its
Chairman Jhalanath Khanal has put forward a
consensus platform grouping the major issues to be
resolved for the sake of the peace process. The
Madheshi coalition, despite strains, has also stayed
largely neutral, and the withholding of roughly 190
votes by these two blocs has prevented both contenders
from garnering a majority.

There is widespread acknowledgement in
principle that a majority Government that leaves any of
the three major parties in opposition is unlikely to
muster the unity needed to see through the most
difficult outstanding peace process commitments.
Unfinished constitutional business includes reaching
agreement on the form of governance, the judiciary and
State restructuring. The State restructuring commission
foreseen by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement was
to have begun its work by the end of July, but has not
done so. Madheshi parties in particular wish to see
State restructuring addressed by the relevant committee
of the Constituent Assembly.

The study committee charged with making
recommendations on seven of the eight remaining
thematic papers did not present its report as scheduled.
Despite plans to present the first draft of the new
constitution in November, there are doubts that this
10-50627
timetable can be kept. But the prospect of forming a
consensus Government remains equally, if not more
remote.

As the three-point agreement of late May makes
explicit, the issues of power-sharing, completion of the
new constitution and solutions for the former Maoist
army personnel are now interlinked. All three also form
part of the proposed UML consensus platform, but this
proposal has received little attention from other party
leaders. The current void in the peace process
illustrates a long-standing reluctance to invest in the
kind of sustained and structured negotiations that might
drive progress. The proper architecture for this was
never put in place, and the once-promising high-level
political mechanism was abandoned not long after the
death of Girij a Prasad Koirala in March.

It is not too late to establish a clear and
dependable discussion mechanism with which the
parties can also firmly put to rest any fears that they
will abandon the path of the constitution and
democracy, and demonstrate a new seriousness towards
resolving outstanding issues.

The commitments that were made in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Interim
Constitution and other auxiliary agreements formed the
negotiated basis for ending Nepal's 10-year war and for
responding to Nepal's historically marginalized groups,
including Madheshi, indigenous and Dalit populations.
These commitments include the integration into the
security forces or the social rehabilitation of the Maoist
army personnel, who were to be supervised by a
special committee, and the democratization of the
Nepal Army, defined as the determination of its
appropriate size, the development of its democratic
structure and national and inclusive character, and
training imparted in accordance with the norms and
values of democracy and human rights.

Pending the implementation of these forward-
looking commitments, the Nepal Army and the Maoist
army were made subject to restrictions in order,
pursuant to article 4 of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement,

"to hold the election to (the) constituent assembly
in (a) free and fair manner and for the democratic
restructuring of the army to proceed".

The parties negotiated the specifics of these
mutual restrictions, under which the Maoist army is
3
cantoned in 28 sites across Nepal and the Nepal Army
is confined to barracks other than for a number of
routine functions. The storage and monitoring by
UNMIN of Maoist army weapons and an equivalent
number of Nepal Army weapons were also negotiated
between the parties. These weapons still belong to their
respective armies, which retain the keys to the arms
storage containers, which are under 24-hour UNMIN
surveillance. The barracks, cantonments and activities
of the Maoist army and the Nepal Army are lightly
monitored by the modest UNMIN contingent of
unarmed arms monitors, and each army remains under
its own chain of command.

In recent months, the caretaker Government,
sections of the Nepali Congress and the UML, and the
Nepal Army have argued that the Nepal Army should
no longer be monitored by UNMIN, citing a provision
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement according to
which "the concept of two sides shall cease to exist"
upon the establishment of the interim Legislature-
Parliament - a development that took place in January
2007.

Whether or not two sides still exist, there are
manifestly still two armies. The restrictions on the
armies were to be transitional and, as Council members
are aware, the Secretary-General has repeatedly argued
against the prolonged confinement of the two armies
without a long-term solution, calling for early
decisions to be addressed in the context of the longer-
term reform of the security sector. The changes
foreseen to the armies under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement have not taken place.

It is cause for concern that the Nepal Army now
seeks unilaterally to withdraw from and to alter the
scope of the Agreement on the Monitoring of the
Management of Arms and Armies. The arms
monitoring agreement contains provisions whereby the
parties can review or modify it. The Government and
the Army have not sought to use this modality. Any
unilateral decision in this regard may have the effect of
abrogating the treaty.

These developments have direct and immediate
bearing on the work of UNMIN. UNMIN's monitoring
of arms and armies and chairmanship of the Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee (JMCC) are set
out in the Arms Monitoring Agreement itself. UNMIN
monitors strictly at the invitation of the parties, and
with their agreement. Absent a fresh agreement
between the parties, UNMIN cannot continue to
monitor one side at the request of the other; neither
does it have the authority to introduce fundamental
changes to the monitoring regime.

The Government's pressure for an end to the
international monitoring of the Nepal Army has been
accompanied by a flood of criticism directed at
UNMIN. A Nepal Army internal document, entitled
"The basis for UNMIN's exit", which has been leaked
to the press, asserts that UNMIN is siding with the
Maoists, is not impartial and is obstructing the Nepal
Army and the Nepal Government in fulfilling their
national duty. The Chief of Army Staff has been visible
and vocal in lobbying the political leadership and
diplomatic representatives for UNMIN's departure.
This activism by the Army on issues within the
political sphere seems, however, to have been
encouraged by some senior political leaders, with the
Defence Minister publicly accusing UNMIN of being
the mouthpiece of the Maoists. UNMIN has protested
the Army's impugning of the integrity of the United
Nations. The caretaker Government has yet to
repudiate the actions or remarks of its army and its
ministers.

As has been reported to the Council in the past,
the Nepal Army has since 2007 continued to recruit
personnel in defiance of the arms monitoring
agreement and bypassing the JMCC. Reports of
recruitment by the Nepal Army and by the Maoist army
have been brought to the JMCC for discussion and
review, as is appropriate. The Nepal Army has now
refused to accept any future discussion of its
recruitment in the JMCC, and has said it will not take
part in JMCC meetings if this issue is on the agenda.
Seeking to restrict discussion in the designated forum -
the JMCC - undermines the agreed arms monitoring
regime.

As recently as May, the Nepal Army had sought
to expand the work of the JMCC to cover the activities
of the Maoists' Young Communist League, sending
four letters of protest in that regard. The JMCC has
never reviewed actions by or on behalf of entities other
than the Nepal Army and the Maoist army. Soon
afterwards, records of confidential JMCC proceedings
were leaked to the press, as were the names of all
19,602 Maoists registered and verified in the
cantonment sites in 2007.
10-50627

Let me emphasize that the true risks of this
moment pertain less to UNMIN than to the gulf of
mistrust between the parties that has paralysed the
political process. Along with this has come significant
distortion of Nepal's comparatively successful arms
monitoring regime and unfounded allegations of
UNMIN bias. These include two matters perpetually
recycled as evidence of UNMIN monitoring failures,
on which I would like to set the record straight. One is
the claim that UNMIN neither prevented nor reacted to
the torture and murder, in May 2008 in the Shaktikhor
cantonment, of businessman Ram Hari Shrestha by
Maoist army personnel. The other is the allegation that
UNMIN intervened to prevent justice being done in
August 2009, when 19 Maoist army personnel were
found in Kapilvastu in possession of nine United
Nations-registered perimeter weapons.

Both of these incidents were serious breaches of
the Arms Monitoring Agreement. As the record shows,
UNMIN condemned both immediately, issued press
releases underlining the Mission's concerns and also
conveyed these messages strongly in private. Both
cases were brought to the JMCC, along with UNMIN's
findings, and were unanimously found to be violations.
UNMIN has repeatedly called for those involved in
ordering and carrying out the abduction and killing of
Ram Hari Shrestha to be brought to justice. In
Kapilvastu, UNMIN went immediately to the site to
identify the weapons. Following the engagement of
senior Government officials, the matter was brought to
a peaceful resolution and agreed steps were taken,
including the return of the weapons to the cantonment.

UNMIN does not control or enforce Maoist army
or Nepal Army movements. As has been reported to the
Council, UNMIN has pressed both armies, since last
year, for greater cooperation in the monitoring of troop
strength. Doubts that Maoists were exceeding the
agreed 12 per cent rate of absence in the cantonment
sites led the Government to halt payments to them
earlier this year. Following discussions between the
Peace Ministry and the UCPN-M, payments resumed
and the minister expressed his satisfaction. UNMIN
has, however, continued to raise concerns in that regard
and has recently agreed with the UCPN-M. that arms
monitors will conduct a fresh head count in the
cantonments in the near future.

UNMIN's aim is to complete our support to the
peace process effectively and wind up our presence
with minimal disruption to that process. Since March,

UNMIN has actively explored how best to do so, in
extensive consultation with senior leaders of the three
main parties. As the Secretary-General has now
reported twice, the parties have consistently maintained
to us that the handover of monitoring responsibilities
would be premature and that there is no mechanism to
take over this responsibility. In the present polarised
climate, a national monitoring mechanism can expect
to find its credibility challenged even more severely
than that of UNMIN.

In the absence of credible monitoring
alternatives, UNMIN has continued to encourage the
parties to focus on reaching an agreement on
integration and rehabilitation and related commitments
so that the need for monitoring the armies could end. In
the meantime it has also continued to press for
improving the effectiveness of its monitoring role. The
Nepali Congress, the UML and the UCPN-M. have all
presented proposals on integration and rehabilitation,
and agree that three options are open to Maoist army
personnel: voluntary separation, integration into the
security forces and rehabilitation. The parties'
elaboration of proposals is useful, but they remain far
apart on the numbers to be integrated as well as on the
modalities of integration. In common with many past
agreements, these too rely heavily on a minimum level
of trust, consensus and goodwill as a modality for
moving forward. The Special Committee met on
5 September, however with Maoist participation for the
first time in many months.

Our counterparts had identified support to the
Special Committee, including on the planning and
implementation of integration and rehabilitation, as an
area where UNMIN could be of greater assistance.
Consistent also with the Council's calls for a timeline
on this issue, we shared a non-paper on this with senior
party representatives as a way of encouraging forward
thinking. As the Secretary-General's report notes, this
placed along a hypothetical timeline the technical
elements broadly agreed among the parties and in the
Technical Committee. Based principally on advice
from Nepali experts and on the experience of the
discharge of the disqualified Maoist army personnel
earlier this year, it posited the reinforcement of
Government implementing institutions, notably a
secretariat to the Special Committee; in-cantonment
consultations, briefing, registration and choices by
personnel; separation into groups; the detailed plan for
integration following political agreement on entry
norms, rank harmonization and so on; and final
briefings on choices. Discharge would follow at the
end of week 39. This was a non-prescriptive effort to
stimulate reflection and technical planning. The Prime
Minister, however, declared that UNMIN had stepped
beyond its jurisdiction. UNMIN has continued to press
for interim actions, including profiling in the
cantonments and a labour market survey.

The recent direct challenge to the Arms
Monitoring Agreement takes the peace process in a
sharply wrong direction. Risks to the peace process and
to democratic governance in Nepal are real. The risks
include an unresolved leadership battle, which may
keep critical decisions in limbo and, at this point,
appears unlikely to deliver the consensus Government
that would form a stronger basis for concluding the
peace process. They include the risk that the
Constituent Assembly, even after a l2-month
extension, will expire without a new constitution
having been drafted. They also include a climate in the
country of deteriorating security. In late July, the
Government decided to give special protection to
village development committee secretaries across the
country, after more than 1,200 secretaries in
31 districts tendered a collective resignation, citing
insecurity. The risks include threats to journalistic
independence, with killings of media personnel earlier
in the year followed by death threats to senior editors
and other acute constraints on their operations and
reporting. They include a contested end to the
monitoring of arms and armies, with unpredictable
consequences.

The biggest risk of all may be that the peace
process and parliamentary processes appear
discredited, sending a discouraging signal to existing
and emerging groups about taking the democratic route
to push for change. UNMIN's tasks can succeed only if
there is overall political progress in Nepal. Its role is
supportive. Ascribing to the United Nations the blame
for the parties' failure to move forward politically is
not a new phenomenon, but it has grown incrementally
and in intensity. The hard political decisions needed to
take Nepal's peace process forward are beyond
UNMIN's mandate and capacity, and lie firmly in the
hands of Nepal's political leaders.

As the report of the Secretary-General indicates,
some things need to change if the peace process is to
be brought to a successful end. With respect to
UNMIN, it is proposed that in the first instance the

mandate be discussed with a new, duly formed
Government, in the context of the parties' fulfilment of
their commitments and the phasing-out of the Mission.
The Secretary-General would then report back to the
Council, and in the event of there being neither clarity
nor consensus in this regard, would propose alternative
measures, including the possible termination of the
mandate.

I would like once again to make clear that the
desire of the Secretary-General is to see the Mission
complete its tasks and withdraw in a manner that does
not jeopardize the peace process and maintains
continued international support for peace consolidation.
The United Nations has no interest in or desire to
prolong the life of the Mission by a day more than
necessary.

Nepal's peace process has not failed, even though
it has moved far more slowly and unevenly than
anticipated by either the parties or the Council. The
original ambitious timelines have not been maintained
on any count, and this is likely to be a protracted
endeavour. For well over a year now, the process has
essentially stalled and the level of mistrust has risen.
The process can be brought back on track if the
political leadership is ready to reassess priorities and
place this process at the front and centre of its political
activity, recognizing that only through continued and
persistent negotiation can it move forward. At a time
when political moderation is in short supply, the parties
have a great deal of work to do in order to make the
case that they intend Nepal's peace to be permanent
and irreversible.

