Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): My delegation would like to
express its deep appreciation to the Polish presidency
for organizing this high-level open debate, and we are
pleased that the President of Poland presided over the
start of the meeting.

We thank the Chef de Cabinet and Judges Owada
and Meron for their informative briefings. I would
like to express my appreciation to Judges Owada
and Meron for their effort to help us to come to grips
with the issues surrounding accountability and the
challenges it presents. I am particularly appreciative
of Judge Meron's comprehensive treatment of this
very vital legal matter, in which he also very rightly
stressed the importance of avoiding selectivity, which
would unquestionably undermine any efforts to ensure
that a system of accountability is put in place. That is a
problem the Council has yet to overcome.

It is an understatement to say that we are living in
dangerously complextimes. We are facing unprecedented
challenges and threats to global peace and security.
Multilateralism and the rules-based international order
are under enormous strain. Collective action and respect
for basic norms and principles of international law have
therefore never been more essential than they are today.
That is all the more true today because we are living
in an increasingly interconnected and interdependent
world. What happens in one corner of the world
can easily affect us all, whether it is terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, climate
change or a pandemic.

No one can remain unaffected by these problems,
nor can anyone claim to have a panacea by which to
address them alone. We can do so only if we work we
work together. That is why now more than ever we need a
rules-based international world order. We cannot afford
to remain silent when established international norms
and principles are being challenged and undermined.
History teaches us that indifference to blatant disregard
for the purposes and principles of international law
that govern inter-State relations can only lead to
catastrophic consequences. That is why upholding
international law is absolutely necessary, making
today's deliberations all the more timely and relevant.
That is in the interest of all States, without exception,
but there can be no question that African States have
a deep attachment to rules-based interactions among
nations, for obvious reasons.
There is no peace without law, as the President
of Poland said. The role of the United Nations and
its various organs, including the Security Council,
continues to be crucial in this regard. Of course, the
Organization can only be as good as its Members allow
it to be, and the United Nations has no life independent
of its membership. It is in that context that the existence
of a healthy relationship among members of the Council
is the major determinant of the effectiveness of the
United Nations in advancing its historic mission, which
is so explicitly stated in the Preamble to the Charter of
the Organization. But recent developments have served
only to highlight how much the lofty ideals of the
Charter, instead of being brought closer to realization,
appear in fact to be objectives that are far from doable.
However, this situation should not be allowed to define
what humankind is capable of achieving in politics. It
is therefore imperative that we must make every effort
to undo the situation by redressing the enormous trust
deficit among nations and allowing diplomacy and
multilateralism to work.

We do not need to reinvent the wheel to do that.
All that is required is absolute commitment and strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter
ofthe United Nations, which remain as relevant today as
they did at the Organization's inception 4 safeguarding
international peace and security, promoting respect for
human rights and ensuring sustainable development
for all. Of course, if we are to meet the needs and
aspirations of current and future generations, the
Charter principles have to be applied in a manner that
is consistent with the realities of our time. That is why
we have been giving our full support to the Secretary-
General's reform agenda.

Unfortunately, we have yet to take full advantage
of what the Charter can offer to help us overcome the
constraints of self-defeating policies based on narrow
national-interest calculations, which ipso facto lead to
double standards that in turn undermine the credibility
of the Organization. In that regard, the most critical
matter is to be consistent in our fidelity to the principles
of the Charter - sovereign equality, territorial integrity,
political independence, non-intervention in others'
internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

The rules-based global order constitutes a
foundation for the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security as well as for fostering
friendly relations and cooperation among States. It
is certainly never easy or even possible, in fact, to
ensure that the rule of law will become a firm basis
for relations among nations, large or small, to the same
degree that it constitutes the foundation for democratic
governance at the national level. On the other hand, we
cannot abandon the effort to adhere to the principles
of international law governing inter-State relations,
despite the fact that it may be an uphill struggle to
fully achieve such a goal. There is not really another
sane option.

Given its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should indeed play a vital role in ensuring strict
adherence to the rules-based international system. As
much as there have been instances when the Council
has stood its ground in order to uphold principles of
international law, there have also been several when
it failed miserably to do so, tarnishing its image and
credibility immeasurably. We therefore certainly need
to draw lessons from those shortcomings and make
all the necessary efforts to redress them. That is what
the situation calls for, and we should summon our
collective will to do better. That is what will enable the
Council to effectively respond to the challenges of our
time and live up to the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the United Nations Charter.

