Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
When our Minister took the floor in the Council, be
conveyed certain convictions of Morocco and our
commitment with regard to the entirety of the Syrian
people. A few moments ago, the representative of Syria
decided to openly attack virtually all the members of
the Council. I understand his distress. He is unable to
rise to the expectations of the international community
with respect to a political solution, a cessation of the
violence and respect for human rights. It seems that he
has chosen to believe that the best defence is a good
offence.

He presumed to talk about Morocco in response
to what our Minister said. The representative of Syria
presumed to talk about Morocco's reforms and the royal
protocol. When our Minister spoke, he spoke on behalf
of the 32 million Moroccans. He expressed the beliefs
of the entire Moroccan people, who throughout history
have never faltered in taking the side of Arab peoples,
starting with the Syrian people. Morocco's Royal
Armed Forces have spilled their own blood to defend
Syria's territorial integrity. But we did it willingly,
expecting neither recognition nor gratitude.

The Moroccan monarchy is an ancestral monarchy,
and one that adapts, evolves and reforms itself. For that
reason Morocco distinguished itself in the Arab Spring
by a peaceful, forward-looking road to change whereby
our country now has one of the most progressive
Constitutions, which brought about profound reforms
supported by the vast majority of Moroccans. I can
therefore assure the Syrian representative that the
32 million Moroccan citizens take great pride not only
in the work of His Majesty the King but also in the
Moroccan monarchy itself and what it brings with it.
And when they express respect for the institution of the
monarchy they do it willingly and do not need anyone's
approval, least of all that of the Syrian representative.

As far as him bringing up the question of the
Sahara, I will very simply remind him that we are here
to discuss Syria in the context of the situation in the
Middle East. If he wants to discuss the Sahara we can
talk about it when the time comes.

The last thing I will say is that the Syrian
representative's words make me think of something he
will certainly understand - a most eloquent passage of
Arabic poetry by Al-Mutanabbi:

(spoke in Arabic)

"Being criticized by a lesser person proves that
I am perfect."

