Mr. McNee (Canada): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, and Japan for organizing this timely and
important debate.

Peacebuilding is rightly emerging as one of the
central challenges facing the United Nations. Conflicts
can erode State capacity, unravel the fabric of society
and hinder economic development. They also
undermine regional stability and create ungoverned
spaces within which armed groups and organized crime
can flourish. Far too frequently, countries emerge from
violence only to return to conflict within a short period
and at tremendous cost. As the Security Council
considers this question, it is important to analyse the
record so far. In that respect, there is much to be
learned from the international engagement in
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste. Canada
has supported peace consolidation in all three
countries.

In Afghanistan, Canada's approach marshals
civilian and military contributions behind a single
comprehensive strategy that aligns Canadian support
with the priorities of the Government of Afghanistan.
As a result, Canada has focused on six mutually
reinforcing priorities: enabling the Afghan National
Security Forces to sustain a more secure environment;
strengthening Afghan capacity to deliver basic
services; providing humanitarian aid; facilitating cross-
border dialogue with Pakistan; enhancing capacity for
democratic governance; and, finally, facilitating
Afghan-led political reconciliation.

In addition, Canada strongly supports the
international community's renewed commitment to
supporting the transition to full Afghan leadership of
security issues, as agreed during the London
Conference in January. While the context of each post-
conflict country differs, in our view the underlying
principles behind that approach are an important step
forward and should be applied more widely.

Canada is also honoured to chair the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
As a success story for multilateral peacebuilding,
Sierra Leone's experience highlights several important
factors. First, strong national leadership has enabled
political reconciliation and set the stage for several
rounds of successful elections, thereby cementing
democratic governance and rebuilding trust. Similarly,
efforts to combat corruption, decentralize Government
and provide essential services are helping to provide
Sierra Leoneans with a tangible peace dividend.

Secondly, Sierra Leone's success has been
accomplished with steady international support. Strong
international military commitment, including a sizeable
United Nations peacekeeping force, helped stabilize
the country and end the civil war. Considerable budget
support and a comprehensive security sector reform
programme in the years immediately following the
conflict laid solid foundations for further progress.
Since 2007, the Peacebuilding Commission has also
worked to ensure that Sierra Leone has the
international attention and political support needed to
complete the peacebuilding process.

Thirdly, the approach to peacebuilding in Sierra
Leone is a model worth replicating. The international
community has aligned its efforts with the priorities
outlined in the Agenda for Change and Sierra Leone's
own national strategy for peace consolidation and
economic development. In that context, the United
Nations family has also united its various mandates
and resources under a common strategy, the United
Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone. The Sierra
Leone configuration of the PBC has not only endorsed
that approach, but also actively oriented its work
according to national priorities. Such steps have
emphasized national leadership, reduced duplication,
eliminated unnecessary administrative burdens and
strengthened coordination.

Finally, it is worth noting that the outstanding
peacebuilding issues in Sierra Leone are representative
of challenges elsewhere. A large unemployed youth
population represents a latent risk of instability. While
a longer-term solution depends on economic growth
and private sector investment, immediate action is
needed to ensure that the youth contribute to peace
consolidation instead of being used by political or
criminal actors for violent purposes.

Canada has also provided support to
peacebuilding in Timor-Leste. From 2006 until early
this year, Canada contributed police experts to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
through the Canadian Police Arrangement, helping to
increase stability and further professionalize the
national police force. Since 2008, Timor-Leste has also
been a member of Canada's Military Training and
Cooperation Programme, which provides capacity-
building through military and language training. In
Timor-Leste, as elsewhere, the international
community also learned a vital lesson. Successful
peacebuilding requires sustained commitment.

(spoke in French)

Much remains to be done but several overarching
principles are emerging. It is clear that peacebuilding
should start as early as possible, that it is
complementary to peacekeeping, and that it requires
considerable resources and sustained commitment. The
Security Council should continue to ensure that the
core risks of relapse into conflict in a given context are
identified and addressed in a targeted manner,
including through closer cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Similarly, international support must be more
comprehensive, better integrated and more sensitive to
local context. Enhanced coordination among security,
humanitarian and development actors is also essential,
including between the United Nations and the World
Bank, as well as with respect to the promising work of
the Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development on principles and modalities for
engagement in post-conflict States. Fully implementing
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304) is one key component
in achieving these objectives.

Finally, peacebuilding must above all strengthen
national ownership. The international community
should work to establish capacity for effective
governance and align support behind national priorities
as quickly as possible. By drawing on local, regional
and international expertise, the international
community also can and should do a better job
mobilizing the civilian expertise necessary to support
national authorities, including through enhanced
South-South cooperation. Canada awaits with interest
the completion of the Secretariat's study on civilian
capacity within the United Nations system.

As a country strongly committed to
peacebuilding, Canada is contributing to progress in
each of these areas and will continue to do so in the
future.

