Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I too would like to thank the Judges and Prosecutors
representing the two International Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. I begin by paying tribute to the
outstanding work done over the past two years in the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
under the helm of Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet
and his team.

Iwould like to share some initial thoughts pertaining
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We welcome the comments of Judge Agius with regard
to the Tribunal's commitment to concluding its work
in December 2017. It is clear that the gradual loss of
experienced staff at the Tribunal and the delicate health
of some of the accused pose a challenge to concluding
ongoing proceedings. Nonetheless, we call upon the
Tribunal to make every possible effort to meet the
deadlines - of course, within the bounds of respecting
due process and fair-trial guarantees. To achieve that
goal, Spain fully supports extending the mandate of the
judges as requested by the Tribunal.

We also reiterate our concern about the pace,
effectiveness and small number of proceedings
undertaken by national authorities, particularly in
cases involving defendants of senior or mid-level
rank. We therefore call for strengthened efforts to
achieve genuine post-conflict national justice, which
is essential in strengthening the rule of law. We agree
with the Prosecutor that more can, and should, do more.
We listened very closely and carefully to Prosecutor
Brammertz's comments and extensive explanations.

Generally speaking, we welcome the fact that
the level of cooperation on the part of the authorities
of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the Prosecutor's Office has been positive.
Nonetheless, certain aspects concern us, specifically
the communication received by the Council on Serbia's
failure to carry out various arrest warrants and
surrender orders issued by the Tribunal. We therefore
call upon the Government of Serbia to duly abide by
the requirements of the Tribunal. We reiterate that
cooperation with the Tribunal is an unavoidable duty.
We encourage the authorities of those three countries to
continue to move forward on their regional cooperation
and to pursue joint efforts to overcome any obstacles
that might hamper such cooperation.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, Spain is of the view that, as has been
said, today's debate is rather unusual. It has special
significance because it is the last debate in which those
heading the Tribunal will participate. This is therefore
a moment to pay tribute to the men and women who,
throughout the past 21 years, have contributed to the
work of the Tribunal. The Tribunal will be closing its
doors, but its legacy will remain as a testimony, not only
to the horror of the genocide against the Tutsi people in
Rwanda, but also to the value ofjustice.

It is important to recognize the impact on
international law of the Tribunal's groundbreaking
jurisprudence in the area of genocide. It has been
especially important with respect to various issues,
including its interpretation of acts of sexual violence
as elements of the crime of genocide, as explained by
Judge Vagn Joensen, as well as in cases ofincitement to
genocide through the media. The Tribunal's contribution
to peace in the Great Lakes region cannot be denied, as
Spain fully acknowledges.

We acknowledge, and indeed welcome, the
information shared with the Council by Mr. Jallow
regarding the detention of one of the remaining fugitives
indicted by the Tribunal. We urge the authorities of
Rwanda and those leading the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to spare no effort
in finding the remaining eight fugitives and bringing
them before the Tribunal or the Mechanism itself or
Rwanda's judicial authorities. At the same time, we
also urge States where those fugitives might be found
to cooperate with the Tribunal by arresting them and
immediately handing them over to it.

With respect to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, we believe that
the transition phase, which in the case of the Tribunal
for Rwanda is nearly complete and in the case of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is well under way,
has been remarkably efficient to date. That has made
possible a smooth and uninterrupted transition in
the conduct of the work of both Tribunals, including
in cases regarding extremely sensitive issues such as
the protection of witnesses and victims. It was not an
easy task. We therefore commend those leading the
processes of all three institutions. We encourage the
Mechanism, whose initial period of activity is currently
under review by the Council, to continue to apply the
lessons learned and good practices developed by both
Tribunals.

I will conclude with some general thoughts. The
establishment of the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Tribunal for Rwanda constituted a milestone
in international criminal law. Their contribution to the
development of international criminal law has been
invaluable. That legacy is the best possible tribute to the
Victims and the survivors. It is critical, however, that
their work be completed by national jurisdictions, whose
genuine commitment to accountability is indispensable
in establishing the rule of law and bringing about true
reconciliation. As Judge Meron has reminded us, today
in Syria, Iraq, Libya, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic - and in many other places as well - we
are once again witnessing the terrible consequences of
contempt for the most basic elements of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
norms.

The achievements on the part of the international
criminal Tribunals, and the current work of other
instruments - I call particular attention to the
International Criminal Court - comprise a source of
hope, because they demonstrate that, through political
will and the necessary means, justice is also possible
for the victims of those conflicts. Combating impunity
must remain a priority for the Council, and the
message must be clear: those responsible must not go
unpunished, and the rule of law must, and can, prevail
in the face of barbarity.

