Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome you
to the Security Council, Mr. President, and thank you
for convening this timely debate and giving it added
significance by presiding over in person.

The United Kingdom welcomes the opportunity
to discuss security sector reform (SSR) in Africa.
History has taught us that we cannot build stable and
prosperous societies without functioning security and
justice systems. Effective and accountable security
systems and access to justice make people feel safe in
their daily lives. When people feel safe, local
entrepreneurs will start businesses, children will go to
school and socio-economic development can take root.

I would like to focus my intervention on two
themes - first, on the need to ensure national
ownership and citizen engagement in SSR processes,
and secondly, on the importance of linking SSR to the
broader peacebuilding and rule of law agenda.

First, with regard to the importance of national
ownership, the international community has learned
that the most effective approach to SSR is to ensure
that national authorities lead, own and drive reform
efforts. International partners have a role to play in
supporting the process, providing advice and often
resources, but political leadership must come from the
recipient country. The political leadership must be
accompanied by the will to advance the necessary and
sometimes difficult reforms in the security sector. That
is particularly important when, as is often the case,
reforms are inextricably linked to wider political or
peace processes.
While Governments have the central role to play,
SSR activities must be extended to include the broader
population. An effective approach to SSR will ensure
that the needs of ordinary citizens, including women
and girls, are at the forefront.

In some countries, the army or the police are the
main face of the State for many citizens. Their
behaviour and responsiveness to citizens' needs can
therefore have a disproportionate impact on
perceptions of State legitimacy. It is essential that
international partners support reform in ways that focus
on those aspects of security and justice that matter
most to ordinary people, and which promote, rather
than undermine, human rights. That is the only way to
ensure that legitimate and accountable security systems
are developed.

Secondly, SSR cannot be considered in isolation.
We must situate this debate on SSR in the context of
international efforts to help countries build peace and
strengthen the rule of law. Security, justice and
economic issues are all linked. SSR efforts must be
embedded in broader peacebuilding strategies that
include expertise from the military, political and
development communities.

Evidence shows that we have not yet gotten the
balance right. It is often difficult for countries to obtain
assistance to develop their police forces or their
judiciaries. When international support is provided for
police training, it is often not sufficiently linked to the
improvement of justice systems. We must all strive for
a more coherent and better coordinated international
response.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are a
part, but just one part, of a better coordinated
international response. We of course agree with Her
Excellency the Indian Minister of State that
peacekeeping operations should not be drawn down
prematurely in a way that jeopardizes stability, nor
should they be given tasks for which they are not
qualified or resourced. That principle includes not
allocating to peacekeeping operations tasks that are
more effectively and sustainably performed by others.

The United Nations has a critical role to play
alongside other multilateral partners, such as the
European Union and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States.

We know that coordinated action can undermine
both national ownership and holistic approaches. We
must continue to support the efforts of the United
Nations to respond in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, and in particular to ensure that SSR activities
are linked to justice, rule of law and broader
peacebuilding activities.

The United Nations has made some progress on
delivering a more joined-up approach to peacebuilding,
but more needs to be done to bring together the
political, humanitarian, development and security
systems of the United Nations to enable effective
support to national reform efforts.

