Mr. Motoc: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the floor and, more importantly, for affording me
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) the opportunity to
make this briefing to the Council, in what appears to be
a very tight December agenda. Before starting the
presentation proper of the first report of the Committee
to the Security Council, I would first like to express
my deep appreciation to all its members for their
constructive approach and valuable contributions to the
foundation and the initial activities of the Committee.
As Chair of the Committee, I would like to thank
all delegations for their hard work and express my
hope that our enterprise will continue in the same
positive spirit it has proceeded in thus far. A special
commendation should go to the wonderful people from
the Secretariat, from both the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department for Disarmament Affairs,
for their invaluable, competent support.

The efforts sustained in the period covered by
this report, 11 June to 5 December 2004, were
concentrated mainly on making the Committee fully
functional and operational before it starts consideration
of the first national reports submitted by Member
States pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). While the
Committee has been able to draw from the valuable
experience of similar subsidiary bodies, I would
venture to say that the subject matter of the
Committee's work has an added degree of both
complexity and sensitivity. To a great extent, the
Committee is called upon to cover new ground.

On 28 April 2004, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1540 (2004), which
affirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their means of delivery,
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council decided that States
should refrain from providing any support to non-State
actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery.

The Security Council also decided that States
shall adopt and enforce appropriate and effective laws
which prohibit any non-State actor from
manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. The
Council further decided that States shall take and
enforce effective measures to establish domestic
controls to prevent the proliferation of such weapons
and their means of delivery. Controls include measures
to secure and protect such items, export and border
controls, law-enforcement efforts, and the development
and improvement of appropriate legislation and
administrative provisions.

The adoption of the resolution was preceded by
intensive consultations and discussions within and
outside the Security Council. Resolution 1540 (2004)
imposes binding, far-reaching obligations on all
Member States to take legislative and administrative
actions in accordance with their national procedures.

In that light, all States have to present to the
Committee a first report no later than six months after
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) - namely,
28 October 2004 - on the steps they have taken, or
intend to take, to implement that resolution. By
5 December 2004, only 86 States and one organization
had submitted their national reports. Therefore, with
the approval of the Committee, the Chairman has sent
to all Member States two notes reminding them of their
reporting obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) and
encouraging them to submit to the Committee their
first national reports. Annexed to the Committee's
report are lists of countries that have or have not,
respectively, met their obligation to submit their first
national report.

In my contacts as Chairman of the 1540
Committee, I have had quite a few opportunities to
learn of the difficulties experienced by States Members
of the United Nations in compiling these first reports.
The Committee will look into further ways of dealing
with these kinds of situations.

There are already, in some of the reports,
indications that future assistance will be needed in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is our joint
responsibility to support all those who are willing to
embark, in good faith, on that path and to uphold non-
proliferation objectives. I trust that the 1540 Committee
will be able to address demands for assistance effectively;
performance in terms of implementation will
undoubtedly increase significantly as a result.

The Committee, which is chaired by Romania and
has appointed three Vice-Chairmen - the Philippines,
Benin and the United Kingdom - decided to establish
three subcommittees with a View to sharing the task of
considering Member States' reports, with each
subcommittee covering an equal number of States,
according to alphabetical order; the Vice-Chairmen
each will chair a subcommittee.

Since its establishment, the 1540 Committee has
worked continuously, on both a formal and an informal
basis, to adopt the necessary initial documents to
enable it to become fully operational, namely the
guidelines for the conduct of its work and the
guidelines for the preparation of national reports to be
submitted to the Committee pursuant to paragraph 4 of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The 1540 Committee also adopted guidelines for
the hiring of the experts who will help the Committee
in the process of considering the national reports
submitted pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). On
1 December 2004, at its third formal meeting, the
Committee endorsed the recruitment of four experts.
Furthermore, the Committee decided that, in the
process of recruiting other experts, it would invite
further nominations of persons with expertise in the
required areas, particularly from the Asian and African
regional groups, which are not yet represented in the
context of the recruitment of the first group of experts.

When the process of the recruitment of experts
has been completed, the Committee will be fully
equipped to begin the substantial stage of its work,
namely the consideration of the national reports
submitted by Member States pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

Cooperation is foreseen with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the Zangger Committee, as the 1540 Committee may
require future technical assistance from those
organizations. It is relevant to note that all the
organizations I have mentioned have made specific
offers in that regard, which were welcomed and deeply
appreciated by the 1540 Committee.

In the spirit of transparency that characterized the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and represents an
integral component of the 1540 Committee's
guidelines, I have conducted, in my capacity as
Chairman, outreach activities vis-a-vis the United
Nations general membership and relevant international
bodies. On 15 September, I held an informal meeting
with the wider United Nations membership to offer an
update on the work of the Committee and to answer
questions pertaining to national reports, which, at the
time, were due in a little over a month.

I have also frequently made myself available to
the media. With the approval and consent of the
Committee, I have attended, during the past trimester,
several intergovernmental, regional and academic
conferences and symposiums, which has enabled the
Committee to keep various constituencies abreast of
developments in its activities. Conversely, reporting
back to the Committee, we were able to benefit from
feedback, evaluations and ideas pertaining to the
implementation of resolution 1540 from relevant and
informed circles. I wish to express gratitude to those
Governments and academic institutions that took the
initiative of fostering such constructive debate on these
issues, which are of such great importance to all of us.
In the same vein, I would like to inform the
Council of the upcoming availability of the web page
of the 1540 Committee. A dozen national reports have
been processed and translated and are awaiting posting
on the web.

These are, by and large, the factual highlights of
the report that is before the Council today. On behalf of
the Committee, I look forward to the cooperation of all
States as the Committee goes forward with its work in
the coming months.

