Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): As this is the first official statement of the
Russian Federation in the Security Council this month, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency. We are particularly pleased to see presiding
the representative of friendly China, a country with which
Russia is developing intensive good-neighbourly
cooperation. We hope that the Council's work will be
successful under your able guidance.

I should also like to ask the delegation of Chile to
convey our gratitude to the Permanent Representative of
their country, Ambassador Juan Somavia, for the titanic
amount of work accomplished by him and his colleagues
last month.

It also gives me sincere pleasure to welcome to the
Security Council Chamber the head of the Angolan
governmental delegation, Minister Carneiro, and to thank
him for his comprehensive statement.

As a member of the troika of observers of the Angola
settlement, the Russian Federation is sincerely interested in
seeing the success of the Angolan peace process, the speedy
cessation of the lengthy conflict there and the establishment
of lasting peace and stability, and has spared no efforts to
attain those goals.

Unfortunately, we are far from that situation, as
demonstrated by the depressingly slow pace of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. Of particular
concern is the obstructionist policy of UNITA in
quartering and disarming its troops - a key element of
the settlement. The UNITA leadership has again failed to
comply with its obligations and to quarter its troops by
8 May, in accordance with Security Council resolution
1045 (1996).

The situation has been exacerbated by the poor
quality and quantity of the weapons surrendered, by
UNITA's impulse not to quarter the most efficient
fighting units and by the mass desertions of servicemen
from the quartering sites. UNITA's hasty quartering of
additional soldiers, literally within the past days and
hours, does not alter the generally unsatisfactory situation
in this area.

No decision has yet been made in respect of UNITA
representation in the integrated command of the Angolan
Armed Forces, which has hampered the creation of a
unified army and the demobilization of those soldiers who
would like to return to a normal life. All these and other
facts suggest a deliberately dishonest position on the part
of UNITA, which threatens the peace process.

We demand that the leadership of UNITA stop
testing the patience of the international community once
and for all and that it meet fully its obligations to quarter
and disarm its troops in accordance with the May
timetable approved by the Joint Commission. Given the
security guarantees offered to UNITA, we deem
inadmissible any linkage between the quartering and
disarming process and other matters that are sometimes
pushed artificially to the fore. We expect that the
Government of Angola will likewise fulfil the tasks
incumbent on it in this plan of action.

One important component of the peace process
requiring complementary efforts from both Angolan
parties is their speedy completion of negotiations on the
entire complex of military questions. This would
significantly stabilize the situation and open the way to
the establishment of a unified army, the transformation of
UNITA into a political party and the solution of other
aspects of the settlement, culminating in the establishment
of a Government of unity and national reconciliation.

 

We welcome the amnesty announced by the
Government of Angola in accordance with the Libreville
agreement and consider it to be an important contribution
to the strengthening of mutual trust. We must also praise
other steps taken by the Government aimed at completing
the quartering of the rapid reaction police, the ongoing
withdrawal of troops from areas near the UNITA quartering
sites, the implementation of a plan for the gradual
disarmament of the civilian population and the undertaking
of measures to speed up mine clearance and the destruction
of landmine stockpiles.

The Government of Angola must consistently continue
to implement that policy, to which the leadership of UNITA
will respond with practical and constructive measures of its
own. We call upon the Government of Angola and UN ITA
to demonstrate an unwavering commitment to peace and to
comply in good faith with the obligations undertaken under
the Lusaka Protocol and the Libreville agreement.

In our opinion, the draft resolution before the Security
Council today objectively reflects the most acute problems
of the current stage of the Angolan settlement. It is
extremely concrete and targeted, clearly assessing the
actions of both parties and presenting them with the
practical tasks to be completed in the next two months. It
establishes the appropriate controls for monitoring the
compliance of the Angolan parties with the agreed plans
and contains a stern warning on the inadmissibility of delay
in the peace process, which is already far behind schedule.

We believe that the adoption of the draft resolution
will help lend additional dynamism to the peace process
and will ensure its irreversibility.

