Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his
briefing. China supports the statement to be made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.

Global climate change is a common challenge of
all countries that is profoundly affecting human
survival and development. In recent years, all countries
have made efforts towards protecting the global
environment and responding to climate change, with
notable results. But resolving climate change and
achieving sustainable development remain pressing and
long-term tasks that require all countries to continue
their mitigating efforts.

Responding to climate change is in the interest of
all countries worldwide, in particular of the majority of
developing countries and for the well-being of their
peoples. The United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol
have been commonly accepted as major channels for
responding to climate change. The principle of
common but differentiated responsibility has become a
basis for all parties to strengthen cooperation.
Sustainable development and harmony between human
beings and nature have common goals for all parties.

Climate change may affect security, but it is
fundamentally a sustainable development issue. The
Security Council lacks expertise in climate change and
the necessary means and resources. Moreover, the
Council is not a forum for decision-making with
universal representation. Its discussions are not aimed
at putting together a broadly accepted programme, nor
can they take the place of the UNFCCC negotiations
among the 193 United Nations Member States.

It is the general belief of the majority of
developing countries that the Council's discussion on
climate change will neither contribute to the mitigation
efforts of countries nor assist affected countries in
effectively responding to climate change. This
reasonable concern should be fully understood and
respected.

In responding to climate change, the international
community should give full consideration to the
developing countries' stages of development and their
basic needs and take note of their difficult situations. It
should listen to their voices, respect their demands and
effectively carry out its own commitments relating to
capital, technology and capacity-building.

China attaches great importance to the concerns
of the small island developing States on climate
change. As a country with many islands, China has
compassion for the difficulties encountered by small
island developing States in their efforts towards
sustainable development. The international community
should adopt effective measures to assist small island
developing States in responding to the challenges of
climate change. Developed countries should especially
carry out their commitments on capital, technology and
capacity-building.

China would like to work together with small
island developing States to continue to actively
implement the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States in order to facilitate sustainable development
around the world.

