Mr. Tleuberdi (Kazakhstan): Our delegation
appreciates the presence of President Mahmoud Abbas
in the Chamber and His Excellency's statement to
the members of the Security Council. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks, and Special
Coordinator Mladenov for the latest update.

As a member State of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, Kazakhstan shares concerns regarding
the future of the two-State solution, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) funding deficit and the need for
the international community to lead the Middle East
peace process.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process remains unchanged. My country urges
the parties to maintain the historical status quo of
Jerusalem, in accordance with previously reached
international agreements. My delegation therefore
endorses the statement of Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres that the question of the final status of Jerusalem
must be resolved through direct negotiations between
the two parties. It should be achieved on the basis of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. At the same time, the legitimate concerns
ofboth the Palestinian and Israeli sides should be taken
into account.

We support negotiations that result in the
two-State solution, and we stand for their early
resumption, especially in the bilateral format and
without preconditions. The ultimate goal should be
the restoration and promotion of the peace process,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the principle of
land for peace, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

Kazakhstan declares its support for the rights of
the Palestinian people to self- determination and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent State
within its international borders pre-1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, coexisting in peace with Israel.
At the same time, we emphasize the right of Israel to
security. We also propose restoring trust and utilizing
the confidence-building measures with a three-fold
approach, namely, the promotion of a security-
development nexus, a revamped regional approach and
a more enhanced, coordinated and transparent modus
operandi of the United Nations in the wider region,
delivering as one United Nations.

We note that the difficult humanitarian situation
in Gaza, which further contributes to instability and
frustration, could lead to the resumption of conflict
and increase of terrorist activities. In that regard, we
urge the official authorities of Israel and Palestine
to help resolve the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza
Strip. That requires confidence-building measures
with an economic dimension, with support from the
international community.

Kazakhstan endorses the concern expressed by
the Special Coordinator over the funding of UNRWA
this year. A significant reduction of its regular budget
has already increased the anxieties of the 5.3 million
Palestinian refugees, who have already suffered at
the hands of the longest protracted refugee crisis.
Kazakhstan also expresses great concern over the
growth of Israeli settlements in Palestinian territories.
All United Nations resolutions in that regard have been
an important step to bring about a cessation of settlement
activities and prevent violence against civilians.

We also call upon the leaders of Israel and
Palestine to take concrete steps that will preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence between the two
States and strengthen the prospects for peace based on
the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel's right to security, as we mentioned before, and
recognition. Kazakhstan welcomes the United States
diplomatic efforts in resuming the peace process and
talks with the leaders of both countries, which United
States President Trump held in Washington, DC, in
recent days.

We call on the Middle East Quartet to revive the
work on the Palestinian-Israeli track in the context of
United States efforts in that direction. We also welcome
the efforts of the Russian Federation and Egypt to
ensure intra-Palestinian unity and urge all Palestinian
political parties and movements to integrate into one
national political structure. Kazakhstan believes it is
necessary, in the very near future, to begin negotiations
on each existing problem, with a View to reaching an
agreement on pending issues and giving them a so-
called final status. Only such an approach would lead
to the adoption of a basic treaty.

