Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for convening this meeting on the fight against drug
trafficking and its consequences for peace and security
in West Africa and the Sahel - a topic that clearly
deserves the full attention of the Council. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa.

I will not dwell on an analysis. The scourge
of drug trafficking includes such a high level of
violence, so many types of transnational organized
crime and such weak rule-of-law structures - often
due to corruption - that it truly represents a threat to
international peace and security. The enormous profits
generated by drug trafficking enable traffickers not only
to weaken States, but also to manipulate the institutions
of the weakened States to their own benefit. Attempting
to combat the scourge through a strategy of repression

alone is doomed to fail. It will require a global approach
that addresses the root causes, especially the fragility
of States.

We welcome and support the efforts of the States
of West Africa and the Sahel to fight drug trafficking,
particularly within the Economic Community of
West African States and the Mano River Union,
whose members adopted a border security strategy
on 25 October, with the support of the United Nations
Office for West Africa. African civil society is also
mobilizing, as demonstrated by the meeting of 30 and
31 October in Accra, Ghana, at the initiative of the West
Africa Commission on Drugs. It is our hope that the
Commission, established at the initiative of Kofi Annan
and comprised of eminent persons and experts, will
contribute to finding durable solutions to the growing
problems of drug trafficking and drug use in the region.

The countries of West Africa and the Sahel and
the regional organizations of which they are members
must be able to count on the steadfast support of the
international community. The European Union and its
member States are working alongside their African
partners, in particular from West Africa, within the
framework of the Union's anti-drug strategy and the
action plan for the period 2013 to 2020 and 2013 to
2016, respectively.

With regard to the United Nations system, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
clearly has a central role to play. It is a welcome fact that
the UNODC cooperates intensively with other players
across the United Nations system. A good example is
the Task Force on Transnational Organized Crime and
Drug Trafficking, which is co-chaired by UNODC
and the Department of Political Affairs and which
brings together United Nations agencies and relevant
organizations. We support the recommendation in
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/22, which we have
just adopted, that the Security Council be informed on
a more regular basis about the activities of the Task
Force. In general terms, it is important that there be
determined follow-up to today's debate.

To better respond to the threat, we encourage the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the missions
authorized by the Council in the countries of the region
to strengthen their cooperation and coordination, as well
as their analytical capacities concerning the political,
economic and social impact of drug trafficking.

The Peacebuilding Commission also has a role
to play in advocating for the strengthening of the
institutional capacities of the four countries it supports
in West Africa - Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone - and in supporting the coordination of
international efforts.

Only increased coordination involving the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, as well as UNODC, the United Nations
Development Programme and Interpol, will it be
possible to appropriately support the ongoing efforts
in West Africa and Sahel to strengthen regional
cooperation. The West Africa Coast Initiative is a
good example of what can be done. The Initiative has
produced encouraging initial results in Sierra Leone.
We should now strengthen units to combat transnational
crime, all the while strengthening judicial and penal
systems, in order to combat impunity. The best police
measures are doomed to failure if the penal system
breaks down at the level of justice or prisons. Where
capacity is insufficient or where the cross-border nature
of the crimes committed gives rise to difficulties, legal
solutions could be explored at the regional level, notably
with the Economic Community of West African States.

The fight against drug trafficking must be a
collective effort involving countries of origin, transit
and destination, for we know that those categories
overlap more and more, including in West Africa and
Sahel. As a partner of many countries of the region,
Luxembourg is committed to assist in this struggle,
in the interest of peace and security, development and
respect for human rights and the rule of law in West
Africa and the Sahel.

Lastly, as my colleagues have done, I too would
like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation
to the five outgoing members of the Security
Council - Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan
and Togo. It has been a privilege to serve with them in
the Council.

