Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
thank the briefers for their briefings. We commend
and support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen to end the conflict
in the country, which is the best way to protect the
suffering population.

Peru notes with deep concern the lack of tangible
progress in the implementation of the important
agreements reached in Sweden and the escalation of
violence in various areas of the country in recent weeks.
We believe that it is essential to act quickly and firmly
to maintain the gains made during the meeting held
in Sweden and implement the Stockholm Agreement,
especially with regard to the agreement concerning
the port of Al-Hudaydah as a necessary step towards
reaching a political settlement to the conflict. In that
regard, we welcome the commitment, flexibility and
patience demonstrated by the Government of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. We are looking
forward to a similar approach on the part of Ansar
Allah, in line with the expectations of the international
community. Accordingly, we are encouraged by the
information provided by Martin Griffiths on the
agreement reached on the implementation of the first
phase. We urge that this window of opportunity, based
on the assurance that the Council will ensure the
parties' strict compliance to their commitments, not be
missed. We also urge them to honour their commitments
concerning the exchange of prisoners. To that end, we
must emphasize that any difficulty encountered in
the process cannot be interpreted as justification for
resuming a military course of action, as that would only
aggravate what is already considered to be the greatest
humanitarian crisis in the world today.

We also stress importance of those countries
with influence over the warring parties being able to
help them comply with the Stockholm Agreement,
refrain from confrontational rhetoric and reciprocal
accusations and address all differences through
diplomatic channels. We must also recall the obligation
of all parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We deplore the deaths of children and the many other
fatalities and injuries that resulted from the recent
air strike near schools in Sana'a. We hope that those
reprehensible and other previous acts will be the subject
of exhaustive investigations that duly identify and
punish those responsible. We emphasize the importance
of concurrently addressing the humanitarian situation,
which appears to be worsening on the ground. We are
particularly concerned about the alarming levels of
food insecurity and worsening economic indicators,
resulting in the increased suffering of the population.

We also note the urgent need to contain the new
and worrisome outbreak of cholera with the approach
of the rainy season. To that end, special focus must
be placed on the repair and maintenance of water
and sewage systems to prevent its spread from
reaching devastating levels, as was the case last year.
Furthermore, as Ms. Gamba mentioned, we believe
that priority attention should be given to the tragic
situation involving women, and especially children,
given their greater level of vulnerability to acts of
psychological, physical and sexual violence. We must
therefore welcome the 25 March signing in Riyadh of
the memorandum of understanding to strengthen the
protection of children affected by armed conflict in
Yemen signed with the coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen. Moreover, we commend the efforts of the
Government of Yemen to arrange for the payment
of salaries to public officials, including those of
Al-Hudaydah, and we urge the Government to refrain
from adopting negative trade measures that could
worsen the dire humanitarian situation in the north
of the country. We note that achieving sustainable
peace will require broad consensus based on a shared
vision for the future. As Ms. Luqman highlighted, all
sectors of the Yemeni population should be adequately
represented, including the meaningful participation of
women and young people in political processes.

In conclusion, I express my gratitude to the
authorities of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Iran, Jordan and
Oman for having recently received the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), which
I have the honour to chair. We especially appreciated
the high level of our interlocutors, the breadth of
the discussions and the unanimous support for the
political solution advocated for by the United Nations.
We extend our gratitude to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, the Head of United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement,
the Resident Coordinator in Yemen and other United
Nations officials for the valuable information provided
to the Committee and the dedicated work they carry
out under very difficult conditions. We believe that
that visit, while carrying out on-site verification of the
implementation of the sanctions regime, was useful in
sending a strong political signal that the Security Council
and its respective subsidiary body are prioritizing the
situation in Yemen and closely following developments
on the ground. We will provide a more detailed report
to the Council in the near future.

Lastly, I reaffirm Peru's commitment to achieving
sustainable peace in Yemen that will end the
humanitarian catastrophe and foster regional stability.

