The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
interim report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi, document
S/2001/1076.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
gratitude to Madiba Nelson Mandela of South
Africa for his dedicated service to the people of
Burundi and the cause of peace in Central Africa.
Building on the work of his predecessor, the late
Mwalimu Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Madiba has
helped to give Burundi a chance for lasting peace,
democracy, economic development and national
reconciliation.

"The Security Council had, in the statement
of its President on 8 November 2001, welcomed
the 1 November 2001 inauguration of Burundi's
Transitional Government and expressed its
appreciation for the instrumental role played by
Madiba towards the creation of the Transitional
Government. The Security Council had also
expressed the hope that the region and the
international community could continue to rely
the

on his moral leadership and ingenious spirit,
which are essential for progress towards peace in
Burundi.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
sterling contribution of Madiba as facilitator of
the Arusha peace process in bringing together all
the parties, including the armed groups, to engage
in dialogue in order to facilitate an early cessation
of hostilities in accordance with the Arusha
Agreement. The Security Council commends
Madiba for his tenacity and unwavering
commitment towards political reconciliation in
Burundi.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to Madiba and the South African
Government for initiating the deployment of the
first elements of the multinational security
presence tasked with the protection of returning
political leaders, without which the conditions
would not have been conducive to the
inauguration of the Burundi transitional
Government. These key successes have
confirmed the trust and confidence which the
Security Council and the international community
have always had in Madiba.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the recent increase in violence and
reiterates its call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities in Burundi. The Council calls on all
Burundians to reject violence and to pursue their
objectives through the institutions and
mechanisms of the transition process. The
Council appeals to all Burundians and United
Nations Member States to build on the
momentum created through the efforts of Madiba
and to support the Regional Peace Initiative, the
transitional Government and the Implementation
Monitoring Committee."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

