Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to take the opportunity of this wrap-up session to
highlight several current pressing security concerns,
including the situation in Syria, the issue of health care
in armed conflict, and our ongoing efforts to increase
cooperation between the Council and the African Union
(AU) on security issues.

As we have for many months, the Council in May
has focused on the political, humanitarian and security
situations in Syria. As Special Envoy De Mistura has
stressed, there are three interlinked elements needed
for peace in Syria: stopping the fighting, improving
humanitarian access and engaging in political
negotiations to bring about a political transition. Yet
as we discussed earlier this month, the cessation of
hostilities has given way to violence, and the regime
has disregarded international agreements on reducing
the violence and providing humanitarian access, as
outlined in resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016),
effectively undermining the conditions needed for
political negotiations.

While all sides have contributed to the return to
violence, the military escalation and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as
hospitals, schools and markets, are largely attributable
to the actions of the Al-Assad regime, and, as attacks
continue, the regime has restricted humanitarian
access and blocked aid, including medical supplies to
people in desperate need. It has deliberately targeted
first responders, health-care workers and medical
facilities. Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for rapid,
safe and unhindered access throughout the country.
Resolution 2139 (2014) specifically forbids the removal
of medicines and medical supplies from aid convoys,
but, as the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reports, that is routine throughout the country.

For our part, we will continue to urge all parties to
comply fully across the country and specifically call
for an end to the Al-Assad regime's continued offensive
attacks in Aleppo, Latakia and elsewhere, as well as
its besieging of towns and obstruction of humanitarian
access. The United States has worked with Special
Envoy De Mistura and, in particular, with the Russian
Federation to reaffirm the cessation of hostilities across
the country, and specifically that the parties agree to
recommit to the truce in Aleppo and the Damascus
suburbs. Yet the violence has continued, as we can see.
Secretary Kerry has raised these concerns with Foreign
Minister Lavrov and urged him to press the regime
to cease at once air strikes against opposition forces
and innocent civilians. Still, as we saw yesterday,
there are reports that numerous civilians were killed
as buildings around the national hospital in Idlib
were struck. Again, at the last meeting in Vienna, all
members of the International Syria Support Group
urged full compliance of the parties with the terms of
the cessation.

That leads me to several points that I would like
to make with regard to our recent meeting on health
care in armed conflict (S/PV.7685), which provided
an opportunity to further examine the human
consequences of attacks in Syria and elsewhere. The
increasing trend of violence against medical personnel,
facilities and transportation is clear in Syria. The
attacks are so frequent that, as Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien has told us, proximity to a
hospital is now perceived by neighbours to be a threat
to their own safety. As we noted in that meeting, over
725 doctors have been killed and over 350 attacks on
medical facilities have taken place, the vast majority
of which have been committed by the regime, although
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has also
directed multiple bombings of medical centres. We
strongly condemn ISIL's current offensive in Aleppo,
which threatens thousands of civilians and has also
targeted medical facilities and staff.

Those issues are now covered in resolution 2286
(2016), in which the Council demands protection for
medical and humanitarian personnel, hospitals and other
medical facilities. The resolution also emphasizes the
responsibilities of States to comply with international
law, end impunity and ensure accountability for those
responsible, and urges States to conduct investigations
into such violations. We feel strongly about those
principles, wherever such violence occurs, be it in
Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan or elsewhere.

Turning to our meeting last week with the African
Union (S/PV.7694), we welcome such opportunities
to examine how best the two organizations can work
together to achieve our common goals. Given the large
percentage ofUnited Nations troops deployed in Africa,
coupled with the fact that over half of those serving in
the continent are themselves African, we have much to
gain from enhanced communication between the two
bodies. We know that the AU can be a particularly
effective partner in responding to the security crises in
its own backyard, including those unfortunate cases in
which offensive military operations are required. The
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council
have common priorities and agree on many issues,
but we also need to deal with the differences that can
emerge inside each of our respective Councils. We need
to be better at responding quickly and cohesively to the
political drivers and roots of conflict.
Before I conclude, I would like to quickly mention
our work and the Secretary-General selection process,
as I know that many Member States are eager for news
of the Council's plans. Under your leadership, Sir, we
held an any-other-business session last week in which
we began to discuss the next steps in fulfilling our
important responsibilities to select the next head of the
Organization. We look forward to further discussions
under France's presidency in June to finalize the
procedures for our upcoming deliberations.

In conclusion, I thank you, Sir, for your steady and
professional leadership of the Council this month.

