Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to express our thanks and appreciation to the High-
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
briefing and for his report (S/2015/84l, annex) on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as for the positive developments
set out in his reoprt with regard to the programme of
reform. However, we are concerned by the greater
challenges that beset the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which contravene
the Dayton Agreement.

We regret that certain parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the leaders of the Republika Srpska
are sowing doubt about the General Framework
Agrement for Peace by calling for a referendum on
separation. We warn against such declarations, which
could plunge the country into a dangerous crisis with
serious consequences. We urge those who call for a
secessionist referendum to abide by national legislation
and norms and to work to achieve the development and
progress of the country Within the framework of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

All influential international parties should engage
with the parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and should use their good offices to contain those
worrying developments. The General Framework for
Peace is the only way to achieve stability and peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability in the Balkans in
general will be achieved only through endeavours by
all States in the region to establish good neighbourly
relations and to bolster their cooperation at all levels.
That will consolidate peace in the region. We therefore
welcome the noticeably improved relations between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Serbia,
which have led to the signing ofbilateral agreements in
many fields. We also welcome the measures undertaken
by the Bosnian authorities geared to implementing their
obligations within the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and to joining the European Union. Those
measures will positively impact the livelihood of
Bosnian citizens. We urge the Bosnian authorities to
continue on that positive path and to implement the
requirements for their integration into the European
Union.

We pay tribute to the statement delivered by the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at the General Debate of the seventieth session of
the General Assembly, in which be confirmed the
determination of his authorities to improve the living
conditions of citizens, promote the rule of law and
establish an egalitarian society for all (see A/70/PV.22).
We welcome the reform programmes undertaken over
the recent period and urge the Bosnian authorities
to intensify their efforts with a view to speeding up
reforms, in particular with respect to the promotion of
the rule oflaw and the fight against corruption.

We voted in favour of resolution 2247 (2015),
which renews the authorization for the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another
year. We pay tribute to those forces for their efforts to
achieve a thriving and secure future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the assistance of the Office of the
High Representative, whom we commend and whose
action we applaud. We stress the importance of the
continued work of that Office, given the threats and
dangers that beset the country.

