Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Commissioner Smai'l Chergui and
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber for their briefings.

On Wednesday, my delegation had the opportunity
to address the Peacebuilding Commission regarding
our concerns about the human rights situation and the
socioeconomic situation in Burundi, as well as our
readiness to engage in dialogue with the Burundian
authorities.

Today, I would like to underscore, first and
foremost, the importance of the 2020 elections. If we
want to prevent any subsequent disputes, the electoral
process must be sufficiently transparent and inclusive.
This requires a consensual road map where the
principal stakeholders can agree on the preparations
and modalities ofthe elections, as well as the conditions
necessary to guarantee peaceful elections.

In that regard, I would like to make a triple
appeal to all Burundian actors, as the requirements
for credible elections are, indeed, threefold: first,
the political and media space must not be closed off
ahead of the elections; secondly, the elections must
not be boycotted; and thirdly, they must be able to be
independently observed.

Inclusivity also implies the participation of the
many peaceful political actors that have been exiled
in recent years. Respect for the letter and the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement is, of course, a prerequisite
for any solution. If these conditions are met, I think it
is important to reflect on the support we can provide
throughout this process, both at the bilateral level and at
the level of the United Nations system. In that context,
Belgium welcomes the adoption of a new electoral
code with wider political support, as well as the recent
announcement by the Independent National Electoral
Commission that it will invite international and regional
observers to attend the 2020 electoral process.

Belgium is convinced that as the 2020 elections
approach, an opportunity is arising to find a lasting
solution to some of the causes and consequences of the
2015 crisis, which are unfortunately still relevant today.
We salute Uganda, which, through President Museveni,
plays a key role as mediator. We are confident that
Uganda will be able to take over the recommendations
of former facilitator President Mkapa, with a view to
bringing them to fruition. We welcome the commitment
of the Kenyan and Tanzanian Presidents. In addition,
the regional repercussions of the situation in Burundi,
as reported by the Group of Experts, further highlight
the need for high-level regional engagement.

The African Union continues to play an important
role in this matter. We believe that in terms of
mediation, the activities of the African Union as well as
the guarantors of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi could complement and
strengthen the initiatives currently being undertaken
by the East African Community.

In parallel, the United Nations and the Office of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi
must continue to support the efforts of the subregion
and the region. The United Nations remains a partner of
Burundi and must make every effort to help it to solve
its political and socioeconomic difficulties, which must
involve full cooperation and mutual respect. Belgium
commends the continued commitment and substantial
work undertaken by the Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy
for Burundi. His mandate is absolutely essential to
direct and coordinate the political support of the
United Nations. We are now awaiting the proposals of
the Secretary-General regarding the possible roles of
the United Nations in Burundi, after consulting key
partners. In the meantime, the Council must continue
to contribute to this discussion.

