Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast for his informative and detailed briefing on
Somalia. It is good to have the Security Council
discussing Somalia. It has, perhaps, been neglected for
too long. We welcome the participation of Ambassador
Olhaye in this important debate. His briefing on
Djibouti's commendable efforts, led by President
Guelleh, to restore peace and stability to Somalia was
helpful and interesting.

We support the main principles guiding Djibouti's
initiative: the need to make the peace process inclusive;
the importance of enhancing the role of civil society to
build peace from the bottom up, rather than impose it
from above; and, in this context, the need to
marginalize the destructive influence of the warlords.
We acknowledge the fact that many Somalis have
participated in Djibouti's peace process, but we are
concerned that some elements of Somali society are
still not represented. We would encourage all regions
of Somalia to take part in the peace and reconciliation
process. Only this will create the environment for an
inclusive determination by the Somali people of a
lasting political solution to the problems of the Somali
Republic.

This is an important initiative. Sir Kieran
Prendergast called it a unique political experience for
Somalis, and we must not let it lose momentum. The
longer the talks continue - and the progress made in
this month's Conference is encouraging in this
respect - the greater the chance that more and
different elements of Somali society will become
involved. We urge the Somali people to continue down
this difficult path and to embrace this opportunity for
peace.

Djibouti's efforts should not be seen as a quick
fix. They constitute a process towards a lasting and
viable solution to a complicated and entrenched
problem. As such, we would urge Djibouti to proceed
with caution. To impose a Government without the
broadest possible consultation of all groups may only
result in undermining the relative peace and stability in
some self-administered areas, for example the northern
regions. In this respect, we very much hope that it will
indeed be possible to establish a transitional national
authority. We also welcome the United Nations
involvement in this initiative, and we particularly
commend the efforts of David Stephen and of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia.

We agree with the Secretary-General's call for the
international financial institutions to exercise
flexibility in taking account of the unique situation
presented by Somalia. We would support the idea of
the international financial institutions engaging in
negotiations with administrations in stable areas as a
first step. They should, of course, look carefully at
issues of transparency and accountability before
making financial commitments.

The grave humanitarian situation disturbs us all
deeply. Somalia continues to suffer from food
shortages and health problems, including serious
cholera epidemics. Many Somalis are displaced. We
commend the brave and tireless efforts of humanitarian
personnel working in this very insecure and
challenging situation. We must insist on proper
protection for them. We call on all conflicting parties to
recognize the impartiality of the relief agencies and to
afford their personnel all possible security and
cooperation.

Somalia is a poverty-stricken country, ravaged by
failure of governance, conflict, drought, flooding,
epidemics and food shortages, yet arms still continue to
flow into the country. All Governments must comply
with the arms embargo established by Security Council
resolution 733 (1992). We commend the efforts of
Ambassador Ben Mustapha, as Chairman of the
sanctions Committee, to try and revitalize this
Committee and make its work more effective.

The United Kingdom will continue to follow the
situation in Somalia closely. We stand, as always, ready
to respond to urgent humanitarian and emergency
needs, and take note of the concern expressed on
funding by both the Under-Secretary-General and
Ambassador Olhaye.

