Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we congratulate your friendly
country, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and thank you for holding
today's important meeting.

The scourge of conflict and its high financial
and human costs mean that conflict prevention and
resolution are a moral and human imperative that
requires a comprehensive approach if gains are to be
preserved and the recurrence of conflict prevented.
Such a comprehensive approach includes national
reconciliation, addressing root causes of conflicts and
early warning.

In the context of peacebuilding, sustaining peace
is a task and responsibility shared among all national
stakeholders concerned. In this regard, we refer to the
vital roles that the Secretary-General, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations in general, as well
as relevant regional and international organizations
and agencies, can play through partnerships and the
building of local capacity and expertise.

If a reconciliation process is to be successful and
lasting, it must be real, credible and inclusive. It must
aim to consolidate lasting peace and address the root
causes of conflicts, with the participation of religious
leaders and civil society as a whole. In addition, we
must strive to increase the participation, representation
and contribution of women in all stages of conflict
resolution and mediation, including reconciliation
efforts, and adopt a gender perspective in reconciliation
talks and conflict prevention.

Qatar also believes that young people can play
an important role. We cannot of course talk about
sustaining peace and the non-recurrence of conflict in
future without the participation of future generations.
In this regard, we would note that the State of Qatar is
planning to host the second International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes next year.

In its desire for sustained peace, strengthened
stability, non-recurrence of conflicts and national unity
of States, the State of Qatar recognizes the importance
of national reconciliation to the achievement of those
objectives. We therefore attach great importance to
supporting reconciliation in the context of its ongoing
efforts to consolidate peace, including through mediation
and humanitarian and development assistance, which
bolster opportunities to achieve lasting peace. This is
what has motivated the efforts made by Qatar to restore
stability to Afghanistan, Darfur and other areas.

Key factors for the success, effectiveness and
consistency of reconciliation processes include
justice, accountability and impunity, particularly for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
gross violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Accountability
is an important deterrent that contributes to the
non-recurrence ofor relapse into conflicts. Accordingly,
we support the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. Documenting crimes and
holding their perpetrators accountable are important
factors in reaching the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and in achieving lasting reconciliation.

In conclusion, we must give serious attention
to efforts aimed at supporting peacebuilding and
sustainable peace and at finding lasting solutions to
conflicts. We must look into all factors for success and
benefit from best practices so that future generations
may be saved from the scourge of war and conflict.

