Ms. Rice (United States of America): Today, the
Security Council has responded decisively to the grave
threat to international peace and security posed by
Iran's failure to live up to its obligations under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The Treaty is the principal international legal
instrument for holding Member States accountable,
discouraging the spread of nuclear weapons, and
bringing the benefits of nuclear energy to all corners of
the world. As President Obama has said, rules must be
binding; violations must be punished; words must
mean something.

The issue is straightforward. We are at this point
because the Government of Iran has chosen clearly and
wilfully to violate its commitments to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the resolutions of
this Council. Despite consistent and long-standing
demands by the international community, Iran has not
suspended its uranium enrichment and other
proliferation-related activities. The Security Council
has passed a resolution today aimed at reinforcing the
need for Iran to take these steps and comply with its
obligations. These sanctions are not directed at the
Iranian people, nor do they seek to stop Iran from the
legitimate exercise of its rights under the NPT, in
conformity with its obligations. Rather, the sanctions
aim squarely at the nuclear ambitions of a Government
that has chosen a path that will lead to increased
isolation.

These sanctions are as tough as they are smart
and precise. The resolution prohibits Iran from
investing in sensitive nuclear activities abroad. It
imposes binding new restrictions on Iran's import of
conventional arms. It bans all Iranian activities related
to ballistic missiles that could deliver a nuclear
weapon. It imposes a comprehensive framework of
cargo inspections to detect and stop Iran's smuggling
and acquisition of illicit materials or nuclear items.

It creates important new tools to block Iran's use
of the international financial system, particularly
Iranian banks, to fund and facilitate nuclear
proliferation. It highlights the potential links between
Iran's energy sector and its nuclear ambitions. It targets
the role of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in
Iran's proliferation efforts. It establishes a United
Nations panel of experts to help monitor and enforce
the implementation of sanctions. And it imposes
targeted new sanctions, including asset freezes and
travel bans, on 40 entities and an individual linked to
Iranian nuclear proliferation.

Since 2002, the International Atomic Energy
Agency has sought to investigate serious concerns that
Iran's nuclear programme might have military
dimensions. In 2003, the IAEA Board of Governors
expressed "grave concern" that Iran had still not
enabled the IAEA to assure Member States that Iran
had declared all of its nuclear material and activities.
For our part, the United States launched a sustained
and serious effort, starting early last year, to engage
with Iran on a range of issues of mutual concern,
including these nuclear issues. The United States has
made detailed and specific openings to the Iranians,
including personal and direct outreach by President
Obama.

The United States strongly supports the peaceful
use of the atom for energy and innovation. Like every
nation, Iran has rights; but it also has responsibilities,
and the two are inextricably linked. Iran has shunned
opportunity after opportunity to allow verification of
the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. In recent
months, Iran has given us all more reason, not less, to
suspect that its goal is to develop the ability to
assemble a nuclear weapon. Last September, the world
learned that Iran had secretly built another uranium
enrichment facility at Qom, in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions and Iran's IAEA
obligations. Last November, Iran announced that it
would build 10 more such facilities. In February, Iran
said that it would begin to enrich uranium to nearly
20 per cent, moving closer to weapons-grade material.
In May, the IAEA affirmed yet again that Iran is
continuing its banned uranium enrichment, and warned
that Iran has amassed more than 2,400 kilograms of
low-enriched uranium.

The resolution we adopted today offers Iran a
clear path towards the immediate suspension of these
sanctions. The best way is also the easiest one. Iran
must fulfil its international obligations, suspend its
enrichment-related reprocessing and heavy-water-
related activities, and cooperate fully with the IAEA.
The United States reaffirms our commitment to engage
in robust, principled and creative diplomacy. We will
remain ready to continue diplomacy with Iran and its
leaders in order to make clear how much they have to
gain from acting responsibly and how much more they
stand to lose from continued recklessness. Today's
resolution does not replace those efforts, but it does
support them.

Turkey and Brazil have worked hard to make
progress on the Tehran Research Reactor proposal,
efforts that reflect their leaders' good intentions to
address the Iranian people's humanitarian needs while
building more international confidence about the
nature of Iran's nuclear programme. My Government
will continue to discuss the Iranian revised proposal
and our concerns about it, as appropriate.

But the Tehran Research Reactor proposal, then
and now, does not respond to the fundamental, well-
founded and unanswered concerns about Iran's nuclear
programme. Today's resolution does. Until the world's
concerns with Iran's nuclear defiance are fully
resolved, we must work together to ensure that the
sanctions in the resolution are fully and firmly
implemented. We must ensure that the development of
the most devastating weapons ever devised by human
science is prescribed by the most responsible controls
ever produced by human Government. Last month, 189
countries came together to strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation Treaty as a cornerstone of global
security. Today's resolution is an important part of that
work. The NPT must remain at the centre of our global
effort to stop nuclear proliferation, even as we pursue
the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons.

Today, I am proud to say that this Council has
risen to its responsibilities. Now Iran should choose a
wiser course.

