Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to praise the sensitivity shown by the
Council in addressing this issue. It is an honour for my
delegation to participate in this open debate of the
Security Council on Haiti, a nation that is close to us in
geographical terms, but even more is a sister nation in
sentiment because its people has been shaken by
countless afflictions that are all too familiar to us. We,
like them, have also experienced the upheaval of
political polarization, the pain of scarcity, the burden
of economic underdevelopment and the bitterness of
inequalities. We have endured persistence poverty and,
if that were not enough, we have also suffered the
tribulations of natural disasters. We therefore
understand the stoicism required to face their struggle
and draw strength from weakness, as well as the fibre
of the spirit that enables them to overcome adversity.

Today, we come together to reaffirm our moral
support and our commitment to accompanying that
noble people struggling to rebuild. They have shown
great commitment to picking up the pieces after the
destruction, rebuilding their nation economically,
institutionally, socially and politically, and striving at
the same time to heal their wounds and dry the tears of
grief in the wake of disaster.

The task is far from small and the journey has
hardly begun. What is most grievous about these
misfortunes is that, while the generosity of
compassionate hearts flows immediately after disaster,
as time passes and the initial shock lessens, the world's
attention is captured by other equally stunning and
touching news.

We do not wish to imply that all that has
happened in Haiti has already been forgotten. We
simply acknowledge that the sense of urgency recedes
as each day goes by, but the mountain of needs does
not. The same enormous problems persist and the
agony of the Haitian people as they rebuild their lives
does not abate. The hope eclipsed by disaster must be
addressed and strengthened now, as it was at first, by
continuous acts of solidarity and commitment, such as
today's Security Council meeting, which serves as an
ineluctable reminder of what happened there and of the
challenges that still lie ahead. We agree with the
assertion of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/183*) that the international community must
continue to provide support. We join the Council's
appeal for a concerted effort of all international actors
to achieve these goals.

It is striking that, after having selected 14
projects for the reconstruction of Haiti, at a projected
cost of some $300 million, that country has still not
received and therefore cannot spend $224 million -
75 per cent of the estimated need - to carry out those
projects. The report clearly states that those projects
relate to education, jobs, agriculture and health care -
among the most important areas that need to be
addressed.

According to the figures of the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, at
the end of 2010 Haiti's foreign debt was 12 per cent of
its gross domestic product. A country battered as Haiti
was cannot bear such a heavy burden. The best way for
the international community to help is to forgive the
debt of a nation that today is going through the most
difficult time in its history.

It should not be forgotten that solidarity begins
with the idea that the suffering of a father, mother or
child has no nationality or borders. The cries of a baby
in a suburb of Port-au-Prince, in a barrio of
Tegucigalpa, in afavela of Rio de Janeiro, in the villas
miserias of Buenos Aires, in the callampas of
Santiago, in the ciudadela of La Paz or in the chabolas
of Madrid are heard in Berlin, New York, Beijing and
Moscow. There is no first, second or third world. The
differences end where solidarity begins, because we are
all inhabitants of the same Planet Earth.

