Mr. Zamaninia (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this timely meeting. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement and Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for presnting the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/656) and for briefing on key political
and security developments and on regional and
international events related to Afghanistan. We
continue to support him and his team in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and their outstanding services. Afghanistan and its
neighbours will remember the services Mr. Kubis has
rendered to Afghanistan for a better life in that country.

UNAMA is playing a very crucial role at this critical
moment of political transition in Afghanistan, and
definitely needs further support from the international
community in order to enhance peace, security and
stability in the country and promote sustainable
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan. The
Islamic Republic of Iran is indeed very eager to see a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour.
We are ready to do everything in our power to that end,
since security in Afghanistan directly and indirectly
affects security in the region, including my country.
We commend the Afghan people for their broad-
based participation in the presidential elections
despite the threat by extremist and terrorist groups.
We hope that the stalemate in the election process
can be overcome soon. The prolonged and contested
electoral process tends to exacerbate economic
uncertainty and encourages extremist groups, terrorists
and their associated networks to take advantage of
the protracted political crisis and to indefinitely
increase their activities. We urge both presidential
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani Ahmadzai, to conclude their negotiations on
the formation of a Government of national unity and
thus pave the way for a stable political transition that
is consistent with the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation proces. We also urge them to reach a
political settlement in the country as soon as possible.
During the most recent visit by Mr. Kubis to Iran, in
August, we emphasized that the establishment of a
Government of national unity was a matter of urgency
and priority for Afghanistan and the region.

The continuing engagement between Afghanistan
and its neighbours and regional partners in the areas
of trade, economic exchanges and development projects
must be further supported and strengthened. We firmly
believe that more economic ties will reinforce the
stability in Afghanistan and its surroundings.

We continue to expand our bilateral cooperation,
particularly on security matters, counter-narcotics
efforts, developing projects and economic cooperation
in the fields of infrastructures and agriculture, as well
as for a durable solution for Afghan refugees. The recent
visit of the Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia
and the Pacific and his meetings with President Karzai
and other Afghan officials was aimed at developing and
strengthening bilateral relations in all fields.

The international support for the Triangular
Initiative on cooperation on countering narcotics among
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan is essential, not only to
strengthen the security and stability of Afghanistan but
also to alleviate the serious concerns of neighbouring
States and transit and destination countries with regard
to drug trafficking.

In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran once
again reiterates its continued support for the promotion
of security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

