Mr. Jallow: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for your support. A few
issues have been raised which fall within my area;
these focus mainly on the question of the transfer of
cases. I base my response essentially on the
explanations made by Judge Mose and by the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, who explained the process of and
conditions for transfer.

Essentially, we will not transfer any person for
trial by a national jurisdiction unless both the
Prosecutor and the Trial Chamber authorizing the
transfer are satisfied that the person will stand fair trial
in the jurisdiction to which he is being taken, and also
that he will not suffer a greater penalty than he would
otherwise have been exposed to at the Tribunal itself.
We are working on the conditions: as I indicated, we
are now drafting an agreement which spells out all the
conditions which, in our View, make for a fair trial,
based on the Statute's provisions and on other
international instruments in force.

In that respect, I would like to confirm that the
Rwandan Government has indicated to us that they
would be ready to take the necessary measures to
waive the death penalty with regard to all transferees.

An important element of transfers is the fact that
the Tribunal always retains primacy over these cases,
so when we transfer the cases we have to put in place a
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the standards of a
fair trial are being observed. We retain the right to take
the cases back to the Tribunal if we are not satisfied
that the standards are being observed. It is important to
note that element.

In the case of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICT R), of course, the primary destination
for the transfers would be Rwanda, because that is
where the offences occurred. This would be subject to
their fulfilling all the conditions to ensure a fair trial,
the issue of penalty having been resolved. There are
also other countries where some fugitives are resident.
If such countries are willing and able to take up the
prosecutions, we would encourage them to do so.
There is a third category of States, in Africa
particularly, where there are no fugitives resident and
where offences were not committed, but which
nonetheless have indicated, in principle, their desire to
take on some transfer cases. That is a very encouraging
sign that they are living up to their international
responsibility to assist with the prosecution of these
cases.

In terms of the timeline, at the Office of the
Prosecutor we are starting work on these transfers as
from now. Our expectation is that perhaps by the
middle of next year we will have finished work on all
the files that we want to transfer to national
jurisdictions.

The representative of Pakistan has asked what
happens if we cannot transfer these cases? I have said
that I would come back to the Security Council and
advise the Council of the situation. I cannot tell at
present what options we would need to look when we
come to that stage. I think, essentially, that we need to
be guided by the principle that we should not let
impunity prevail. Already, the completion strategy has
resulted in a situation where we are letting off quite a
number of people who would otherwise have faced
prosecution. The difficulty of completing all those
cases has made us focus on a specific category. If we
find that we cannot even transfer those to national
jurisdictions for prosecution, then the Security Council
and the broader United Nations, together with the
Tribunals, will have to look at another option that will
ensure that impunity does not prevail.

Some of the countries in question would require
material support. That would not be the responsibility
of the Tribunals, because we would not be in a position
to provide it. We could provide help in terms of
capacity-building and training: taking in officers from
national jurisdictions on attachment to us, training
them and giving them the necessary experience.
Individual countries wishing to take on cases would
have to draw up lists of their requirements and
approach the United Nations or approach other
countries on a bilateral basis, with the support of the
Tribunal, and try to obtain such assistance.

The issue of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was raised. Many of our indictees, as I said, are
within that jurisdiction. A combination of factors has
made it difficult to reach them so far, the primary one,
I believe, being the problem of accessibility to the
particular area of the country in which they are located.
Nonetheless, one must say that communications with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have been a little bit difficult. We have had to
resort to intermediaries. Even in the case I mentioned,
of Yusuf Munyakazi, transfer was made possible
largely by the intervention of an intermediary. So
perhaps a more prompt and direct response from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would facilitate matters for us in this regard.

Finally, I have noted the issue of the prison
incident in Mali, which was raised by the
representative of Rwanda. The situation he described
there is, of course, a deviation from the normal regime
for persons who have been convicted and are now
serving their sentences. But what happened there did
not occur with the knowledge, the authority or the
approval of the ICTR. Inquiries are now under way to
determine fully all the circumstances that led to that
situation.

With those remarks, Mr. President, I would like
again to thank you and the other members of the
Council for your support and your encouragement.

