Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes today the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2399
(2018), which extends the sanctions regime against the
Central African Republic for one year. We hope that
the implementation of its provisions will allow for
significant progress to be made in resolving the crisis
in that brotherly country.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, Cote d'Ivoire thanks all delegations for their
flexibility and the constructive spirit that led to a
balanced and consensual text, which was accepted by
all. My delegation reiterates its readiness to work with
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all Member States, in particular the countries
of the region, in implementing the present sanctions
regime, with a view to finding lasting solutions to the
serious crisis affecting the Central African Republic.

In the light of the many remaining challenges to
be faced, renewing the sanctions regime against the
Central African Republic appears to be amplyjustified.
Indeed, efforts aimed at the gradual restoration of State
authority throughout the country are being undermined
by the destabilizing activity of armed groups, which
negatively affect the peace and reconciliation process
under way in the Central African Republic. Today's
resolution seeks to strike a balance between the need
to encourage the Central African State to ensure its
sovereignty throughout the country and the imperative
to disable armed groups whose destructive capacity has
well been established.

In that regard, the Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the 2127
Committee's commitment to carefully considering
developments concerning the arms embargo within
the overall framework of security sector reform, as
well as the work of the Central African authorities to
improve the security situation. Moreover, my country
welcomes steps made towards operationalizing the
National Commission to Combat the Proliferation and
Illegal Movement of Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Through resolution 2399 (2018), the Committee has
added criteria for imposing sanctions, including
inflammatory speech of an ethnic, religious or other
nature, and incitement to violence, as well as attacks
against humanitarian workers.

Based on its recent experience, Cote d'Ivoire
reaffirms its belief that sanctions, when strictly
respected and imposed, constitute an effective
mechanism that can complement the Council's actions
in resolving conflicts that continue to face States.
My country therefore encourages the Government of
the Central African Republic and all stakeholders to
persevere in their efforts to find a lasting solution to
the crisis, and assures them of its full support for the
definitive return of peace and stability in the Central
African Republic.
Lastly, Cote d'Ivoire calls for synergy among the
Central African authorities, the States of the region and
the United Nations, facilitated by the Group of Experts
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
with a view to effectively implementing the sanctions
regime so as to find a lasting solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic.

