Mrs. Lima da Veiga (Cape Verde): May I thank
you, Sir, and, through you, the members of this Council
for allowing the delegation of Cape Verde to
participate in this debate, which is so important for
Timor-Leste and for all those who genuinely wish to
see that country treading the path of peace, stability
and progress. Since this is the first time my delegation
is addressing the Council under your presidency, let me
congratulate you on assuming that important position.
We wish you continued success in discharging your
mandate.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his two very informative reports,
and to Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his insightful briefing and assessment of
the situation in Timor-Leste.

We also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, for his important statement.

Furthermore, we associate ourselves with the
statement to be made by Ambassador Luis Fonseca,
Executive Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries.

Sharing significant historical, political and
cultural ties with Timor-Leste, Cape Verde has always
supported the struggle of the Timorese for a free,
independent and prosperous country, coexisting
peacefully with its neighbours. We have therefore been
following very closely the evolution of the situation on
the ground.

Concerning the security situation, we are
heartened to learn about the positive measures adopted
by the Timorese authorities in order to foster
reconciliation, confidence and dialogue within the
population and among the main political stakeholders.
Yet the root causes of the recent crises are still to be
tackled. That is a prerequisite for the success of the
State-building process and the holding of the first
presidential and parliamentary elections in 2007. We
therefore encourage the authorities and all stakeholders
to demonstrate perseverance, tolerance and cooperation
in order to speed up the process. Furthermore, steady
back-up from the international community is much
needed if that huge task is to succeed.

As part of the international effort to restore
normalcy to the country, we commend the role played
by Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal.
However, as the Timorese authorities have themselves
acknowledged, the current situation requires that the
prevailing arrangements regarding the international
forces be reviewed.

Therefore, and in line with the common position
of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries,
the Capeverdian delegation supports the call of the
Timorese authorities for a robust, multidisciplinary and
integrated mission that is adequate to the situation
prevailing in Timor-Leste. With a small military
component placed under the control and command of
the United Nations, such a mission would be very
instrumental in consolidating peace and stability and in
assisting in the preparation of the electoral process, in
full respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Timor-Leste.

We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
has given due consideration to that request and has
incorporated it into its report. We are confident that the
proposals made in the report deserve the indispensable
adherence of the members of this Council and that the
mission will be given the necessary resources and
means to successfully carry out its mandate.

Lasting peace and stability in Timor-Leste will be
achieved only when the country's development
challenges are addressed in a comprehensive way. In
that context, we are heartened by the political
determination and leadership of the Timorese
authorities in launching long-term initiatives and plans
with a view to reinforcing the still-fragile internal
stability, consolidate and maximize the major progress
achieved in State-building and meet the challenges
ahead in the political, judicial, legal, economic and
social sectors. Those efforts deserve firm, generous and
sustainable support from the international community.

That is the reason my delegation welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the ways
and means to reinforce security and to assist the
authorities in promoting development that is pro-poor,
gender-sensitive, youth-focused and aimed at
enhancing institution-building, governance and
democracy. Cape Verde stands ready to continue to
cooperate with Timor-Leste and the international
community towards the achievement of those goals.
Cape Verde experts are already assisting the Timorese
authorities in capacity- and institution-building in the
fields of justice and public administration, under a
framework of international cooperation. On the
bilateral level, Cape Verde and Timor-Leste have
already agreed on plans and programmes to foster a
fruitful partnership in areas of common interest.

