Mr. Hamdi (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head ofMission ofthe United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA). The
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Mali (S/2015/426), which the Council has before it,
follows resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, which
established MINUSMA.

As the Security Council discusses renewing the
mandate ofMINUSMA, I will also take this opportunity
to take stock of the cha11enges facing the Mission and
short- and medium-term perspectives.
Last Saturday, 20 June, we attended the final
stage of the signing of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It was a great day of peace
for Mali, a historic day. Today we have a global and
inclusive agreement, that is to say, signed by all
parties to the conflict: the Government, the Azawad
movements Coordination and the Platform coalition.
The Agreement was negotiated in less than a year,
with the support of international mediation efforts
led by Algeria. It is a political, institutional, security,
humanitarian and development compromise that
will enable Malians to rebuild their nation on strong
foundations.

Ofcourse, the Agreement is not peace itself, as peace
cannot be decreed, but it establishes the conditions for
building peace and lays out the best way to get there.
Of course, the Agreement is not itself reconciliation
among the various communities of Mali, but it provides
a foundation on which to rebuild Mali. Of course, the
challenges ahead are many, because rebuilding is more
difficult than destroying. However, I am convinced of
the goodwill of the majority of women, men and youth
from all regions of Mali, with whom I speak on a daily
basis.

Throughout the negotiation process, we have
consistently reminded the parties to the conflict and
the Malian people of the special nature of this new
agreement as compared with previous ones. We have
stressed, among other things, the involvement of the
international community, either through the presence
of a United Nations mission or in mediation during
negotiations, but also in the implementation of the
Agreement.

Concretely, the people of Mali, particularly those
of the northern regions, ask for only one thing: security
and the return of basic social services, especially
health and education. To get there, a real, ongoing and
animated dialogue must be established among Malians,
one inspired by a spirit of compromise and founded on
trust and mutual respect. In that respect, I welcome the
Government's inclusion of the Peace Agreement in its
general policy programme, which was presented two
weeks ago to the National Assembly.

The weeks and months ahead will be critical. It is
imperative to begin to take concrete action so that the
Malian people can begin to see and feel the dividends
of peace. With that, I launch a strong appeal to the
international community and financial institutions
regarding the need to begin funding the implementation
of the Peace Agreement as soon as possible.

(Spoke in English)

In spite of notable progress on the political front, the
security situation remains fragile. The recent violations
of the ceasefire agreements and the clashes are a stark
reminder of the complexity and unpredictability of the
security environment in the northern regions of Mali. I
welcome the withdrawal of the Platform from Menaka,
where the Mission continues to reinforce its presence
and support arrangements to ensure the protection of
civilians.

The security provisions in the Peace Agreement,
if implemented in a timely, inclusive and consensual
fashion by the parties, could have a positive impact
on our efforts to stabilize the northern regions. They
include interim security arrangements, including
cantonment, as well as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security-sector reform
programmes. MINUSMA and the United Nations
family are expected to play a major role in those areas.
The success of our combined efforts is contingent on the
parties' commitment and determination to make much-
needed compromises and concessions for the greater
good of all Malians. The continued maintenance of the
ceasefires is an important demonstration of that.

The recent spate ofviolence in some localities in the
north has caused massive displacements of populations.
That increased caseload puts an even heavier burden
on the resources of host families, health and education
facilities, and on water and sanitation infrastructures.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the humanitarian community in Mali, including
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, on
their mobilization and quick response to address the
displacement crisis.

The Peace Agreement opens prospects for Mali's
recovery and long-term perspectives, with a view to
reversing the setbacks induced by the political and
security crisis. Scores of displaced people and refugees
are returning home in spite of pressing humanitarian
needs. It is therefore crucial to quickly re-establish
basic social services nationwide, particularly in areas
ofreturn. That will facilitate the reintegration ofpeople
within their communities, ease potential tensions over
meagre resources, guide early-recovery activities and
support social cohesion.

Northern Mali remains one of the most difficult
environments for peacekeeping. Its size, geographical
environment, harsh climate and extremely poor or
non-existent infrastructure continue to pose significant
challenges to the Mission. To compound the situation,
violent extremists and other enemies of peace continue
to indiscriminately attack our forces and camps. I
would like to take this opportunity to extend my
condolences to the families and Governments of the
fallen peacekeepers. I would also like to express my
gratitude to all the countries contributing troops and
police forces to MINUSMA and salute their courage.

We are likely to continue to face significant
security and operational challenges in the immediate
future despite the Peace Agreement. It is therefore
critical that troop- and police-contributing countries
have the capacities and capabilities required to operate
safely and effectively in such an environment.

As the Security Council initiates discussions on
MINUSMA's mandate renewal, neither the challenges
nor the risks at hand should be underestimated.
Nevertheless, our efforts to date and the results
achieved thus far suggest that, with commitment,
vision and adequate resources, those challenges are not
insurmountable.

Going forward, it is critical to clearly define the roles
of the international community in the implementation
of the Agreement, based on comparative advantages.
MINUSMA, by virtue of its mandate, and working
together with partners, will naturally play a lead role
in supporting the implementation of the Agreement
on the ground. I see a particularly important role for
MINUSMA in supporting security and defence, as
well as the human rights and justice aspects of the
Agreement. MINUSMA will also provide support to
the functioning of the Comite de suivi de l'accord by
leading its secretariat.

Mali has made significant strides in the last
three years, thanks to a combination of national and
international efforts. I would like to salute the Malian
Government, the armed movements and the population
for their courage and determination to peacefully
resolve their differences. I would like to express
my gratitude to all members of the mediation team,
particularly Algeria, for its commitment and dedication
throughout the negotiations process. And I would
like to thank France and the United States for their
unwavering support to Mali and to the Mission.

In conclusion, the Peace Agreement provides
an opportunity to start addressing the multifaceted
challenges facing Mali. The responsibility for the
implementation of the Agreement lies primarily with
the Malians themselves, with the support of MINUSMA
and the international community. It is my hope that the
future mandate of MINUSMA can be oriented fully
behind the peace process, including through continued
good offices, active ceasefire monitoring and a leading
role in the implementation of the Agreement.

