Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Before the hundreds of people being killed
every day in Gaza; the thousands being wounded; the
total destruction by naval, air and ground
bombardment; and the long-standing siege of our
people in Gaza, we have sought urgently to put an end
to the Israeli aggression, lift the siege and provide the
Palestinian people with humanitarian assistance,
medicines and food. To that end, we submitted an Arab
draft resolution and stepped up our contacts with the
members of the Security Council in order to mobilize
support for it. In that respect, we thank those member
States that responded positively to our efforts.

After several meetings and lengthy discussions
with the United States of America, France, the United
Kingdom and Arab ministers currently present at the
United Nations, we formulated a draft resolution,
submitted by the United Kingdom, that the Arab Group
believes to meet our minimum requirements, including
an immediate ceasefire, the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces of aggression, the opening of the crossing points
and guarantees for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We therefore voted in favour of resolution
1860 (2009).

We believe, however, that the situation on the
ground in Gaza requires a speedier response and a
stronger resolution commensurate with the scope of the
tragedy. Although we do not agree with some of its
provisions, we voted in favour of the draft resolution.

Beyond this tragedy, another tragedy exists today:
that of the 11,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails,
some of them elected members of the Legislative
Council. Yet we hear unending talk about one Israeli
prisoner, a soldier: just one soldier compared to 11,000
civilians, including children, women and members of
parliament. Yet nobody defends them.

But the important and urgent thing now is to
implement the provisions of the present resolution in
such a way as to put an end to the Israeli massacre in
Gaza and to halt the Israeli destruction machine.
Working to ensure the implementation of this
resolution will be a test for us and our credibility. It
will also be a test for peace. This Israeli crime must not
continue.

