Mr. Konishi (Japan): In line with our Prime
Minister's comment which was issued today, I would like
the make the following statement.

The letter dated 14 November from the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq to the Secretary-General raised hopes that
Iraq would resume full cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The Security Council was
looking forward to a comprehensive review of Iraq's
compliance with its obligations under all relevant
resolutions, which was to be conducted after confirming the
resumption of full cooperation by Iraq with UN SCOM. and
the IAEA. Once full cooperation is resumed, all the
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions
can be fulfilled, and the prospect of lifting the sanctions can
be made clearer. Japan has long awaited this in order to
restore its traditional friendship with the people of Iraq.

However, from the letter of the Executive Chairman
of the Special Commission dated 15 December, one has to
conclude, regrettably, that Iraq's resumption of cooperation
with UNSCOM. is not sufficient and that Iraq's behaviour
constitutes a serious violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulated the conditions for the ceasefire in 1991, as well
as the Memorandum of Understanding signed in February
this year by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq.

Up to now the Security Council and many Member
States have worked strenuously to persuade the Government
of Iraq to cooperate fully and unconditionally with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA and have made their utmost
diplomatic efforts to ensure Iraq's full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Japan, for its part,
made numerous demarches to the Government of Iraq and
has made various efforts, in cooperation with other States
concerned, in the Security Council and elsewhere in order
to correct Iraq's behaviour. Regrettably, however, Iraq has
failed to provide full cooperation to UN SCOM, leading to
the consequences we face today.

In view of the course of events as stated above,
Japan supports the action taken by the United States and
the United Kingdom.

Japan strongly urges the Government of Iraq to
comply immediately and unconditionally with all its
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. By doing so, Iraq will be able to normalize its
relationship with the international community, and
international peace and security will be attained at the
earliest possible date. Japan sincerely hopes that this will
be realized as soon as possible. At the same time, Japan
earnestly hopes that the plight of the Iraqi people will be
alleviated as soon as possible.

