Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council meets today to consider the situation
of Afghanistan under particularly sensitive
circumstances. That sensitivity derives from the tragic
criminal acts committed against the friendly people of
the United States of America - acts that led this body
to take a firm position, embodied in the Security
Council resolution adopted on 12 September that
condemns these heinous crimes and reiterates a solid
commitment to the United Nations Charter and to "the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence".
Subsequently, military operations were pursued in a
brotherly Islamic country that has been driven towards
a dangerous path by some rogue elements. In this
respect, we follow the current military developments
on the ground and hope that all parties will adhere to
strict rules of self-restraint and that no one will carry
out reprisals, collectively or individually.

Egypt understands the motives and justifications
that impelled the United Sates of America to resort to
military force against the Taliban regime in
Afghanistan. On the other hand, Egypt has always
stressed the importance of a serious and committed
effort to avoid any harm to innocent Afghan
civilians e a noble people that has been exposed for
almost a quarter of a century, by no choice of their
own, to suffering and affliction. Their land, regrettably,
was subjected to a Great Game between numerous
parties. The only result of that game was the loss of life
and property. Most regrettably again, some Afghans
contributed in the last few years to furthering the
suffering of the Afghan population by engaging in a
vicious civil war. In their attempt to achieve their
narrow and parochial interests and objectives, they
only contributed, in the end, to the fall of the country
into the hands of a closed and severe regime that
knows no mercy towards its people - a regime that
opened the territories of Afghanistan for use by outlaw
elements who declared war on humanity as a whole.

The people of Afghanistan are currently faced
with a human tragedy of huge magnitude that has
inflicted extensive damage on their lives. It also
threatens their future and their hopes for a stable and
peaceful life. There is no doubt about the immediate
and urgent need for the international community to
stand united in support of the great Afghan people.
This requires comprehensive international action to
lend a helping and supportive hand and to deliver
humanitarian assistance immediately, before the harsh
winter season, in order to avoid a major catastrophe.

Talk of the future of Afghanistan requires
consideration of the following elements.

First, there is the need to preserve the territorial
integrity of Afghanistan, which has to establish good
relations with its neighbours, as well as with the
international community, on the basis of mutual respect
and adherence to international legitimacy.

Secondly, there is the need for all Afghans to
engage in the formation of the new Government and in
the optimal future administration of their country in a
manner that would serve the communal interests of this
predominantly Muslim people.

Thirdly, foreign Powers must refrain from any
attempt to impose their influence or hegemony.

Fourthly, the international community, in
particular the great Powers and those economically
capable of doing so, must take serious steps towards
the reconstruction of Afghanistan in a manner that
would ensure security, stability and peace in this
important part of the world. This should lead to the
beginning of a new era of stability and development in
the history of Afghanistan, as well as the end of
suffering there.

Fifthly, the forces of terrorism and darkness must
be denied any opportunity to use the territory of
Afghanistan for their terrorist acts, which destabilize
countries, jeopardize the interests of peoples and burn
the bridges of understanding among them.
The United Nations has a vital and important role
to play in an Afghan settlement. Such a settlement
requires a close examination of what can be done and
of the burdens that the United Nations will be able to
bear. We must exercise utmost discretion because the
responsibility is great. I wish to express Egypt's full
support for the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi in the
political field. We hope that these efforts will reach a
satisfactory conclusion. We further express our
readiness to make any necessary contribution to the
restoration of Afghanistan's stability, in order for it to
become an effective and positive actor in the
international arena.

Egypt was the victim of a vicious terrorist
campaign. With the clearly expressed will of the people
and through the strict rule of law, Egypt gave a
decisive blow to the scourge of terrorism. Egypt fully
supports all international measures taken to combat
international terrorism for the benefit of all humanity.

