Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by reaffirming our commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), to which my country has contributed
troops since its establishment in 2004.

When it comes to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council must be predictable in
its actions. That requires, including on the part of the
Secretariat in accordance with the principle of triangular
cooperation, that troop-contributing countries be kept
informed and consulted during each cycle of the life

of a mission so that they can make informed decisions.
Even though it is true that the final decision is up to the
Security Council, it is also true that troop-contributing
countries are key partners in that common effort.

Several reasons led us to ask to participate in this
meeting on the renewal of the MINUSTAH mandate.
First, we understand that the political and security
situation in Haiti has not improved enough to proceed
to an accelerated and sharp reduction by more than half
of the current troop level, as the Security Council has
just decided.

Secondly, resolution 2180 (2014), which has just
been adopted, interrupts MINUSTAH's ongoing
consolidation plan for 2013-2016. It also replaces in
less than six months the five options that were under
consideration by the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries with a single new option with
considerable consequences.

Thirdly, it ignores another key index, which we
had set as a condition for the reduction of troops, which
is progress in the professionalization of the Haitian
National Police, whose current plan will be completed
in 2016.

Fourthly, experience has shown that we must
maintain an adequate presence in Haiti, particularly
during electoral periods. The measures that have
just been adopted could jeopardize the holding of the
election itself.

Finally, we believe that MINUSTAH should
remain in Haiti no longer than necessary. We recall
that the consensus reached was that any reduction of
MINUSTAH's military component should take place
gradually and responsibly and be associated with the
necessary capacity-building, increasing with respect
to the Haitian National Police numbers, and that all
decisions should be based on conditions on the ground,
and not on the budgetary needs of other missions.

We regret that the post-2016 scenario is being
imposed in 2014, and we were therefore not in a position
to co-sponsor the resolution, as my country and other
countries in the region have traditionally done.

