Mr. Kobler: I would like to express, at the outset,
my sincere congratulations to Jordan for taking up
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. At the same time, I would like to extend
my best wishes to all the new members of the Security
Council and, to those who celebrate the birthday of the
Prophet, my deepest respects today.

(spoke in French)

It was just a month ago that I briefed the Security
Council on the most recent political and military
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which demonstrates the Council's deep interest in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Today I will share with the Council an
overview of the latest developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the outlook for 2014.

Previously, I spoke in the future tense, but now I
can speak in the present and even the past tense. The
Kampala dialogue has been concluded in Nairobi.
The Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo, supported by the MONUSCO Intervention
Brigade, are conducting operations directed against
the armed groups. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has adopted its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan and, at this very
moment, MONUSCO is being fully deployed towards
the east to bolster its civil presence in the conflict-
affected areas. Naturally, much remains to be done, but
there can be no doubt that we are making progress.

(spoke in English)

Nevertheless, we have to add a word of caution
here. After the security incidents of 30 December,
the spirit of optimism following the conclusion of
the national dialogue, the defeat of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) and President Kabila's tour of the
east, have given way somewhat to a sense of fragility.
It is therefore more important than ever that we stay
committed to preventing a rollback of what has been
achieved.

The year 2013 was marked by three significant
milestones: the signature of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement; the adoption of
resolution 2098 (2013), which created the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade, with a robust mandate; and the
unwavering international cohesion exemplified by the
team of Special Envoys.

Allow me to highlight the relentless efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mary
Robinson. Together with the Special Envoys of the
African Union, the European Union and the United
States, she has created a positive dynamic and brought
together all the key stakeholders towards open and
continuous dialogue for durable peace and sustainable
stability. We are cooperating in an exemplarily close
way.

The year 2013 also marked important
accomplishments for MONUSCO. We have been able to
conduct more robust military operations. We have made
it clear that there would be no cohabitation with armed
groups - any of them. Our position is clear. We are
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo not to react,
but to act; we are there not to deter, but to prevent; and
not only do we keep the peace, but we must also make
peace a long-term reality. With the Force Intervention
Brigade and our unmanned aerial vehicles, all armed
groups are aware now that we have the will and means
to take robust action at any time. In the coming weeks,
we will finalize the review of our military deployment
across eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
will then have a more flexible Force. We need it to
be more agile and ready to deploy when it is needed
and where civilians are threatened. That is the Force's
new paradigm. Our rules of engagement are clear. Our
mandate is clear. Our determination is clear.

After the military defeat of the M-23, it now is
important to implement the Nairobi declarations. There
are credible reports that the military recruitment of the
M-23 did not cease after the Nairobi declarations were
signed. There are also credible reports ofemerging M-23
activities in Ituri in north-eastern Congo. I call upon the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to implement the Nairobi declarations and expedite the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
ofM-23 ex-combatants. At the same time, I call upon the
Governments of Uganda and Rwanda to do everything
possible to prevent M-23 elements from sheltering or
training troops on their territory. We should tolerate not
a military re-emergence of the M-23.

In full support of the Congolese Government and
to fulfil its mandated responsibilities, MONUSCO has
reoriented and streamlined its priorities along three
main axes: security and protection, the stabilization of
conflict affected areas and the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. I
will now talk along those three lines.

First, with regard to security and protection, the
presence of armed groups is still strong - too strong.
We need to keep the momentum. First operations
against the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR) have cleared some positions.
Further operations are being shaped. Operations can
be successful, however, only if done jointly with the
Congolese army. I encourage the Congolese forces to do
more and to intensify the joint planning and execution
of operations against the FDLR. However, remaining
realistic, it will be difficult to eliminate the FDLR
completely by military actions alone. Through military
pressure, the FDLR must be left with no choice but to
come out of the bush. Its leadership must be left with
no choice other than to surrender. Its racist ideology
must be left with no choice than to disappear. That is
the clear message for 2014, the year we commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda.

The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) still terrorizes
civilians in Ituri and north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. For example, on 13 December in
an ADF-controlled area, 21 bodies, including those of
eight babies, very young children and pregnant women,
were found dead, mutilated and some beheaded. Three
of the children were reportedly raped before being
murdered. I visited ADP-controlled areas during the
past few days. ADF continues to spread terror and
horror. On 23 December, it attacked Congolese forces
in Kamango and Ituri near the Ugandan border. With
the help of the Force Intervention Brigade, order could
be restored. Military actions against the ADF are
expected soon.

In 2013, 151 children, including babies caught in
cross-fire and primary school students summarily
executed, were killed or maimed as a result of conflict-
related Violence; 206 underage girls were documented
by MONUSCO as having been raped by parties
to the conflict. That is only the tip of the iceberg.
Their childhood is destroyed; their future is brutally
burdened. We cannot and should not remain silent and
passive. That is the very reason the Council sent us to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

After the security incidents of 30 December in
Kinshasa and Lubumbashi, renewed abuses of human
rights in Ituri and Katanga were recorded as having
been committed both by armed groups and by national
security forces. There is zero tolerance in particular
for sexual violence and violence against children in
conflict. We must stand side by side with the Congolese
authorities and the Congolese people to ensure that all
the perpetrators are held accountable and brought to
justice. I am encouraged by the fact that the amnesty
law submitted to Parliament, as promised in Nairobi,
will exempt the perpetrators of gross human rights
Violations from amnesty.

I am glad to announce that, at a Cabinet meeting
held on 26 December, the Congolese Government
adopted the third national plan for DDR. It also
introduced an amnesty law to Parliament, paving the
way for the return of ex-combatants having taken
refuge abroad. However, I appeal to the Government
to expedite the implementation of its DDR plan so as to
allow those combatants who have laid down their arms
to reintegrate into civilian life. As demonstrated in the
past months, our strategy remains that of neutralizing
the threat by our military presence, on the one hand,
and stimulating voluntary disarmament, on the other.

In the meantime, around 8,000 combatants
have surrendered. That is a good development
and we encourage defections. Those who have
surrendered - plus the M-23 ex-combatants in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda - have to be reintegrated into society. The
DDR process, however, is still much too slow.

Secondly, force is not the only solution. The
civilian component of the Mission is stepping up. The
stabilization of areas liberated from the control of armed
groups is essential. Our new stabilization support plan
has been presented to the Government and to all our
international partners. That guiding framework brings
the Government, MONUSCO, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations together. I call
upon all Member States to support the implementation
of the stabilization strategy by funding stabilization
programmes, including the islands of stability. To that
end, the islands of stability are not just a concept. They
are areas in which men and women can go to their
fields and to the market without fearing being robbed,
raped or kidnapped. But, let us be frank - they are
not yet territories in which children go to school, the
police offer reliable protection, the administration fully
functions and women can give birth without risks.

The islands of stability need the full redeployment
of regularly paid civil servants, security and law
enforcement agents, social and medical service
providers in order to resume the delivery ofbasic public
administration and services to the population. They
need lasting engagement in order not only to briefly
restore but to permanently consolidate State authority
in those areas. The United Nations cannot and should
not replace State functions. We need the firm and
lasting commitment of the Congolese authorities.

Thirdly, in line with the country's national
commitments, 2014 must be a year of continued reform.
I welcome President Kabila's address to the nation in
which he reiterated that security sector reform must
remain the priority of priorities. The Congolese army
and defence reform will be achieved only through a
change in mindset and mentality.

Peace in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be durable only if the root causes of the conflict
are addressed. The restitution of State authority
alone is not enough. Only regional cooperation and
good governance will provide the peace dividend the
population is expecting.

Let me mention one important priority for 2014.
Legalizing and regulating the current exploitation and
trade of conflict minerals will substantially increase
State revenues and will allow the Government to
dispose of greater means to govern. The challenge will
be to successfully introduce a system of validation
of child-labour-free and conflict-free minerals in
accordance with international standards. Congo's
natural wealth will thereby help finance the economic
and social challenges of the country. Obviously, that has
to be done in partnership with the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of neighbouring
States, and the private sector, and with the assistance of
the international community.

As I outlined at the outset, democratic institutions
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo remain fragile.
On 30 December 2013, a group of attackers mounted
a coordinated assault on the buildings of the national
radio and television, the Ministry of Defence and the
airport in Kinshasa. Simultaneous attacks occurred
in Kindu and Lubumbashi. Those were clear warning
shots to expedite reforms, including on the rule of law,
good governance and decentralization, and to nominate
the new Government as announced.

On the electoral front, the national budget, which
is currently being debated in Parliament, is intended
to finance the Independent National Electoral
Commission, in the amount of $260 million, of which
$40 million is to come from external sources. At the
end of 2014, the local elections should kick start the
electoral cycle culminating with the presidential
elections of 2016.

Peace and prosperity go hand in hand. Turning
Goma into an economic hub could be a first step in the
right direction. Upgrading its airport and improving
road infrastructure will prove to be a decisive turning
point for fostering an environment conducive to trade
and economic cooperation. That will benefit the
population of the entire region. We have submitted
proposals to the donor community, and I will continue
to lobby for them.

Improved and better integrated regional cooperation
is a key element for successful and durable peace. It
starts with cooperation among the leaders in the region.
That is why I travel regularly to Kampala and Kigali.
I was there just last week. I leave it to my partner in
peace, Mary Robinson, to elaborate further on that.

The demonstration in Goma on 10 January, during
which United Nations vehicles were hijacked by
demonstrators, revealed that much still has to be done
to restore confidence across borders. MONUSCO and
I clearly dissociate ourselves from any racist or ethnic
undertones of that demonstration.

In order to meet the challenges of 2014, MONUSCO
needs to adapt. The mandate the Council gave us clearly
directs us to bundle our strengths where they are most
needed. In Kinshasa, a leaner Mission headquarters
will provide a more efficient and focused platform for
cooperation at the national level with the Congolese
Government, United Nations country team members
and other national and international partners.

As I address the Council, MONUSCO staff are
being redeployed where they are most needed, in the
areas affected by armed conflict in the east. Before
July, two thirds of our substantive staff will be active
in the Mission's operations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The east needs more civil affairs officers, human
rights experts, police officers, political analysts and
engineers - not to win a war, but to win a lasting
peace. In the western provinces, antenna offices will
exercise reduced monitoring and reporting functions,
ensuring MONUSCO's presence throughout the whole
Democratic Republic of the Congo, while intending
to transfer a large part of programmatic tasks and
responsibilities to the country team.
The transfer of tasks and responsibilities is a
strategic aspect of our reconfiguration. MONUSCO
cannot alone make the journey to peace a comprehensive
and lasting success. Together, as one United Nations,
and with our national and international partners, we
can.

(spoke in French)

It remains only for me to thank you, Sir, and the
entire staff of the United Nations for the commitment
they show daily, their tireless determination to work,
even in trying conditions, towards lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In particular, I
should like to express my great gratitude for the work
and commitment of the United Nations Volunteers,
who represent more than one third of the international
personnel of MONUSCO, its energy and beating heart.

(spoke in English)
I thank the Council once again for its continued support.

