Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
regret the Council's failure to adopt this draft
resolution. My regret is that the draft resolution has
been rejected despite what I believed to be an
agreement among members of the Council. We share a
deep concern over the plight of Burma's people. We
know that the lack of political progress, the continued
detention of their democratically elected leaders, the
attacks on civilians and the restrictions placed on
humanitarian organizations have all exacerbated the
situation of the people of Burma/Myanmar. We all
support the good offices mission of the Secretary-
General to promote political change. We want to see a
better future for a beleaguered people.

Our disagreement is one of competence. Is this a
valid issue for decision by the Security Council? The

British Government believes that the situation in
Burma/Myanmar represents a threat to regional peace
and security and to the security of the Burmese people.
We therefore voted for a draft resolution that we
believed to be within the responsibilities of the
Council. But we do not claim an exclusive Security
Council interest. Other organs - the agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations - all have a
key role to play in tackling the problems affecting
Burma/Myanmar, be they HIV/AIDS and other
infectious diseases, displaced persons and refugees,
abject poverty, drugs, vulnerable children and so on.

The United Kingdom wants to see a strengthened
relationship between the United Nations family and
Burma/Myanmar. That should include working for the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
which are woefully behind in that country, and a
political process to establish democratic institutions,
the rule of law and respect for human rights. I hope
that this is the signal that is heard in Myanmar, and that
there is a positive response from Nay Phi Taw. We urge
the Council, for its part, to continue to monitor the
situation in Burma/Myanmar, which I note is not an
impediment to consideration by any other part of the
United Nations family.

