Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to join
colleagues in thanking the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).

Seventeen years after a devastating war that put
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the brink of violence and
disintegration, the security situation remains calm and
stable. We acknowledged that fact already during our
last debate six months ago (see S/PV.6659). At that
time, however, the country was in a state of political
paralysis.

Today we can welcome significant improvements.
The political process in the country has tangibly gained
momentum. A new State-level Government has finally
been formed, more than 15 months after the elections.
With the budget for 2011, the country has started to
regain its capacity to act at a fiscal level. The recent
laws on State aid and on the census to take place in
2013 are equally important and prerequisites for the
EU accession process. The decision on the distribution
of State and military property between the State and
the entities has laid the groundwork for the activation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's NATO membership action
plan.

Germany commends Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leaders for beginning to overcome their
differences and for cooperating constructively in the
search for compromises. However, significant
challenges still lie ahead. The most imminent is the
long overdue implementation of the ruling by the
European Court on Human Rights on the Sejdic-Finci
vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case, concerning the right
of minorities to be elected to the Bosnian Presidency
and to the second chamber of Parliament. A credible
effort in that regard is the prerequisite for the next step
towards EU membership, namely, the entry into force
of the stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina must remain firmly
anchored on the reform track, not least to catch up with
its neighbours on the path towards Europe. The
responsibility lies first and foremost with Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political leaders. They should place
front and centre the interests of their country as a
whole and the well-being of all ofits citizens.

The European Union has the proven political will
and the instruments necessary to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in that task. The EU approach is based on
a clear and simple concept - in order to benefit from
what the EU has to offer, Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs to assume ownership of a comprehensive reform
process that will, step-by-step, lead the country
towards accession. Based on that approach, the EU
Special Representative in Sarajevo has worked
tirelessly to facilitate the positive developments of the
past months.

Close and far-reaching monitoring and
supervision by the international community was
undoubtedly a necessity in the past. It has not
succeeded, however, in creating incentives for
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina to seek
compromise solutions rather than advancing their
nationalist agendas. Germany wholeheartedly
welcomes the indispensable contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the High
Representative and his Office have made during the
past 17 years.

It is now time, however, to focus on concepts and
instruments that have shown to initiate positive
developments, rather than on obsolete approaches. The
EU perspective is finally occupying centre stage in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; we can now afford to relieve
the Office of the High Representative of tasks that are
fulfilled by the EU and its representatives on the
ground.

With regard to the question of immunity from
legal proceedings of present and former staff of the
Office of the High Representative, we continue to
favour a sustainable and comprehensive solution at
some stage.

Let me conclude by underlining once again our
commitment to a sovereign and united Bosnia and
Herzegovina that enjoys territorial integrity,
contributes to peace and stability in the region and is
willing and able to conduct the EU accession process
by its own strength.

