Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I
would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
periodic briefing on developments on the Palestinian
question and the peace process. We are coming together
today for this periodic meeting in order to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, the effect of the serious developments
on our entire region and their ramifications on the
international level.

Egypt has repeatedly warned against unilateral
measures, actions and decisions that run counter
to international legitimacy and resolutions on the
Palestinian question that have been agreed upon and
accepted by the international community. We have
also pointed out several times that all countries need
to honour international law, especially international
humanitarian law, including relevant Geneva
conventions and instruments. Egypt is convinced that
just and lasting peace is to be achieved through respect
for international law and legitimacy as the only means
to ensure the rights of peoples. Any measures aimed
at undermining such rights will only hamper efforts to
achieve peace and compromise the forces battling for
peace, and thus serve only as a pretext for the forces of
extremism and violence.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
is deteriorating. Palestinians continue to suffer. They
can no longer enjoy their freedom and their right to
self-determination and to live in an independent State
in peace and security. That is why the international
community and its various bodies and institutions find
themselves in a dilemma that raises questions about
their ability to implement the decisions they adopt and
their credibility in the eyes of the people of the world
who truly respect them. It also allows countries to
break from the international consensus, the terms of
reference, signed treaties and agreements without a
deterrent factor that ensures stability and international
peace and security

We meet periodically and repeat the same
pronouncements on elusive peace, the deterioration
of humanitarian situation and suffering of the
Palestinians. We are all responsible. We must put
an end to the occupation as the only way to restore
stability and security to the region. The feelings of
injustice, oppression and impotence to make changes
in the region, especially with regard to the Palestinian
question, are apparent, particularly in light of the
escalation of regional tensions and the collapse of
institutions. That creates an opportunity for some to
increase their violence and aggression and to spread
their extremist and racist ideologies. We must therefore
take the necessary measures to change the situation,
which poses a genuine threat to international peace
and security.

Egypt is facing many challenges, but we have
always sought to manage the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip. That does not, however, absolve
the occupying Power from its responsibilities to the
Palestinian territories, particularly Gaza. Measures
such as checkpoints must be relaxed and rebuilding
must begin. That will benefit all parties and ensure
security and stability.

Imposing a status quo, changing the situation on
the ground, shirking one's responsibilities towards
signed conventions, pursuing provocative and punitive
measures against the Palestinians, continuing to build
settlements on Palestinian territories and attempting
to legitimize those actions by changing the status of
East Jerusalem will not ensure security for any party,
especially as we know that all actions that do not
respect international resolutions or international law
are invalid and have no legal effect on the occupied
party or on the international community.

Egypt has repeatedly called on the parties
concerned to take the measures necessary to return to
the negotiating table, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions and on the basis of the two-State solution.
That is the only way to safeguard the rights of the
Palestinians and Israelis alike. Any other solution that is
not agreed to bilaterally will only exacerbate tensions.

In that regard, Egypt is committed to putting an
end to Palestinian division, which had a negative
impact on the Palestinian question. We call on the
international community to support Egyptian efforts
in favour of the Palestinian Government in order for
it to be able to successfully perform its tasks, and
overcome the obstacles to Palestinian reconciliation. In
our view, Palestinian reconciliation is one of the best
ways to build a strong, united Palestinian society that
could be a full-fledged partner in peace, which in turn
would allow for the creation of a viable and consistent
Palestinian State.

