Mr. Yardley (Australia): The scale and pace of
challenges facing the Security Council today must
bolster our resolve to ensure that the Council is as
agile and effective as possible. Australia welcomes
the update to note by the President S/2010/507. We
thank Japan, which acted as Chair of the Informal
Working Group during its recent Council term in 2016-
2017, for its leadership and commitment on this issue.
Australia likewise commends Kuwait for assuming
the Chair in 2018 and for convening today's debate.
I will focus on three key areas of working methods
reform - transparency, sanctions and use of the veto.

First, as a member ofthe Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, Australia firmly
believes transparency is an important element of the
Council's effectiveness. In line with Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the
responsibility of the Security Council to act on behalf
of the whole membership, Council members should
engage regularly with the broader membership through
briefings, including with regional groups and outreach
to affected countries. We also support greater use of
public meetings, open debates, Arria Formula meetings
and monthly wrap-up sessions.

Secondly, much of the Council's work relies on
non-members to implement its decisions. It is therefore
imperative that the broader membership be engaged
appropriately in Council deliberations. One clear
example is in the field of sanctions. We need to continue
improving the working methods of the sanctions
committees to enable better implementation of sanctions
measures. Australia was proud to collaborate with
Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden in launching,
in November 2015, the Compendium ofthe High-Level
Review ofUnitedNations Sanctions and, in October last
year, its follow-up Assessment Report. We are pleased
that many of the Compendium's 150 recommendations
are now being implemented. But more can be done. Last
year's Assessment Report offers further ways in which
cooperation, collaboration, transparency and capacity-
building on sanctions issues can be enhanced. Both
the compendium and the assessment represent sizable
contributions towards building a better United Nations
sanctions system and are essential tools for reforming
Council working methods.

Finally, we must move urgently, decisively and in
unison to agree on clear restraint of the veto. Too often,
the Council has failed in its mandate because narrow
interests have been allowed to prevail over those of the
most vulnerable. We note with concern the observation
by Mr. Martin that 2017 saw the highest number of
vetoes in two decades, which can impede decisive
action in response to egregious crimes. We therefore
join others in calling on all Council members - current
and incoming - to commit unambiguously to the
ACT code of conduct and the complementary French-
Mexican initiative on restraining the use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity. Australia also encourages
the Secretary-General to make full use of his prerogative
under Article 99 of the Charter to bring to the Council's
attention any matter that may threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security.

As we continue to grapple with the multiple,
overlapping challenges of terrorism, instability,
conflict and fragility, working methods reform is not
just a bureaucratic exercise. It is critical to the ability of
the Council to discharge its core mandate - and to the
lives that depend upon it.

