We begin by thanking Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing. Let me also thank Mr. Daniel Levy, Professor Khalil Shikaki and the representatives of the State of Palestine and Israel for sharing their assessments and perspectives on the evolving situation in the Middle East. The question of the implementation of the internationally agreed parameters to achieve a just and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains a significant concern for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. As the situation on the ground has drastically evolved over the past decade, leading to the continued expansion of illegal settlements across the occupied Palestinian territories and the associated threats of annexation, that question has become even more acute. Recent developments underscore, more than ever, the need to support the people of Palestine. In particular, we remain deeply concerned about the continued demolitions and seizures of Palestinian properties and structures, which, according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, climaxed in June to the highest levels since January 2017. In line with resolution 2334 (2016) and other related United Nations resolutions, we condemn the illegal demolition of homes and the displacement of Palestinian civilians. Given the vast humanitarian concerns in the occupied Palestinian territory, which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease, we call on the international community and other actors to provide increased funding for the revised inter-agency response plan, which remains underfinanced. Ina positive development, we welcome the Palestinian Authority's willingness to resume negotiations with Israel under the auspices of the Middle East Quartet, with international involvement. We call on the Quartet to engage and step up consultations with the relevant parties and key regional actors in an effort to restart talks in the near term. Despite many setbacks, direct negotiations can bolster the prospects for a negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and promote lasting peace in the region. The serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip necessitates an urgent political solution to facilitate lifting the 13-year Israeli blockade. It is important to note that the delivery of the essential services of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) contributes significantly to the overall well-being of Palestinian refugees, especially the most vulnerable. Consequently, we reiterate our call for the international community to provide UNRWA with the necessary funding so that it can continue providing vital life-saving services, health care and education for Palestine refugees. Although Israel did not proceed with its annexation plans on | July, we are mindful that the threat of annexation has not disappeared. We take this opportunity to stress, yet again, that annexation of any part of the occupied Palestinian territory will constitute a grave violation of international law and undermine prospects for accelerating the Middle East peace process. It is imperative that we collectively work to discourage any possible initiative towards annexation, and to promote the internationally agreed two-State solution. We therefore support the call of President Abbas for an international conference.
