Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is customary for
all Security Council members to thank the President
of the meeting for convening a debate on an important
topic when they have chosen one, but I really mean
it. Preventive diplomacy is a vital tool of the Council
in maintaining and restoring international peace and
security, which we do not use often enough. We cannot
simply pay lip service to the primacy of political
solutions. Collectively, the Council should be willing
to engage with slow-burning political crises before
they flare up into open conflict. That is why, during
the presidency of the United Kingdom last August, we
held an open debate on mediation (see S/PV.8334). I
therefore thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on an important issue.

Let me pay tribute to the efforts of the African
Union (AU) and African subregional organizations in
that regard. The AU took swift and decisive action in
June in response to a brutal crackdown on peaceful
protesters in the Sudan. The subsequent AU mediation
was crucial to supporting the Sudan's transition to a
civilian-led Government. I am pleased that the Council
was ultimately able to express its support for the
African Union's position on the Sudan in June thanks,
in no small measure, to the leadership of our African
colleagues on the Council.

Our conflict prevention and resolution efforts work
best where the United Nations, the African Union and
subregional organizations coordinate to leverage their
comparative advantages. We have seen that in the
Central African Republic, where the United Nations
and the African Union continue to play a vital role in
supporting the implementation of the peace agreement.
I hope that we will see further such coordinated
efforts and actions to encourage peaceful dialogue and
political processes.

In South Sudan, we urge the regional Governments,
together with the African Union, the United Nations
and all interested actors, to encourage the parties to
make further progress in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan ahead of the critical
12 November deadline. That should include further
direct contact between President Kiir Mayardit and
Riek Machar. I hope that the Security Council is able to
play a helpful role during its visit under your leadership,
Mr. President, and that of our United States colleagues
later this month.

In Cameroon, the United Kingdom welcomes the
national dialogue that took place last week as an initial
step to bring parties together to work towards peace.
Further inclusive discussion about the root causes of
grievances is urgently needed and all parties must take
action to address those grievances. We are often asked
to ensure space for African organizations to take the
lead on African issues. We therefore call on the African
Union and the Economic Community ofCentral African
States to support an inclusive and peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Cameroon.
In Burundi, I welcomed our briefers raising the
situation there. We encourage Burundian and regional
actors to work together in the spirit of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in order to make
progress on a long-term solution to the political crisis
ahead of the 2020 elections. I hope that the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission can and will remain
fully engaged.

There is of course no one-size-fits-all approach to
conflict prevention and resolution. In some contexts we
can best make headway by ensuring alignment by actors
behind United Nations leadership, avoiding duplication
of effort. That is the case in the United Kingdom's
opinion, for example, in Libya, where the international
community should follow a single shared road map
towards the resumption of a political process, aligning
behind Special Representative Salame's leadership.
That emphatically does not mean marginalizing
regional voices. Rather, it means maximizing the United
Nations ability to leverage the support and expertise of
all relevant actors, including the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the European Union, behind
a successful process.

Conflict prevention is of course preferable
to conflict resolution but it requires effective
horizon-scanning capacities. I therefore commend the
work of the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission on strengthening their ability to
conduct joint analysis and reporting. 1 also commend
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
for the useful discussion on horizon scanning that we
held on Latin America some time ago. I hope to see
the next one soon and that such discussions take place
more frequently hereafter. It is very good, I think, for
members of the Council to have an informal opportunity
to understand the situation in a range of countries not
on the Council's agenda.

I also welcome the development of the African
Union Continental Early Warning System, which the
United Kingdom is proud to support, including by
funding secondee roles within the AU Commission.

As we discussed in our debate on mobilizing the
youth last week (see S/PV.8629), inclusive approaches
to conflict prevention and resolution are key to a lasting
peace. That means supporting women peacebuilders at
the grass-roots level and ensuring women's meaningful
participation in peace processes, mediation and
intercommunal dialogue. We welcome efforts to that
end, such as the AU's Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, which the United
Kingdom supports enthusiastically, and the Women
Mediators across the Commonwealth initiative, to
which the United Kingdom is contributing $1.5 million.
We hope that more Member States will offer their
support to such initiatives, including by supporting
the Global Alliance of Women Mediators Network,
launched recently on the margins of the high-level week
by the Secretary-General, I believe.

