Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to join others in warmly thanking Under-Secretary-
General Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-
General Michele Coninsx for their very informative
briefings and the exemplary commitment that they and
their teams have demonstrated in our common struggle
against terrorism.

As the eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/103) on this topic underscores, despite the loss
of its territorial entrenchment Da'esh continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.
The group has evolved into an underground network
relying upon dispersed cells potentially comprised of
former foreign terrorist fighters and, as we know, its
propaganda continues to attract many sympathizers.

In that regard, clearly now is not the time to lower
our guard or decrease pressure on Da'esh. It is therefore
necessary that the efforts of the Global Coalition
against Da'esh be pursued both in terms of its military
commitment and of civilian component in support
of the implementation of a pluralistic and inclusive
political solution in Syria and Iraq. Clearly, that is the
only lasting response to prevent the re-emergence of
Da'esh in other forms. With that in mind, the Foreign
Ministers of the Global Coalition reaffirmed their
commitment in unison on 6 February in Washington,
DC. Similarly, accepting impunity for the crimes
committed by Da'esh is not an option. We have the
political, legal and moral responsibility to ensure that
those responsible are prosecuted and sentenced to the
fullest extent of the law.

Justice meted out with respect for human rights
and the rule of law is also essential to peace and
reconciliation. It requires the strengthening of judicial
systems and sound international judicial cooperation.
France particularly welcomes the contribution of the
team created by the Council - the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant - which is intended to help gather evidence
to prosecute those responsible for crimes committed by
Da'esh in Iraq. In addition, our efforts must continue
to focus on three priority areas for action, which are
clearly set out in the Secretary-General's report.

Our first priority is the fight against terrorist
financing, which is a top priority for France. During the
Arria Formula meeting, which we organized with other
partners on 31 January, we noted that there are still
many challenges to be met in order to adapt our response
to the threats posed. Sharing information, combating
anonymous transactions, identifying the sources of
financing, anticipating the misuse of new financial
instruments, making a collective commitment not only
to vulnerable countries but also to failing countries,
and international sanctions are all priorities on which
we must make progress. That is why, after inviting the
international community to Paris last year for the No
Money For Terror conference and after consulting with
the relevant actors, France has decided to submit a draft
resolution on the subject with a view to adopting it in
the coming weeks. We will work closely with Council
members and look forward to everyone's commitment
and support.

Our second priority is managing the return of
foreign terrorist fighters. Faced with that challenge,
we must continue to strengthen measures to detect,
treat and monitor people at risk, including through
constant information-sharing. Given the variety of
profiles concerned, close coordination among civil,
military and financial intelligence services and
agencies, as well as among judicial authorities, is
essential to strengthening the interaction between
intelligence action and the criminal justice response.
The involvement of the education, social services
and justice sectors is essential to helping the families
concerned. France's national strategy places particular
emphasis on providing care specifically for children,
in particular at the sociopsychological and educational
levels, to promote their reintegration.

Our third priority is preventing the use of the
Internet by terrorist groups. France intends to continue
to play a leading role in that fight. Considerable progress
has been made and Internet companies are mobilizing.
However, much remains to be done and we will pursue
our efforts, in particular in the European context,
to more effectively prevent the spread of terrorist
propaganda that fuels radicalization and to support the
development of positive counter-narratives. Combating
the financing of terrorism is also a priority for us in
other forums, in particular within the framework of the
European Union and of our presidency of the Group of
Seven this year.

The United Nations has an increasingly vital,
unifying and recognized role to play in each of those
areas. We thank the Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCTO and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) for the outstanding work
they do every day. We also rely on UNOCT and CTED
to continue to address, as their respective mandates
provide, more cross-cutting issues, such as respect for
and the promotion of human rights or the integration
of the gender dimension in the fight against terrorism.

You may rest assured, Sir, of France's full support
to United Nations entities in their efforts to identify
needs and the best ways to meet them and to promote
coordination among all relevant actors. Considerable
progress has been made on these various issues and it is
vital that it continue.

