Mr. Daeie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I am very pleased to
address the Security Council on this occasion. As we
sit down to consider the most recent report (S/2015/303)
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), I extend to the members of the Council my
gratitude for the continued attention they devote to the
question of Kosovo and Metohija, which is of paramount
importance for the Republic of Serbia. Drawing upon
the constructive cooperation that we have had ever since
the establishment of the provisional administration of
the United Nations in Kosovo and Metohija, I continue
to believe that our common endeavour based on
resolution 1244 (1999) will make it possible for us to

achieve a sustainable political solution for the question
of Kosovo and Metohija,

By its constructive approach, the Republic of Serbia
has made every effort to render a concrete contribution
to the achievement of the goal of transforming the
Western Balkans into a zone of lasting peace, stability
and prosperity. It is not in dispute that, after much
turbulence, substantial progress has been achieved in
the region, both with regard to the building of peace
and democracy and in the area of regional cooperation
and European integration. I concur with European
Union (EU) High Representative Federica Mogherini,
who said in her statement to this body at the meeting
convened to discuss cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
on 9 March that "the Balkans offer us all, today,
reasons to be proud and optimistic" (S/PV. 7402, p. 6).
Yet the recent terrorist attacks in Zvornik, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Kumanovo, Macedonia, are a clear
demonstration of the fragility of stability in the region.
Therefore, all of us in the region, as well as the relevant
international stakeholders, should invest additional
efforts to preserve.

Those events have borne out the assertions I have
made repeatedly in the Council that the undiminished
presence ofthe United Nations Mission is of paramount
importance for stability and for the creation of conditions
conducive to a lasting and sustainable solution for
the question of Kosovo and Metohija. My country
appreciates very much the status-neutral UNMIK
engagement aimed at establishing preconditions for
a peaceful life together and for the security of all the
residents of its southern province and respect for their
human rights. We therefore expect that, proceeding
from resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK will continue to
carry out its mandate in the coming period as well, in
particular in the areas that are important for Serbs and
other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija and that
are a precondition for their survival and normal life.

We appreciate the contributions made by other
international organizations that, through their missions
under the auspices of the United Nations, make up
part of international civilian and security presences in
Kosovo and Metohija. They include the Kosovo Force,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as well as specialized agencies of the United
Nations. In particular, we are appreciative of the efforts
made by Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary- General of the United Nations, in monitoring
the implementation of the UNMIK mandate and
coordinating the international civilian and security

presences. We are well aware ofthe challenges he faces.

The formation of a Government in Pristina and
the continuation of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina at a high level are singled out as key political
developments in the report before us. The Government
of the Republic of Serbia is fully committed to the
dialogue, conducted with the facilitation of the European
Union, and expects that its resumption will solidify the
basis for the implementation of the agreements already
reached. The essence of the process of normalization
is to find mutually acceptable answers to questions
that burden the life of the people of the province and
prevent them from realizing their basic rights. That can
be achieved only through dialogue, based on a genuine
understanding ofthe needs and interests ofthe other side
and the readiness to compromise, clearly demonstrable
in practice. In that context, I am pleased to note that
the report also mentions the direct communication
initiated by Serbia's Prime Minister, Aleksandar Vueie,
with Mr. Mustafa. Serbia approaches the dialogue with
Pristina openly, and is desirous of finding practical
solutions that will enable all the people of the province
to lead a normal life within a broader process of the
region's integration in the European Union. There is no
doubt that the participation of Serbs in the political life
of Kosovo and Metohija is a contribution to that end.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia
fulfils - conscientiously, consistently and in a timely
manner - all its obligations under the agreements
reached thus far under the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, initialled in
Brussels on 19 April 2013. I am pleased that the current
report recognizes the importance of the establishment
of the community of Serbian municipalities, which
is the key question for the Republic of Serbia in the
context of the direct continuation of the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement. Let me point out that, going
forward in the dialogue with Pristina, the key questions
for the Republic of Serbia continue to be the return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and property of the
Serbian Orthodox Church, and property issues.

Iwould also like to use this opportunity to emphasize
that the Government of the Republic of Serbia has taken
a constructive stance vis-a-vis the participation of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
and Metohij a in the work of regional forums. Respectful

of the agreements reached on regional representation
and cooperation, the Republic of Serbia has acquiesced
to Pristina's participation in the Regional Cooperation
Council and the South-East European Cooperation
Process and in the activities of the Migration, Asylum,
Refugees Regional Initiative. That acquiescence has not
changed the position of the Republic of Serbia on the
status of Kosovo and Metohija, nor has Serbia desisted
from its views. However, there are attempts to include
Pristina's representatives in the work of international
organizations outside that agreement. They are not
acceptable for the Republic of Serbia and do not help
preserve the positive atmosphere contributing to the
continuation of the dialogue at all. When, and if ever,
these questions are taken up, they should be discussed
in the framework of the dialogue. In that regard,
although, we continue to believe that the opening of
such questions at this moment is not in the interests
either of Belgrade or Pristina - or, for that matter,
of our international partners with whom we share an
interest in the stability of the Western Balkans.

Serbia welcomes the work of UNMIK carried
out in cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the missions of other
organizations present in Kosovo and Metohija on
monitoring the status of non-majority communities
in the province. The Government of the Republic of
Serbia attaches great importance to the quest for a
proper solution to the question of IDPs from Kosovo
and Metohia. Creating sustainable conditions for their
return is the key factor in the process of reconciliation.
Regrettably, even 16 years after the end of the conflict,
no conditions exist for a sustainable return of the IDPs
to Kosovo and Metohija, primarily due to the lack
of proper interest in this question by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina. This sad
fact is noted in the regular reports of the Secretary-
General on the work of UNMIK and in reports of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (UNHCR).

Only 1.9 per cent of the 220,000 persons who left
Kosovo and Metohija in 1999 have realized a sustainable
return over the last 15 years. About 204,000 of those
persons are still displaced in Serbia. The most recent
UNHCR data presented in the current report bear out
the decreasing trend: only 14 persons, it is reported,
returned to Kosovo and Metohija in the last four
months. Self-defeating statistics indeed. To achieve
lasting solutions, key obstacles to unencumbered and
sustainable return should be overcome, a consistent
and fully implemented legal framework for return,
including protection of property rights and security,
should be ensured, and the obstruction of returns should
be eliminated, with full respect for the principle of the
responsibility ofinternational and local actors engaged
in the process.

This is an occasion to recall once again the Serbia
ops the list of European countries by the number of
internally displaced persons in protracted displacement.
In that context, I call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international Administration in
Kosovo and Metohija to help us overcome the problems
that prevent IDP returns and make the situation of
returnees ever more difficult, not least by ever more
frequently incidents. Surely, a contributing factor in
the delay of IDP returns has been physical insecurity,
as manifested in the continued attacks on Serbs and
their property and aggravated by the atmosphere of
impunity for crimes committed against Serbs. Such
attacks are widespread: one of them happened during
the Christmas visit of Serbs from Djakovica- 12,000
of whom lived in the town prior to 1999 - to the
Church of the Presentation of St. Mary in the Temple.
It demonstrated once again the intolerance and
non-acceptance of Serbs by the majority community
and provided ample evidence that, with displaced
Serbs unable to visit their places of worship freely and
safely and mark religious holidays in a dignified way,
the exhortations by Kosovar institutions to displaced
Serbs to return are disingenuous, and that capacities
to ensure safety and security to all in Kosovo and
Metohija, especially at the local level, are non-existent.
Under the anti-discrimination law and other rules and
regulations in force in Kosovo and Metohija in this area,
obstructing access to places of worship and preventing
religious practices for the purpose of preserving one's
identity are violations of law. This problem calls for a
dedicated commitment if we are to overcome the present
situation. Such a commitment would also demonstrate
the goodwill and the serious intention of all the relevant
actors and serve the purpose of normalizing relations,
making life together possible and respecting the basic
rights and fundamental freedoms of all residents of
Kosovo and Metohija.

The decrease in the number of potentially ethnically
motivated incidents is noted in the report before
us, just as is the increase in the number of incidents
affecting unoccupied properties owned by non-majority
communities, and religious and cultural sites. Such
comparisons are unbecoming, since we cannot tolerate
any attack on members of other communities. The
incidents are eloquent proof that much serious and
genuine work still has be done to achieve reconciliation
and approach this problem in an appropriate way, and
that appropriate records on them should be kept and
their perpetrators tried.

Creating conditions for Serbs and other non-Albanians
to enjoy basic human rights and the rights belonging
to them as non-majority populations in the province
without discrimination would certainly help improve
the general atmosphere for IDP returns. We regret
the fact that the recent closure of the Office of
the United Nations High Commission for Human
Rights in Pristina - justified by financial
constraints - was done without consultation with the
Republic of Serbia and, if anything, is unwarranted by
the situation of human rights in Kosovo and Metohija.

Last April, the Republic of Serbia submitted a
report on the implementation of the Convention against
Torture, in which it pointed out that it was unable to
report on the Convention's implementation on part
of its territory under international administration. In
that regard, we welcome the recent decision by the
Committee against Torture to request information from
UNMIK on the implementation of the Convention in
Kosovo and Metohija.

We condemn each and every act of desecration of a
religious site of any religion. In that regard, the cause of
our deep concern is not only the desecration of a cultural
monument of world renown such as the Visoki Deeani
Monastery, but also the fact that it was desecrated with
graffiti glorifying the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and the "future Caliphate", at the time when the
international community is investing enormous efforts
to suppress this scourge as the greatest threat to peace
and stability in the world.

As I did the last time I addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7377), it is with concern that I warn that the
desecration of Serbian churches and monasteries has
continued and that, last January, "UCK" graffiti were
scribbled on the Orthodox church in Lipljan and on the
fence wall of the church in Djakovica, despite security
provided by the Kosovo Police Force. Those acts, let
me point out, present not only threats and insults to the
Serbian Orthodox Church and its clergy, but also a way
to intimidate the remaining Orthodox population in the
province, which is preponderantly Serb.

I take this opportunity to point to the need for
taking additional measures to protect the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija.
Attacks on such sites are tantamount to attacks on the
identity of the Serbs, and influence in the direct way
their feelings of security and acceptance in the local
community. They call into question the commitment
of the competent authorities in the province to the
protection and preservation of the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage. At the same time, we are witness to
the parallel process of altering historic facts aimed at
marginalizing and eliminating the presence of Serbs
and Serbia in the history of Kosovo and Metohija.

In the context of the struggle against terrorist
threats and the rise of violent extremism globally,
the need for greater security has assumed an added
dimension. As a sponsor of resolution 2178 (2014),
the Republic of Serbia has taken all necessary steps
to suppress the financing and organizing of terrorism,
which are ever-more frequent phenomena related to the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters to join armed
terrorist organizations in the Middle East, such as the
Islamic State. Serbia will continue to act resolutely in
the efforts to suppress terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We expect the international missions
in Kosovo and Metohija and the local provisional
institutions of self-government to contribute within
their powers to our common struggle, which has global
importance.

In the context of the priority importance that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches to the
solution of the property issues in Kosovo and Metohija,
let me draw the Council's attention to the ongoing
privatization processes conducted by the Kosovo
privatization agency, contrary to international and
European conventions on human rights. UNMIK, too,
once assessed that the process is contrary to resolution
1244 (1999), since the agency was not established under
the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija, in accordance
with the resolution. Much in evidence is the tendency
to privatize public and socially owned companies in
communities with Serbian majority populations. Those
companies are sold to persons of Albanian nationality.
The nationality of the persons coming into possession
of the companies is not in dispute; rather, it is the fact
that the unlawful measures being taken are motivated
by the destruction of the economic resources of Serbian
communities.
I take this opportunity to point out the importance
of appropriately addressing the property issue of the
Trepca complex, mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report. Any other solution of the issue other than that
achieved through the Brussels dialogue, would be
unacceptable to Serbia. I am convinced that we all
are aware of the importance of respect for ownership
rights, irrespective of whether private or State property
is involved. In that sense, it is necessary to ensure
that all activities in Kosovo and Metohija relative to
privatization be returned to the valid legal framework,
in particular since such activities necessarily have
an ethnic connotation in the province, which is
inadmissible in the democratic world. I recall that the
protection of the property of economic entities and the
suspension of privatization in Serbian communities are
important items of the coalition Agreement on the basis
of which the representatives of the Serbian community
entered the Pristina Government. The Agreement was
reconfirmed at the meeting in Brussels on 21 April
2014.

The importance of the continued monitoring and
assessment of the work of Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, the judiciary and other agencies
and their readiness to take over the executive powers
now exercised by EULEX, as provided for in the June
2014 decision to extend and reconfigure its mandate,
cannot be emphasized strongly enough. On a number of
occasions, Serbia has pointed to the need for continuous
monitoring and for establishing objective criteria for
the assessment of the work of Provincial Institutions by
the relevant missions present in Kosovo and Metohija
under United Nations auspices. In its Kosovo Progress
Report 2014, the European Commission noted that much
remained to be done with respect to the functioning and
responsibility of the provincial judiciary. The report
also noted that concrete results were needed in the fight
against organized crime, corruption, money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism.

The current situation in the province bears out our
assessment that conditions have not been fulfilled for the
transfer of competencies to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. The fact that those competencies
have been entrusted to EULEX does not diminish the
powers and responsibility of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I expect EULEX, Within its
mandate, to continue to exercise its executive powers
in the field of the rule of law, against the backdrop of
the realistic assessment of the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija in that area.

Serbia is committed to the process ofreconciliation.
We consider it to be important for the process that we
confront our own past and, in that context, establish the
fate of the missing persons. That is important primarily
to the families of the missing persons and contributes
to the process of inter-ethnic reconciliation in the
province. In order to establish the fate of the missing
persons, the Serbian expert teams cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as with the competent
authorities in Kosovo and Metohija. The process of
mutual reconciliation cannot be complete without the
prosecution of the former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army responsible for the persecution of
Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians, as well as
their political opponents among Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians. We expect the necessary conditions to
be created to try those suspected of committing war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We attach special
importance to trying the cases arising from the findings
of the European Union Special Investigative Task
Force on the inhumane treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs. We expect the decision on
the establishment of the specialist court to be taken as
soon as possible.

In conclusion, let me point out once again that the
quest for a lasting and sustainable solution for Kosovo
and Metohija is a national priority for Serbia. Such a
solution can be arrived at only through negotiations
and dialogue with the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Pristina and in full respect for the
legitimate interests of the Albanian, Serbian and other
populations in Kosovo and Metohija, on the basis of
resolution 1244 (1999). The solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija must be in the interests of
our citizens, who should be able to live in normal
conditions, just as all communities should be ensured
a safe life together.

On our road to such a solution, we must achieve
mutual reconciliation. That will surely be helped by
the process of the adoption of European standards
and values that we have begun on the journey of our
entire region to European integration. We believe
that the commitment to European integration is the
principal driving force behind the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We expect the
European Union to also continue its active engagement
in facilitating our dialogue with Pristina. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia will certainly
continue its active engagement in the implementation
of the Brussels Agreement in the interest of peace,
economic progress and reconciliation.

