The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing this afternoon. As
we have heard from him, the situation in separatist-held
areas of eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate. The
number of casualties is rising, public infrastructure is
failing and the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is growing. Thankfully, we do not have in
Ukraine a situation that is comparable to humanitarian
crises elsewhere. But that is of little comfort to those
Ukrainian civilians who are experiencing increasing
levels of daily hardship.

Let us be absolutely clear: it is the continuing
separatist violence that is responsible for the worsening
humanitarian situation in the cities of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Where there are no separatists there is no
humanitarian distress. In those cities and towns that
have been liberated by the Ukrainian Government,
life is returning to normal, IDPs are returning to their
homes and the Ukrainian Government is working to
repair and re-establish public services. There have been
no reprisals.

In contrast, in those areas that remain under
separatist control, civilians are increasingly vulnerable.
The United Nations reports that separatists have
deliberately targeted critical public utilities, including
water, electricity and sewage plants. They have replaced
the rule of law with what the United Nations describes
as the rule of violence, thereby creating an atmosphere
of fear, intimidation and harassment. The latest report
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission,
released on 15 July, leaves little doubt about the violent
and abusive nature of the separatist groups. It describes
in detail their abduction of civilians, their looting, their
torture, their killings and their executions of civilians.
Recent reports indicate that separatist groups have been
refusing to allow fighting-aged men to evacuate the
areas under its control. These illegal armed separatist
groups have no grounds to pursue their campaign of
violence. They must lay down their arms, vacate all
illegally seized-Government buildings and address
their grievances through exclusively peaceful and
democratic means.

But we must also address the root causes of the
situation, and not just focus on its symptoms. Despite
professing concern for Ukrainian citizens in the east,
Russia has at no point called upon the separatists to
cease their violent and illegal insurgency. Instead, it has
fuelled the crisis, sustained the violence and prolonged
the humanitarian distress. It has been equipping
separatists with sophisticated heavy weaponry,
including Grad rocket launchers and artillery, tanks
and surface-to-air missiles. It has been recruiting and
training fighters and waging a propaganda war on
their behalf. There has even been been direct shelling
of Ukraine from Russian territory. The truth of the
matter is that this is not an insurrection born in the
Donbass; it is an insurgency manufactured in Moscow.
It is led by Russians using Russian-supplied weapons
in a deliberate effort to destabilize Ukraine and to exert
control over Kyiv. The profile of the separatist leaders
makes that abundantly clear.

Last month, Vladimir Antyufeyev joined the
ranks of the separatists' military command alongside,
Igor Strelkov and Alexander Borodai. Antyufeyev is
wanted for his role in suppressing pro-independence
demonstrations in Latvia in 1991 and was most recently
the KGB chief in Transnistria. All three of those
individuals are Russian citizens and all three have
worked for Russian intelligence. It is deeply ironic
that Russia should call for an emergency meeting for
the Security Council to discuss a humanitarian crisis
largely of its own creation. We agree that there needs
to be an end to the violence. We agree that alleviating
humanitarian distress is a matter of priority. But Russia
cannot credibly present itself as supporting the people
of eastern Ukraine when it is the architect of the
violence that afflicts them.
I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ging to respond to the
questions raised.

