Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like first to
add our voice in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting today; Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council; and the
representative of Germany, as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

This briefing is timely given the discussions that
the Council has been holding this week on sanctions on
Mali and the Sudan, wherein there has been recognition
of the implications of the Libyan fiasco throughout
the region.

The reason that the bloody Libyan crisis still haunts
the Council, as others had predicted, is that although
our organization, the African Union (AU), had devised
a continentally agreed road map to deal with the bloody
Libyan crisis, it was not allowed to roll it out until
the very end. This fiasco and the many that followed
should remind our partners from outside the African
continent that Africans are best placed to understand
their problems and the solutions thereto. Africans must
be allowed to provide solutions to African problems.
Partners will be invited only if need be.

I would like to focus my intervention on the political
process and the humanitarian situation in Libya.

My delegation supports and encourages the efforts
of Mr. Salame, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to work with all Libyan parties to
reach an acceptable and lasting political solution. We
welcome the efforts made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in engaging with all relevant
stakeholders in support of the implementation of the
United Nations action plan and look forward to the
convening of the national conference in order to move
beyond the political transition phase and fully unite
the country.

As a member of the AU High-Level Committee on
Libya, South Africa will continue to support the United
Nations and the African Union in their common cause
of jointly coordinating activities that will contribute to
a peaceful resolution of the Libyan crisis.

We wish to recall that at its 31st Summit, held in
Nouakchott in July 2018, the African Union Assembly
reiterated its "deep concern over the persistent security
situation in Libya, which continues to prolong the
suffering of the Libyan people".

The Chair ofthe AU High-Level Committee and the
AU Commission Chair have reaffirmed their common
desire to assist all stakeholders in overcoming the serious
crisis facing Libya. In this regard, they have agreed to
relaunch preparations for the national reconciliation
conference with all relevant stakeholders, as provided
for in the road map adopted by the Committee.

On the humanitarian front, my delegation is
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially as some humanitarian actors have
recently faced challenges restricting their access to parts
of the country. We condemn the loss of civilian lives
during the violence in Tripoli and support the Secretary-
General's call for all commitments made under the
September 2018 ceasefire agreement to be adhered to
in order to maintain the calm and avoid further violence
in the capital and elsewhere. We also call on all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law and to
ensure that all possible measures are put in place to
avoid further conflict.

We urge all parties to work constructively on
a dialogue for a mutually acceptable negotiated
agreement. As the Council, we must do all we can
to assist and support all stakeholders in moving this
process forward.

Lastly, my delegation welcomes the work of the
Women's Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council aimed at advancing gender equality
and the full participation of women in the Libyan
political and economic spheres. Including women in
the political dialogue is essential to ensuring that all
sectors of Libyan society are included in the process of
charting their own futures, in a spirit of dedication to
peace and security for Libya.

Through our own struggle for liberation, we
South Africans know first-hand the importance
of incorporating women in the peace process and
the benefits that are derived from including the
whole population.

