Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Madam President, allow
me at the outset to welcome your initiative of convening
this open debate on international cooperation in
combating terrorism and violent extremism. The
holding of this high-level debate only three months
after the 24 September summit on foreign terrorist
fighters (see S/PV.7272) and the adoption of resolution
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are a demonstration of the
deep commitment of the Security Council to follow
through on its decision and address the ever-growing
phenomenon of terrorism and violent extremism.

Allow me also to welcome the presidential
statement just adopted (S/PRST/2014/23). I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his leadership
in mobilizing the United Nations system in combating
terrorism. I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Raimonda Murmokaite of Lithuania, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Ambassador Gary
Quinlan of Australia, Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, for their respective briefings.

Terrorism is a global threat that has affected all
continents and all peoples without distinction, regardless
of race, religion or social class. As the concept note
for this debate (see S/2014/787, annex) reminds us, the
average age of terrorists is much lower than the previous
generation of terrorists, with many teenagers enrolled
in terrorist organizations. In most countries, young
people continue to face serious challenges related to
education, poverty, unemployment, bad governance
or discrimination. Through social media, extremist
propaganda and religious radicalization, young people
can easily be recruited and indoctrinated by jihadists
and other extremists. Therefore any comprehensive
approach against terrorism will require our continued
resolve to address the political, economic and social
challenges facing our societies.
Nevertheless, the economic hurdles that our
countries face should never be a justification for
criminal activities. That would be an insult to the huge
majority of law-abiding young people whose ambition
is to face those challenges and improve their lives
through education, employment, innovation, culture,
sport or any other contribution to their society. Every
terrorist, whatever his or her background, should be
held accountable for widowing mothers and fathers, for
orphaning children and for devastating communities.

As we have said in the past, terrorism should
never be identified with any religion, faith or culture.
Terrorism is pure evil and should be combated as such.
Nonetheless, religious and community leaders have
an important role to play in combating terrorism and
violent extremism. Those leaders should unequivocally
dissociate themselves from terrorist activities, reject
extremist and violent narratives, and protect young
people from radicalization and recruitment by terrorist
organizations.

Regarding foreign terrorist fighters in particular,
it is important that countries of origin, transit and
destination work together and agree on a common
approach to prevent the recruitment, training and travel
of these killers, in accordance with resolution 2178
(2014). In this regard, as terrorist organizations abuse
civil liberties such as freedom of speech and freedom
of the press, it is critical that all countries put in place
appropriate measures to counter the dissemination of
hatred ideology on social media and other information
and communications tools. We need to ensure that
fundamental rights and freedoms do not fuel extremism
and lead to the violation of the most important right of
all: the right to life.

To effectively curtain the growing trend of the
mobilization and recruitment of young people into the
ranks of terrorist groups, the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies must be vigilant and proactive. Using
the example of the recent public announcement of
anotherjihadist group in Egypt, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis,
which pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities should be ready to continue to impose sanctions
against groups that support sanctioned entities such as
ISIL.

Another tool in addressing the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters is financing. Most terrorist
groups such as Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram
have been financing their activities through online
fundraising, illegal taxes and extortion, as well as
kidnapping for ransom. Others, such as ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front (ANF), have secured huge amounts of
money from the illicit trade in oil. In that context, we
call on all States to fully implement the presidential
statement of 28 July (S/PRST/2014/l4) and ensure
that their nationals and residents do not engage in any
commercial or financial transactions with ISIL, ANF
or other sanctioned entities.

We recall also resolution 2133 (2014), which calls on
all Member States to prevent terrorists from benefiting
directly or indirectly from ransom payments or from
political concessions. We have to work together to drain
the bloody river that fuels terrorism and spreads death
and devastation in our communities.

Specific to our region, Africa, terrorism and
extremism have spread to the Sahel and beyond,
with unprecedented security and humanitarian
consequences. Terrorism is increasingly becoming
interconnected throughout Africa, from Boko Haram
in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar
Eddine in Mali, Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya, Al-Shabaab
in Somalia and many others, from the Maghreb to the
Horn of Africa, with links to Syria and other parts of
the world.

This is a worrying situation that threatens African
stability. We need now to have proactive policies,
mechanisms and concrete measures to prevent the
further spread of these negative groups and eradicate
them, while sustaining the resilience of communities.
These measures can succeed only if the United Nations
works hand in hand with regional and subregional
organizations to enhance and sustain innovative
mechanisms aimed at eradicating this scourage.
Additionally, we should never lose sight of the fact that
the core of this evil is always radical ideology, be it
religious or political.

While Rwanda has no yet been affected by ISIL
or Al-Qaida terrorism, it is important to recall that,
as stated by President Kagame at the recent Council
summit on foreign terrorist fighters (see S/PV.7272),
Rwanda has faced, even its capital city, terrorist
activities carried out be elements to the so-called
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, which
has been based in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and driven by its genocidal ideology since
1994. It is therefore important that, in combating global
terrorism, we pay attention to the most immediate to
our respective populations.

To conclude, terrorism and violent extremism
remain a global threat to international peace and
security. No country, however powerful it may be, can
deal with that threat alone. Therefore, coordination
among States, international assistance and cooperation,
information exchange and the sharing of best
practices are some of the best ways through which
the international community can defeat the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism. Rwanda is therefore
committed to continuing to play its part in the region
and beyond.

