Mr. Lacroix: I will be brief. There were a few
additional questions on women, and I am sure that
there will be many elements in the answer to that
question by the Heads of the police component. But I
think that on the issue of what needs to be done, we
should not only be increasing the number of women
in peacekeeping and the United Nations Police but
also making the environment more welcoming and
appropriate for them. The first question in that regard
was about accommodations and facilities. I think that it
is quite clear that although a lot of work has been done
in that regard, for which I would like to salute the role
of the Department of Operational Support, more needs
to be done to make the physical environment of our
peacekeeping operations fully welcoming to women,
particularly in the police.

The second element has to do with the continuing
issue of bias and misperception, which I believe was
raised by my colleague to my left. As I said, I think
that there is an awareness of the critical importance
of increasing the number of women in United Nations
Police among Member States, and certainly among
ourselves. But we still have to work on those biases
and misperceptions, which have to do with providing
adequate training and improving sensitization.

The Police Division has also made it easier for
women to deploy for a shorter length of time, which
is something that the Office of Military Affairs has
done for female police officers as well. We hope that
the possibility of reducing the length of deployment to
six months will make it easier for women, particularly
women with families, to consider deploying in the
United Nations Police.

The Police Division has rolled out a number
of training programmes and encouraged women to
apply to them, with a view to enhancing the capacity
of female police officers to apply for a position in
the United Nations Police. There are also a number
of training sessions that are only for female police
officers. I attended one in China last year and was very
impressed not only by the level of training but also by
how motivated the female officers being trained were
and how eager they were to be deployed. I would also
like to highlight that the last United Nations Police
Commanders course, which was organized with the
support of Germany, had 50 per cent female attendees.
I think that there is therefore a lot being done to
further open the possibility for women to apply and be
deployed, including in senior positions.

The President asked a question about the follow-
on presence of the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) in the Sudan, and Darfur in particular. The
State liaison functions certainly have a very important
rule-of-law component, including a police component.
They are very active in capacity-building. The State
liaison functions are a vehicle for transitioning from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. As the Council
knows, we are in the process of working with the
Sudanese authorities within the tripartite task force
that we created with the AU to determine, in very close
consultation with the Sudanese authorities, what the
modalities and key priorities of a follow-on presence
could be. It is a bit early to say more about that, but it
seems to be quite clear that it is likely that this follow-on
presence could have a strong capacity-building element
following what the State liaison functions are doing.
When we talk about capacity-building in peacekeeping
or peacebuilding, I think that we are essentially talking
about the key State capacities that have to do with
security and the rule of law, and therefore the role of
the police is very important.

I would also like to address what the representative
of Indonesia referred to regarding some of the key
elements that we would like to enhance in order
to improve the skills and capacity of our police
component. I already mentioned the issues of language,
facilities and accommodations and further increasing
the role and participation of women, but I think it is
also important to highlight the increasing need for very
specific skills in the United Nations Police and which
some statements have referred to. They include skills
in criminal investigation, gender-based violence and
organized crime, among a number of other things.

What I would like to say in that regard is that the
Police Division has developed very specific training
groups and programmes to address this increasing
need for some of the skills that I mentioned, inter
alia. Therefore, these training programmes have been
developed in very close consultation with Member
States and by listening carefully to what our mission
has to say in that regard. Of course, we are also making
more and more requests to our police-contributing
countries to provide us with police officers with
those specific skills, which are increasingly needed in
our mission.

