Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania; the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the European Free
Trade Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area;
and Ukraine align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, for his
excellent briefing, and by reiterating the European
Union's full and strong support for his work. We would
also like to warmly welcome the participation of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadic. At the same time,
we also warmly welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Bajram Kosumi, in the
delegation headed by Mr. Jessen-Petersen.

The European Union expresses its profound
sadness at the passing away of the President of
Kosovo, Mr. Ibrahim Rugova. Kosovo has lost a
historic leader who devoted his life to promoting
peacefully the rights of his people. In this time of
important decisions for the future of Kosovo, the
European Union calls on all Kosovar parties and
leaders to work together so that further progress can be
achieved in implementing standards and so that
Kosovo can participate constructively in the status
process. In that context, the EU welcomes the election
of Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu as President of Kosovo. His
election on 10 February, coming so swiftly after the
end of the mourning period for the late President,
signals stability and continuity and marks an important
step towards the further consolidation of Kosovo's
political life.

Much has changed since the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative last reported to the
Council on the situation in Kosovo. Last year, the
conduct of the comprehensive review, under the
leadership of Ambassador Kai Eide, encouraged the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
make progress on the implementation of the standards,
dialogue between communities and reform of local
Government. In November, the Secretary-General
appointed Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, former President of
Finland, as his Special Envoy to lead the political
process designed to determine the future status of
Kosovo. Mr. Ahtisaari and his deputy, Austria's
countryman Ambassador Albert Rohan, have started to
work on the future status and held initial consultations
in the region. Mr. Ahtisaari's negotiation team enjoys
the full support of the European Union.

The European Union shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that, since his report last May,
the Kosovo Albanian leaders have made significant
progress in preparations for the status process, as well
as some progress in other areas, such as the protection
of property rights and the reconstruction of cultural and
religious heritage. We also share his assessment that
overall progress on standards implementation has been
too slow and his serious concern that there have been
delays or setbacks in most areas of standards
implementation.

Together with the Secretary-General, the
European Union strongly urges Kosovo's institutions to
renew their efforts to ensure substantive, accelerated
and sustainable progress in the implementation of the
standards, especially in such key areas as returns, equal
access to justice and the preservation of cultural
heritage. Their commitment is crucial to the prospects
for a sustainable status settlement that will enable all
communities to live and thrive in safety.

The European Union attaches particular
importance to the establishment of a substantial
dialogue between all Kosovo communities, as well as
between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that today's
presence of President Tadic and Prime Minister
Kosumi will give new impetus in that regard. We call
upon the authorities in Belgrade to encourage, rather
than discourage, the Kosovo Serb leaders to participate
constructively in the Provisional Institutions, which
would contribute to concrete improvements in their
living conditions and ensure that their interests are
taken into account. All communities should participate
actively in the political process for standards
implementation and become more involved in
presenting their own communities' interests during the
status process. At the same time, leaders on all sides
will have to prepare their populations for difficult
compromises ahead.

The European Union also expects Kosovo's
institutions to move ahead on the reform of local self-
government and welcomes the first ministerial-level
meeting on decentralization, held in Vienna last
September. It also urges both parties to participate and
engage constructively in the meeting on
decentralization organized by the United Nations
Status Envoy in Vienna, which has now been scheduled
for 20 February.

The European Union calls upon both Pristina and
Belgrade to engage constructively in the working
group on missing persons and hopes that progress can
be made on that humanitarian issue. We further remind
the relevant authorities of their commitment to
alleviating, without further delay, the humanitarian
crisis created by the continued use of contaminated
facilities for the temporary residence of a large Roma
community in Mitrovica. Bureaucratic obstacles must
be overcome. In that regard, the European Union
supports the call made by UNMIK, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund
on 9 February 2006 for all Roma, Ashkaeli and
Egyptian communities to vacate the lead-polluted
camps in northern Mitrovica in Kosovo and to move
their families to the safer environment at Osterode
camp. We also remind the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of the need to find a long-term
solution for the internally displaced persons. They
should continue to work towards creating safe housing
for such persons, and should move quickly to provide
sustainable options for returns and permanent housing.

The European Union also fully supports the call
of the foreign ministers of the Contact Group, at their
meeting on 31 January, for all possible efforts to be
made to achieve a negotiated settlement in the course
of 2006. In that respect, we encourage leaders in both
Serbia and Kosovo to show the political courage and
vision necessary to come forward with realistic
proposals.

Whatever Kosovo's future status will be, it will
be firmly rooted in the European architecture. With
that tangible European perspective in mind, accelerated
implementation of standards should not be viewed just
as a goal in itself or as a quicker way to a decision on
the future status of Kosovo. Effective standards
implementation, including dialogue and outreach to
Kosovo's minority communities - thereby building a
sustainable democratic and multi-ethnic society - is
also a prerequisite for the fulfilment of Kosovo's
European perspective. In December, the European
Union adopted a new European Partnership document
for Kosovo within the European Union's broader
Stabilization and Association Process for the Western
Balkans. The Partnership incorporates the standards as
requirements for Kosovo's long-term European
perspective, thereby underscoring that they must
continue to be a central focus of efforts by the
Provisional Institutions throughout and beyond the
status process.

The European Union has been steadfastly at the
side of the people of Kosovo throughout the post-
conflict period and has provided a major part of
international aid, economic access, political support
and reform advice. The Contact Group guiding
principles for a settlement of the status of Kosovo,
adopted in November 2005, make it clear that Kosovo
will require an international civilian and military
presence to supervise compliance with the provisions
of the status settlement to ensure the security and
protection of minorities and to support the continued
implementation of the standards. The European Union
is fully engaged in the status process and is in close
contact with Mr. Ahtisaari. It has appointed Mr. Stefan
Lehne as EU representative to the Kosovo future status
process. We are ready to assume our responsibilities
and to work on an enhanced future EU engagement,
with a view to assisting a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo in its efforts to realize its European
perspective. In parallel, we are already cooperating
closely with other international agencies that will
continue to play a role in Kosovo according to their
comparative strengths and specializations.

In concluding this long statement on behalf of the
European Union, to which nearly 40 States adhered, I
wish to recall that, on 27 January, the European
Commission adopted a communication entitled "The
Western Balkans on the road to the EU: consolidating
stability and raising prosperity". The EU Council of
Ministers welcomed the communication as a good
basis for further work in preparing discussions at the
informal EU-Western Balkans Foreign Ministers
meeting to be held in Salzburg in March 2006. Thus,
the European Union remains committed to helping the
Western Balkan countries by practical measures to
make the European perspective more tangible.

