Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely and
important debate on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I wish to extend a most cordial
welcome to Minister Raymond Tshibanda and to thank
him for his statement, which we heard with great
interest. It illustrated the significant progress made in
several decisive areas, and it clearly reflects the
commitment of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to tackle the challenges that still
lie ahead. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his important statement.

As a member of the European Union, Portugal
naturally shares the position that will be later
expressed by Mr. Pedro Serrano.

Allow me also to reiterate Portugal's condolences
to the families, colleagues and friends of those who
lost their lives in the recent plane crash while serving
the United Nations and the international community.

Despite the substantial challenges that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo faces, there is a
positive structural trend that is essential to foster. To do
so, it is critical to continue enhancing security and
improving the protection of civilians. In that regard, we
express our satisfaction with the stability achieved in
the vast majority of the country and the progress
towards the neutralization of foreign and other armed
groups, namely through the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation.

The activity of armed groups remains an
intolerable source of instability and violence in the
Kivus and in Orientale province. It is at the root of
continued violations of human rights.

We remain concerned with the recruitment and
use of children. We call upon the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to implement the
recommendations of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

We also remain concerned about the high number
of cases of sexual violence against women and girls in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as mentioned
by the Secretary-General. However, it is significant
that the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have shown the political will to investigate the
cases of sexual violence that led to the trial and
conviction of officers of the Forces arme'es de la
Republique democratique du Congo. We strongly
support the fight against sexual violence and the
defence of fundamental human rights. In that regard, I
would like to pay special tribute to the efforts being
developed by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Wallstrom in this field.

The reform of the security sector and upholding
the rule of law are essential to overcome those
challenges. We therefore encourage the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to
pursue those processes in an integrated way, while
closely coordinating with its international partners.
Allow me to underline the role played by the European
Union Mission of Assistance for Security Sector
Reform, which is led by a Portuguese general.

The upcoming presidential and legislative
elections will be a key moment in the stabilization and
peace consolidation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I paid special attention to what Minister
Tshibanda said on that important point. It seems to me
that it is particularly important that the national
authorities hold and keep up an enhanced dialogue with
the opposition and the international community in
order to ensure an environment that is conducive to a
peaceful, free and fair electoral process. In this regard,
I commend the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), both in technical
and logistical terms, and underline the European
Union's support to this process.

The fulfilment of the medium- and long-term
expectations of the Congolese people depends on
furthering institution-building and economic and social
development. Only with legitimate, credible and
resilient institutions will the State be able to discharge
its functions. Only with economic and social
development will the State be able to sustain peace.
Bearing in mind the decisive importance of
national ownership, the primary responsibility for these
endeavours rests naturally with the people and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
But as we heard today, the international community
stands ready to continue to work with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in this process. We welcome the
enhanced dialogue and close cooperation between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO.

I would now like to focus on two key challenges
facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo that have
a regional dimension and can only be addressed
through effective regional cooperation. The first
challenge is the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), which
is responsible for intolerable humanitarian tragedy in
Central Africa. We welcome the efforts of the African
Union, namely the recent joint experts mission to
LRA-affected regions. Moreover, we commend the
Secretary-General for dispatching the multidisciplinary
mission, which will soon visit the region to assess the
LRA threat. We look forward to hearing its
recommendations to strengthen and better coordinate
United Nations and African Union efforts to help
address this threat.

Secondly, the illegal exploitation and trafficking
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fuels conflict and instability and deprives
the Congolese people of the benefits of their country's
assets. The results of the Lusaka Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
are encouraging. We welcome President Kabila's
pledge to fight mercilessly against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in the Great Lakes
Region, and we hope that it will soon bring about
tangible results in a regional framework. In dealing
with these and other threats, it is thus fundamental to
further enhance regional cooperation and support the
efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations. We hope that the work of the United
Nations Office in Central Africa will also be
instrumental in this regard.

(spoke in French)

I should like to address the Minister personally
and recall the words of Dag Hammarskjold: "the
pursuit of peace and progress, with its trials and errors,
its successes and its setbacks, can never be relaxed or
abandoned".
The United Nations and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have already come a long way together.
This is a strategic partnership aimed at achieving peace
and progress for the Congolese people and the stability
of this vast region.

Portugal commends the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the progress
achieved and encourages it to continue along this path
despite the challenges it still faces. I have taken note of
the appeal made by Minister Tshibanda and I wish to
assure him of our unfailing support in the pursuit of the
goals he mentioned, which we fully share.

