Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing.

Thanks to renewed military operations by the
Regional Task Force of the African Union (AU) and the
support of the international community, the territory
controlled by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) is
shrinking. Reports of continued defections from the
LRA are also encouraging. In order to accelerate this
trend, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement programmes need
to be effectively implemented in the affected areas,
with adequate financial support. The Republic of
Korea appreciates the coordinating role played by
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
for the counter-LRA regional strategy, undertaken in
cooperation with United Nations missions and regional
organizations.

To bring to an end the atrocities committed by
the LRA in Central Africa, active cooperation among
LRA-affected countries is critical. We expect the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan to fully support
the collective efforts for the success of cross-border
operations against the LRA. It is also of concern that
the armed groups are often sustained by poaching and
the illicit trade in wildlife. Even more troubling is the
fact that these illegal activities feed on rising youth
unemployment and pose a potential threat to peace and
stability in the region. In this regard, we commend the
efforts of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community to revive the regional economy.

The Central African Republic is becoming
a potential safe haven for the remaining LRA
operatives. Gross human rights violations continue
and transitional authorities seem unable to stop them.
The priority should therefore be to protect civilians
and provide humanitarian assistance to those in urgent
need. We in the Security Council should continue to
encourage the Central African Republic authorities to
actively cooperate with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic to restore
public order and end impunity.

Last month, the Council enhanced BlNUCA's
mandate. The report of the Secretary-General before
us (S/2013/67l) suggests various options to support the
Central African Republic. We look forward to closed
consultations in this regard in the days to come.

Regarding piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea, we commend the Yaounde Summit convened in
June, which laid the groundwork for a regional strategy.
We hope that regional leaders will translate their resolve
into concrete follow-up measures. Lastly, we appreciate
the continued efforts of Special Representative Abou
Moussa and his staff, who are working in a challenging
environment.

