Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Egeland and to
tell him how thankful we are for his commitment to the
humanitarian cause and to the African continent. His
regular reports on the humanitarian situation in Africa
are important. The Security Council correctly devotes
considerable time and effort to considering the
situation in Africa, in order to help African countries,
in coordination with the efforts of the African Union
and subregional organizations.

I believe it is important for us to be thoroughly
familiar with the humanitarian situation in various
regions. We need to know the causes of crises, as well
as their consequences, because often neighbouring
countries and subregional stability are affected. Too
many humanitarian crises are due to non-economic
causes, as Mr. Egeland has noted. Providing food aid
cannot be an alibi for a failure to recognize the causes
of crises in which millions of people suffer so terribly.
I fully support his comments on that point.

I wish to focus briefly on the main situations
referred to by Mr. Egeland in his briefing. First,
concerning Darfur, Mr. Egeland's description reminds
us how disturbing that matter is. Undoubtedly, in 2006
the international community will need to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance, including to Chad.
The international community must make certain that
access to camps is guaranteed and that no obstacles
hamper the work of non-governmental organizations.
However, improvement in the humanitarian situation,
which is linked to the security situation, depends not
only on bringing the necessary pressure to bear, but,
also on an improved political situation.

Currently, pressure must be maintained on the
parties in Abuja. I believe that the Council should
review that issue regularly, and within the framework
of a comprehensive strategy.

One side note here is that I believe we tend too
often, when considering the situation in Darfur and in
the Sudan, to look at those problems separately. In fact,
in his briefing, Mr. Egeland spoke of those two matters
together, because they are related. Certainly those
issues are complex, and for technical reasons the
argument can sometimes be made that we should
consider separately the humanitarian situation, the
security situation, including the question of the United
Nations possibly replacing the remarkable efforts made
by the African Union, the political situation and,
finally, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. However it seems to me that from
time to time we need to consider these matters
together, in order to strengthen our commitment. I
think we need a comprehensive view in order to assist
the Sudan more effectively.

The activities of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) in northern Uganda and in the region has
created an increasingly intolerable situation. It is clear
that the Council should look into that matter. There are
a number of issues beyond the humanitarian issue,
including access to populations, which is of interest to
the Security Council. There is also a regional
dimension that has gained greater prominence.

In his briefing today, Mr. Egeland offered some
proposals for the Council's consideration. His
suggestions were interesting, and I assure him that we
will be looking at them closely. It is time for a solution
to the problem to be found. The solution can only be
military, as the Council has often recalled.

I have a question that I often ask and that I now
ask of Mr. Egeland once again. I do not understand
how a limited number of combatants, however
ferocious they may be, could have caused such tragic
consequences: 1.5 million displaced persons and a
contribution to regional destabilization. Any
information that Mr. Egeland could give us on the
number of these combatants would help us understand
the problem, which I must admit I do not comprehend.

I turn now to Zimbabwe. Following the
inexplicable and unpardonable operation to demolish
shanty towns, which was condemned by the
international community, the Council had to look at the
situation. We take note of signs that the Zimbabwean
authorities appear willing to work with the United
Nations. We believe that following Mr. Egeland's visit
it would be useful for the Secretary-General to visit
Zimbabwe as well, as I understand has already been
suggested.

Limiting the measures taken by the European
Union in the framework of article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement depend, we believe, on such dialogue and
on concrete efforts by the Zimbabwean authorities -
within the framework of the dialogue - towards
finding a solution to the problems that they themselves
created.

In conclusion, I echo a comment made by
Mr. Egeland and express our concern at the weak
response to some United Nations emergency appeals
regarding certain situations; here I refer in particular to
the Sahel. We need to find a solution to this problem,
so that aid levels will match the gravity of the
situation, rather than the media attention in donor
countries.

