Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to begin by thanking Ms. Norma Chan
for her contribution to the work of the Security
Council. I would like to convey to her my best wishes
for happiness in the new life before her.

Allow me also to acknowledge the presence
among us of Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

With regard to the current tense post-electoral
environment in Afghanistan, I would first like to
underscore the outstanding role and work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which reflects the central part it plays in the efforts
undertaken by the international community. I would
like in particular to commend the work of Special
Representative Kai Eide, who has maintained strict and
watchful impartiality in making an irreplaceable
contribution to the credibility of the electoral process. I
should therefore like to reiterate our full confidence in
the Special Representative, both in his role as the
international community's spokesman to the Afghan
people and in his efforts to ensure the mobilization and
coordination of the international community on an
issue where much remains to be done despite the
progress made in the past year. He will need the
unwavering support of the international community to
overcome those challenges, and he can of course count
on France's support in that regard.

As the Council is aware, France is very involved
in Afghanistan. On the military level, we have
deployed more than 3,000 troops in dangerous combat
zones. They have paid a heavy price. With respect to
police personnel, we are currently deploying members
of the gendarmerie as part of the European gendarme
force. Turning to civilian assistance, my country has
made very significant efforts in recent years. Alongside
its partners, France will continue its commitment for as
long as is necessary to bring about an Afghan State that
is able to fully take its future in its own hands.
Afghan voters went to polling stations on
20 August 2009 to elect their President and provincial
council members. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has underscored, certain
irregularities have been pointed out. The Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission have conducted an audit on this subject.
They must be able to work in transparency and
tranquillity with the support and confidence of all
parties.

As we await final results, we have only one
demand: that procedures be complied with so that,
ultimately, the choice of the Afghans is respected. It is
essential that dialogue and national consensus
continue, including beyond the elections. Whatever the
final result may be, the establishment of a Government
which can express that national consensus is desirable.

The elections were a time when the Afghan
people not only could see what has been accomplished,
but also turn towards the future and express their hopes
and expectations as a new period is beginning in the
history of Afghanistan. For the international
community also, it is a time to take stock of our
commitment and evaluate the challenges still before us,
as well as the best way to meet them.

That is why France, together with Germany and
the United Kingdom, has taken the initiative to propose
to the United Nations that a new international
conference on Afghanistan be convened after a new
Afghan Government has been put in place. The goal of
such a conference would be based on the comprehensive
strategy, defined in 2008 in Bucharest and at the Paris
conference, to establish the framework for relations
between Afghanistan and the international community
during this new phase, which should see Afghans taking
full control over their national destiny.

These gradually increasing responsibilities will
require from the future Afghan authorities more
resolute, virtuous and effective action than in the past.
Priority reforms must be urgently undertaken on
political and domestic matters insufficiently addressed
to date: improving governance, in particular local
governance; building Afghan security and civilian
capacities; stepping up the fight against corruption; and
re-launching the national reconciliation process and
speeding up the progressive reintegration of ex-
combatants into society.
We welcome the Secretary-General's positive
response to our proposal. The modalities for the
conference will be discussed with interested parties,
beginning, of course, with the next Afghan
Government. In any case, we believe it essential that
the meeting be held as soon as possible so that the
international community can support the renewed
compact concluded between the Afghan people and
their Government.

