Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Climate
change clearly presents serious challenges. Under the
able presidency of the United Kingdom, in Gleneagles,
two years ago, Group of Eight (G-8) leaders
emphasized that energy security, climate change and
sustainable development are fundamentally linked. In
consultation with our developing country partners, G-S
leaders committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
improve the global environment and enhance energy
security in ways that promote human development.

To achieve those goals, the United States is
pursuing a wide range of activities and programmes.
For example, we are working with Brazil to advance
biofuels. We facilitated an agreement with China to
install the largest coal mine methane power facility in
the world. Through the Asia-Pacific Partnership on
Clean Development and Climate, we are expanding
investment and trade in cleaner energy technologies.
We are leading global efforts for the commercial
deployment of near-zero-emissions coal technology
through $1.65 billion in tax credits. The United States
Energy Policy Act authorizes $5 billion over five years
in tax incentives to encourage private investments in
energy efficiency and alternative renewable energy. We
dedicate about $180 million a year to promote
adaptation to climate variability and change and to
other climate change priority areas in developing
countries.

At home, we are on track to meet our goal of
reducing our economy's greenhouse gas intensity by
18 per cent from 2002 to 2012. United States
greenhouse gas emissions increased only 0.6 per cent
between 2004 and 2005, compared with a l per cent
increase over the 1990-2005 period. We have invested
some $35 billion in climate-related science and
technology since 2001, including over $17 billion in
energy technologies.

Internationally, climate and energy issues are
being actively addressed through the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and other
venues with appropriate mandates. The Bush
Administration has pledged $500 million to the Global
Environmental Facility over the next four years - and
that is the largest contribution of any country - to
help developing countries address these problems.
Those efforts matter, including because a lack of
energy security can exacerbate economic and political
problems.

The most effective way to bolster security and
stability is to increase the capacity of States to govern
effectively. States that can govern effectively can better
anticipate and manage change and the challenges that
come with change. Successful development strategies
must focus on education, rule of law, human freedom
and economic opportunity. The international
community joined together in recognizing that at the
World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002.

Well-governed countries grow and prosper.
Economic growth provides the resources, in both
developed and developing countries, to address energy
and environmental challenges, including challenges
associated with climate change.

The United States has a long history of extending
a helping hand so that people can live in democratic
societies with robust economies and strong and stable
governance. We intend to continue that support,
working with freedom-loving people everywhere to
face the future constructively with confidence and
determination.

