Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow me
first to express my gratitude for this opportunity to
address the Council in the name of the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as for the great
interest and concern you are expressing for the
situation in our region. We would also like to reiterate
our confidence and pleasure in your initiatives and
leadership.

Before I explain our position and our concerns
regarding the situation in the Balkans, let me once
again underline what a great benefit we have enjoyed
since the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed, due to
the joint effort of the whole international community.
Because of these commitments, we are now far from
where we were just four years ago. Of course, we are
fully aware that much more has to be done to reach the
point at which Bosnia and Herzegovina may be
proclaimed as a self-sustained State not dependent on
foreign assistance.
Nevertheless, we are sure that things are moving
in the right direction. I would especially like to
emphasize how important the help being provided is in
regard to the reform of our economic and judiciary
system, which we desperately needed to overcome and
replace the old, stiff and non-productive former
structure.

Finally, it is our firm understanding that the
Dayton Peace Agreement has no alternative and must
be completely implemented.

It is not even necessary to mention how interested
we are in the situation in the region where we belong,
and how the situation and especially the instabilities
have a huge negative impact on our country. We are
watching very carefully the situation in Serbia, the
Kosovo crisis which is far from being resolved, and the
uncertainties in Montenegro. In that regard, we may
express our deep concerns about the non-democratic
regime in Belgrade, led by Mr. Milosevic. We see the
changes as inevitable and hope they are carried out as
soon as possible for the sake of stability in the region
as well as for the benefit of the people of Serbia, who
deserve a place in modern Europe, and the modern
world.

At the same time, we strongly support the
democratic changes in Montenegro. We see the
cooperation with healthy, prominent Serbian figures,
working together and redoubling the efforts to
democratize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as in
their and our vital interest.

The Kosovo situation is still far from being
resolved. We fully support and respect resolution 1244
(1999) in all that it means and expect it to be fully
implemented. We expect that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
with the help of the whole international community,
will be able to provide security for all ethnic groups
and start the process of reconciliation.

Finally, we would like to make several points.
After all the things we have experienced in the
twentieth century, our thought is that any attempt at
changing borders in the Balkans will lead to another
war. Internationally recognized borders have to be fully
respected by all.

Nonetheless, the solutions for long-term stability
in our region lie within us - but also within you, the
international community, and in particular the
European family. Even though so many issues in our
region have been internationalized, longer-term
solutions depend on our people's ability to commit to
democratic and free market reforms, and at the same
time, the European Union's willingness to recognize us
as equal partners.

Therefore, we see the long-term, definitive and
the only satisfactory solution for the whole region in
the full integration into the European Union. That is the
only way the full and final reconciliation can be
reached and the whole region can become prosperous.

After all, the precedent of Western Europe in the
post-Second-World-War period, after centuries of
nationalist wars, is relevant for the people of our region
as well. We appeal to the European States, members of
the European Union, to help the whole region to reach
European standards, to prepare ourselves for becoming
a part of a united Europe, and to encourage all Balkan
States to move in that direction.

Of course, we are really delighted to hear from
you, Mr. President, regarding the initiative for a
summit of the European Union and western Balkan
leaders, and we appreciate that very much. We see that
as a preparation for us to join Europe. At the same
time, I would like to thank Mr. Javier Solana. I do not
want to miss this opportunity to thank Mr. Carl Bildt,
our old friend. We have a great memory of him when
he was High Representative of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

