Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Since
the beginning of the tragic events in Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the members of the Security
Council have on several occasions expressed their great
concern. But today for the first time the Council is
indicating its feelings and its resolve in a draft resolution.
We welcome the initiative taken by non-aligned members
of the Council; these members are the source of this
necessary and justified taking of a position.

The provisions of the draft resolution are self-
explanatory and for the most part require no commentary.
They include: support for the efforts of humanitarian
organizations - and, as members know, France is
playing a role in this undertaking by setting up refugee
centres and itself hosting refugees; stress on the need for
the coordination of humanitarian activities, with an
emphasis on the role of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees; and, most important, a

 

reaffirmation of the right of all refugees and displaced
persons to return in safety and in dignity.

The French delegation wishes also particularly to
stress the importance of one provision of the draft
resolution, that of paragraph 5, which emphasizes that the
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate in the
absence of a political solution to the crisis. We are
convinced of this. It is striking that this evening the Council
is indicating what the parameters of that political solution
must be, by specifying that the solution must be consistent
with the principles adopted by the Foreign Ministers of
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America on 6
May 1999. Those are the principles that the French
delegation set out in its Security Council statement of 8
May. We hope that, as outlined in the draft resolution, these
will be endorsed by the Security Council.

For these reasons, the French delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

