Mr. Tasovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Let me express the satisfaction of my
delegation at seeing you, Sir, the representative of the
Russian Federation, preside over the Security Council for
the month of July. I can assure you that you can count on
my delegation's cooperation and support.

Upon the instruction of my Government, I would
like to state the following. The Council is about to take
an important decision for the maintenance of peace and
security in the region where my country, the Republic of
Macedonia, is situated. On behalf of the Government of
the Republic of Macedonia, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Blagoj Handziski, in his letter dated 15 May
1998 addressed to the Secretary-General, stated the
reasons for the request of my Government for the
continuation of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) mission beyond
31 August 1998, for a period of six months, with the
same mandate, structure and proportion.

Considering the further deterioration of the situation
to the north of our borders, my Minister for Foreign
Affairs, in his letter dated 9 July 1998 addressed to the
Secretary-General, reiterated that the Government of the
Republic of Macedonia has endorsed the option of an
eventual increase in the military component, in
cooperation with, and upon the agreement of the
Macedonian authorities, maintaining the same mandate,
structure and proportion, taking into account in particular
the internal specifics of the country. The Minister of
Foreign Affairs considers that the deliberations on
reinforcing the Civilian Police with an additional 20
civilian policemen, in cooperation with, and upon the
agreement of the authorities of the Republic of
Macedonia, could be successful and could contribute to
more efficient monitoring.

 

Regarding the situation in the region, the assessment
of the international community coincides with our
assessment, which is also the case with the situation on the
northern and western borders of my country. The situation
on the borders is stable, and the Government of the
Republic of Macedonia is undertaking considerable efforts
to maintain it, especially in the present circumstances.

We would like to express our gratitude for the
presence of UNPREDEP in the Republic of Macedonia. We
would like to emphasize that the mission has been a very
successful one and has established an excellent cooperation
with the Government, especially with the Ministry of
Defence and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, on the basis of its
original mandate. The mission is generally viewed by the
international community as one of the most successful
United Nations missions.

We welcome the recommendations of the Secretary-
General contained in his report on UNPREDEP dated 14
July 1998 (S/1998/644), especially the recommendation to
extend the mandate beyond 31 August 1998, for a further
period of six months. I would like also to express the
satisfaction of my delegation that all of my Government's
concerns were taken very seriously into consideration by
the members of the Security Council and are embodied in
the text of the draft resolution before the Council.

I would like to express the gratitude of my
Government to the Governments that have made their
military, police and civilian personnel available to
UNPREDEP and to the members of the Contact Group. I
would like also to express my Government's gratitude to
the Secretary-General; the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Bernard Miyet; the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Henryk
Sokalski; the Force Commander, Brigadier-General Bent
Sohnemann; and all personnel of the mission.

I would like to reiterate our commitment to further
cooperation with the United Nations, and in this context
with UNPREDEP, in order to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security in the region.

