Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We too would like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the outstanding way in which you
have presided over our work during the month of June.
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
thank Mr. Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing.
We acknowledge his hard work to promote sustainable
peace in Syria. We therefore reaffirm our commitment
to the success of his term.

Peru looks forward to the important meetings being
held between the Special Envoy and various parties,
and between high-level authorities of international
stakeholders in the Syrian conflict, helping to
find points of convergence towards establishing a
constitutional committee that can be recognized as
legitimate, balanced and consistent with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/20l2/522, annex).

We specifically emphasize the urgent need to
make tangible progress on crucial issues, such as the
representative membership of the committee, the
decision-making process within it and its mandate, and
to ensure that those efforts lead to free United Nations-
supervised elections.

We note that further delays on such issues are
unacceptable given their real impact on the credibility
of the process, especially as it is 17 months since the
Sochi congress. In that connection, we consider it
essential that the parties continue to work on measures
that foster a better climate of understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing
persons and the delivery of mortal remains. We
welcome the work that is being done in that regard
within the Astana framework, but we note the need for
more substantial progress.

We should also emphasize the importance of
avoiding escalations of the conflict that could undermine
the prospects for reaching a political solution. In the
current circumstances, it is crucial to preserve the
agreement on Idlib between Turkey and the Russian
Federation. We condemn the violations of international
humanitarian law that have been happening. The fight
against terrorism is no excuse for non-compliance
with such international obligations. Another major
challenge is addressing the grave situation that
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons
are enduring, which requires mustering not only the
financial resources but, more importantly, the political
will necessary to guarantee them a safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters.

We are at a critical juncture where rapid action
at the political level is vital. The efforts in that
regard should be aimed primarily at avoiding the
country's further fragmentation and achieving long-
term stability, taking into account the strategic and
geopolitical considerations that have largely fuelled
the conflict in Syria, especially when the main priority
is protecting the millions of people who are in such a
terribly vulnerable situation.

