Mr. De Benito (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like first to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing this morning on the current
situation and new trends in peacekeeping operations.
We also thank the Russian presidency for its initiative
in convening this debate and for the priority it has
attached to this issue in the Council's programme of
work.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to offer
the following contribution in its national capacity.

Spain believes that peacekeeping operations are
a key component of the comprehensive strategy in
favour of international security, which has shown itself
capable of responding effectively and flexibly to the
challenges posed by the new typology of conflicts in
difficult and changing environments. We value the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping operations as
a formula to establish sustainable peace, equipped with
clear and feasible mandates and adequate resources
allowing us to respond to security challenges and to the
needs of host countries and of the civilian population.

We highlight the role of regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping. We firmly support
all efforts aimed at continuing to strengthen this
collaboration in the conviction that it provides
effectiveness and coherence to the actions undertaken,
thereby avoiding duplication and taking advantage of
the complementary nature of their respective efforts.
At times, collaboration with regional organizations is
also crucial for strengthening the invaluable regional
ownership of the solution of conflicts.

We value very positively the high level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union, both with regards to institutional
dialogue and at the operational level. Cooperation on
the ground in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
along the border between Chad and the Central African
Republic, and more recently in Mali and the Central
African Republic provides a model to follow and to
deepen in the coming years.

International peace and security is not an abstract
concept; as reality reminds us every day, conflict
affects millions of men and women directly and with
immediacy, and it is to them we owe our efforts. We
therefore welcome the Security Council's interest in
the fundamental issue of the protection of civilians,
as expressed in its debate in February (see S/PV.7109).
The inclusion ofprotection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations mandates is a fundamental step. In that
regard, we consider it vital that child protection also
be incorporated from the beginning into all United
Nations activities relating to the defence of international
peace and security through the inclusion of the issue in
mandates. I would like to reiterate once again Spain's
full support for the Secretary-General's Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.

We firmly support the efforts to implement fully the
resolutions relating to women and peace and security.
Spain commends the British initiative to hold the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and is fully
confident that an international protocol for investigating
and documenting sexual violence in conflict will be a
valuable instrument for the appropriate protection of
victims and response from our contingents.

This year, Spain is celebrating the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its participation in peacekeeping
operations. My country has contributed to more than
50 missions and crisis management operations and has
deployed more than 137,000 troops in such complex
theatres as Lebanon, Afghanistan, the coast of Somalia,
Mali and the Central African Republic, exemplifying
Spain's commitment to the primacy of international law
and to a more stable world.

I would like to express our sincere appreciation
to the other troop-contributing countries for the
commitment they have shown to peace and the United
Nations and for their valuable work in this area. Spain
believes in improving the channels of communication
between troop-contributing countries and the Security
Council, and in better links between those countries
and the work of the Council, in keeping with articles 43
and 44 of the Charter of the United Nations. Given the
continuing responsibilities we are dealing with, Spain
will work to that end.

