Mr. Shen B0 (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.

At present, the international situation is complex
and constantly changing. Traditional and non-traditional
security risks are interwoven, while global challenges
are increasing by the day. Meanwhile, all countries are
interdependent even while their interests are linked.
Therefore, seeking peace, development and cooperation
remains the general desire of the Member States.
The international community urgently needs to
work together in order to make new contributions to
addressing global challenges properly and promoting
international peace and development.

First, we must uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The United
Nations has existed for more than 70 years, and the
cause of peace and the development of humankind
has seen significant progress. However, the beautiful
blueprint traced by the Charter has yet to be realized,
while new challenges keep emerging. In the face of old
problems and emerging challenges, the purposes and
principles of the Charter are not obsolete and remain
immensely significant and realistic in guiding our
work. To promote the spirit of the Charter, to face
history with honesty and to draw lessons from history
has always been our source of strength in maintaining
peace and building the future. We hope that Member
States will join hands, honour their firm commitment
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, promote a new type of international relations
based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win
cooperation, build a community of common human
destiny and make new contributions to advancing the
noble cause of human peace and development.

Secondly, we must settle disputes peacefully
through dialogue and negotiations. With the world
today far from being secure, and with regional conflicts
expanding, maintaining peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council - a
task entrusted by Member States. All countries should
actively defend the authority of the Security Council
in international security affairs and support the efforts
by the countries concerned and regional organizations
in peacefully settling disputes through dialogue,
negotiation, mediation and good offices. The United
Nations and the Security Council should adhere to the
principles of objectivity and impartiality, respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and their
right to choose their social systems and development
goals on their own, and establish a concept of
comprehensive, mutual, common, cooperative and
sustainable security so as to play a constructive role
in addressing regional conflicts appropriately and
promoting peace through negotiation.

Thirdly, we must take comprehensive measures to
address complex global challenges. The root causes
of conflict, such as poverty and underdevelopment,
are far from being solved, while non-traditional
security threats, such as terrorism, climate change,
refugees, migrants and epidemics, are constantly
expanding - setting a higher bar for global governance.
We hope that the international community will
adhere to multilateralism, increase their development
contributions, fully implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, reach an early consensus on the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, follow
the principle of mutual consultations, joint efforts and
benefit-sharing, push for open, inclusive, universal and
win-win globalization and create favourable conditions
for addressing global challenges.

Fourthly, major organs of the United Nations
should fulfil their mandates and generate synergy. The
United Nations is a core platform for addressing global
challenges. The main organs, such as the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, should abide by the United Nations
Charter and its responsibilities, adhere to their
mandates, coordinate their work in preventing conflicts,
maintaining peace, building peace and combating
traditional and non-traditional security threats, bring
into full play regional initiatives and organizations and
actively support the countries concerned in capacity-
building for sustainable development and building
capabilities so as to develop synergies for combating
traditional and non-traditional security threats.

China is ready to work together with the
international community to properly address the
increasingly complex global challenges and make
greater contributions to building a world that enjoys
lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity
and that is open, inclusive, clean and beautiful.

