Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing today's
open debate on working methods, which offers us a
public occasion to elaborate on the revised note by the
President S/2017/507, push for its implementation and
pay tribute to the remarkable progress made by the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under the Japanese chairmanship
over the past two years.

The revised note 507 responds to the demand for
enhanced transparency, inclusiveness and interaction
of the Council with the rest of the United Nations
membership. It reflects the improvements already
achieved in recent years, as in the case of the new
selection process for the Chairs of the Council's
subsidiary organs. The measures introduced for the
preparation of incoming elected members put them in
a better position to contribute to the Council's work
from day one, thereby enhancing its effectiveness. So
much has been done. Let me mention, in that context,
our split term with the Netherlands and the work
carried out throughout the year with its team to ensure
a smooth transition, in particular in the work of the
subsidiary organs.

More can be done to achieve full implementation
of note 507 and for a bold interpretation of its
provisions. In our View, the role of the elected ten will
be crucial in that respect. We encourage the Council
to continue to make full use of all tools at its disposal,
and wish to put forward the following considerations
and suggestions. Italy believes in closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and is looking forward to seeing
the Council regularly request, deliberate and draw
upon the PBC's specific, strategic and targeted advice,
as stated in paragraph 95 of note 507. Italy is aware of
the responsibilities as a penholder. At the same time,
we welcome co-penholdership as a practice that allows
for the wider participation of Council members in the
drafting process and can consequently bring added
value to the Council's outcomes. During the drafting
process, we encourage the Council to engage in timely
consultations, including with the broader United
Nations membership, in particular with interested
States and regional organizations.

In that respect, in reviewing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, due consideration should be
given to the views of the troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs). The inclusive involvement of
TCCs and PCCS when renewing mandates is key to
nurturing trust between those countries and Council
members. During our term in the Council last year,
we saw first-hand that much remains to be done in that
respect. The Council should also promote and make
more regular use of informal settings, such as informal
awareness meetings to receive necessary information
prior to deliberations. Italy is also in favour of inviting
non-traditional briefers to Council meetings, in
particular women from civil society, to allow Council
members to hear other voices before deliberating.

Finally, we believe in an enhanced role of the
Council presidency in framing the discussion in
consultations and communicating outcomes to the press.
Transparency is a very important tool for upholding the
legitimacy of this organ's deliberations.

While we discuss working methods, we must
not shy away from debating in the same terms the
comprehensive reform of the Council, including its
structure and composition. We must aim at a modern
Council, which enjoys greater authority and legitimacy
in tune with the democratic reality of the twenty-first
century and in line with the principle of equal status
for every State Member of the United Nations. We
should then earnestly debate if an increased number of
veto powers would make the Council more responsive
to international crises, or more efficient, inclusive,
accountable and transparent. That is an open question
which, in our view, remains crucial in the current debate.

In conclusion, in that respect, Italy is ready to
engage with the rest ofthe membership in a constructive
dialogue leading to an early reform, through which
elected members can make a greater contribution to the
Council's work, as well as by acting as a bridge towards
non-Council members, while reflecting their concerns
and remaining fully accountable to the scrutiny of
the wider membership. We remain committed in
that endeavour.

