Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to see
you, Sir, presiding over this important meeting of the
Council on a subject and problem that haunts us all.
Let me start by extending our sincere felicitations to
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and Syria on
assuming their well-deserved seats in the Council as
newly elected members. We value our friendly
relations with all of them and the important role that
they are playing as significant members of the
international community.

I share the sense of loss that many of our
colleagues have expressed here at the sad news that
Ambassador Navarrete will be leaving us. It will be a
personal loss also, because I have been working very
closely with him on another important process -
financing for development - and I have benefited
immensely from his experience, wisdom and maturity
of thought. So it will be a personal loss, and I am sure a
loss to this organization. But I am sure that wherever
he goes, in whatever capacity he is selected to serve his
country, he will continue to serve the cause of the
international community.

I also wish to place on record our thanks and
appreciation to the outgoing members, Bangladesh,
Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia and Ukraine, for their valuable
contribution to the work of the Council.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate Sir
Jeremy Greenstock on his commendable work thus far
as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We
look forward to working very closely with him in
meeting this challenge to all humanity.

Today, we have come to this Chamber once again
to discuss the subject of terrorism and the response of
the world community to counter it. The tragic events of
11 September have no doubt brought the menace of
international terrorism to centre stage of the global
agenda. The steps taken by the Security Council to
combat this serious threat to international peace and
security, which include the adoption of resolutions
1368 (2001), 1373 (2001) and 1377 (2001), as well as
the formation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, are
unprecedented in their approach and global in their
scope. These welcome measures are aimed at cutting
off financing and other forms of support for
international terrorism everywhere.

As a matter of policy and commitment, Pakistan
rejects and condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Pakistan also believes in implementing
all resolutions of the Security Council without
selectivity or discrimination or even technical
differentiation. We are determined to respect
international legality and support all that is right and
all that is just. We are convinced that terror is a menace
and a scourge that we need to combat at all levels a
national, regional and global. We deplore violence of
any sort or on any scale, especially violence engineered
by dogma or theology. We have ourselves been Victims
of violence and terrorism.

Following the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1368 (2001), Pakistan took a principled
decision to offer its full and unstinting support and
cooperation for the international fight against
terrorism. President Musharraf, at that time, clearly
pronounced our policy on this matter, and he took the
people of Pakistan into confidence. He knew has the
support of the people of Pakistan for the policies that
he is pursuing.

Our support has gone far beyond simple
pronouncements and verbal commitments. It has been
translated into resolute and decisive actions. These
actions include, but are not limited to, the various
legal, financial, administrative and enforcement
measures listed in our detailed report sent to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on 27 December, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).
Indeed, the steps taken by the Government of
Pakistan are part of an ongoing process to combat this
scourge both internally and externally. The latest of
these measures were announced only last Saturday by
President Pervez Musharraf in his address to the
nation. The President reaffirmed that Pakistan's
behaviour would always be in accordance with
international norms. He said,

"Pakistan will not allow its territory to be used
for any terrorist activity anywhere in the world.
Strict action will be taken against any Pakistani
individual, group or organization found to be
involved in terrorism within or outside the
country."

Inside Pakistan an environment of "tolerance, maturity,
responsibility, patience and understanding" will be
promoted and "extremism, militancy, violence and
fundamentalism" will be curbed.

President Musharraf also warned that the
Government will not allow its writ to be challenged by
anyone. In that context, wide-ranging measures,
including the reform and regulation of the madrassa
system, the police and the judiciary, are being carried
out. Simultaneously, a crackdown has begun on groups
engaged in fomenting violence and militancy. The
Government intends to pursue this campaign to purge
our society of obscurantism and violence.

Members will agree that the measures Pakistan is
taking go well beyond the requirements of resolution
1373 (2001) and underscore our firm commitment to
the fight against terrorism. There is no other country
that has put more at stake on this issue than Pakistan,
and no other country has gone as far as Pakistan in the
fight against terrorism.

As we fight terrorism we have to be careful that
we are not misled and drawn away from the main task
at hand. A crisis has been provoked in our region, for
the sake of political opportunism, by confusing and
obfuscating the issue and by fudging the very
definition of terrorism. In fact, this crisis, imposed on
us and accompanied by blatant threats of the use of
force, has shifted the focus away from the real fight
against terrorism. It is driven only by political
ambitions for regional hegemony, not by the fight
against terrorism. If those who have provoked this
confrontation are really sincerely committed to the
cause of fighting terrorism, then they should practice
what they preach and in doing so end the terrorism that
they themselves perpetrate - and perpetuate against
the people under their occupation, in the guise of
democracy and secularism, by keeping those people
under military occupation in violation of Security
Council resolutions.

Terrorism, the anathema of this new century, has
to be eliminated root and branch in all its forms and
manifestations. And indeed, terrorism has many forms
and manifestations, which should also be included
within the ambit of Security Council resolutions and
within the purview of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Here, I recall that, a short while ago,
Ambassador Greenstock spoke of the scope of the
Committee. Those who employ the State apparatus to
trample upon the fundamental and inalienable rights of
peoples are also perpetrators of terrorism, especially
those who do this in blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions. If, as some would say, terrorism is
defined by the act, not by the description of the
perpetrators, then alien occupiers and usurpers,
especially those who employ ruthless measures against
people under occupation, also fit that definition.

Thirteen million people is no small number-
perhaps it would constitute one of the 50 countries
Members of the United Nations with the largest
populations. Thirteen million people in Indian-held
Kashmir are struggling for freedom against foreign
occupation and alien domination. The people of
Kashmir continue to be deprived of their inalienable
right to self-determination, which is enshrined in the
resolutions of this very body, which have remained
unimplemented for more than half a century. If East
Timor, with a population of less than half a million, can
exercise its right of self-determination, why should the
13 million people of Kashmir continue to be deprived
of that fundamental inalienable right? They have been
victims of State terrorism and repression of the most
brutal sort. While a just cause cannot be ennobled by
the killing of innocent civilians, neither can the
civilized community of nations condone the use of
force for the suppression of the legitimate cause of a
people.

Eighty thousand Kashmiris have lost their lives in
this struggle, which has sadly drawn no attention from
the international community - not even a one-line
press statement from this body. And those 80,000
Kashmiris are buried inside Kashmir; the mothers who
are mourning over their graves are Kashmiri women;
they are not women come from outside. That shows the
indigenous nature of the struggle.

How long will the people of Kashmir have to wait
before the international community answers their call?
That is a question awaiting an answer from this body.
How long will Kashmir remain a nuclear flash point
and continue to be "the most dangerous place on
Earth"? How long will it be before the Security
Council can take the same sort of impressive action on
Kashmir that it has taken in countering terrorism?

Pakistan, for its part, remains ready to resolve the
Kashmir dispute through peaceful means, in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. When President Musharraf extended
the hand of genuine friendship to Prime Minister
Vajpayee at Kathmandu recently, it was no empty
gesture. We have indeed backed up our words with
deeds, our gestures with resolute action.

As we seek to grapple with the worst-ever
challenge to humanity, our approach should not be
cosmetic. Nor should it be guided by emotion or anger.
Surely, the perpetrators of terrorism, whoever they are
and wherever they may be, must be brought to justice.
But our battle must not remain confined to retaliation
and retribution alone. We must tackle the causes that
give rise to forces of hatred and violence. Individual
acts of madness or the behavioural insanity of groups
that snuff out innocent lives are both crime and disease.
Yes, crimes must be punished; the disease should be
treated at its roots.

International conventions and Security Council
resolutions on terrorism are indeed important and
necessary. We must implement them. Freezing assets,
closing bank accounts, denying safe haven and sharing
information are important steps in controlling terrorist
acts. For a long-term solution, however, we must
unearth the source of the problem and diagnose the
disease beneath the skin. Sheer bandages will not heal
wounds that are rooted in the injustice of systems and
societies. Nabbing a few individuals or banning a few
groups will not serve the purpose. I think we have to
solve problems and settle disputes.

No matter what action we might contemplate
against terrorism, that faceless enemy, which lurks in
the shadows of fear and frustration, which breeds on
despair and disillusionment and which is fed by
poverty and ignorance, will not disappear unless we
build global harmony and stability through mutual
tolerance and shared prosperity.

If I may take this opportunity, as one of the Co-
Chairmen of the Preparatory Committee for the High-
Level International Intergovernmental Event on
Financing for Development, let me say that we should
all try to make that Event successful. Perhaps it could
make a significant contribution towards attaining that
goal.

This phenomenon will continue to haunt us if the
roots of terrorism, which lie in the inequality of
societies, in the exploitation of the downtrodden, in the
denial of fundamental rights and in a sense of injustice,
are not addressed. It would be too simplistic merely to
focus on the symptoms or their ugly manifestations.
Terrorism has now emerged as a different challenge
which has to be dealt with in a different, but resolute
and measured, manner.

Finally, we must admit that these are unusual and
difficult times demanding exceptional responses. As
we confront the universal evil of terrorism in a
determined manner, we cannot be oblivious of the need
to address the source of this problem at its roots. The
Security Council must rise above power politics and
political expediency and respond to international crises
and conflicts in an objective manner. When I say crises
and conflicts, I think we must address long-standing
disputes and resolve them. It is a time for courageous
decisions, for correcting historical wrongs and
redressing endemic injustices. Our universal obligation
to fight terrorism must not deflect us from the need for
a just, lasting and honourable settlement of the
Kashmir issue and other similar issues, which will
restore peace and stability not only to our region but
also to the world at large. It is time for the Security
Council to restore its credibility and legitimacy and
work as a true instrument of peace and security as
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations.

