Ihave the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States member of the Pacific Islands Forum with a presence at the United Nations, namely, Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own country, Tuvalu. On behalf of our group, we would like to express our gratitude to the co-sponsors for convening this important debate on climate and security. We would also like to take this opportunity to convey our condolences to and solidarity with those countries that have lost lives to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. With regard to climate and security, climate change is the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific. As the Pacific Islands Forum, we are collectively addressing the Security Council today because the links between climate and security for our region are indivisible and demonstrable. When the effects of climate change intersect with a complex array of environmental, economic and social issues, it becomes a threat multiplier and can be a significant contributor to social and political instability, in addition to both low- level and more violent conflict. The Pacific region faces negative climate impacts stemming from rising temperatures, sea-level rise, ocean warming, increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as storm surges and tropical cyclones, more variable rainfall patterns and prolonged droughts. Pacific island countries are particularly vulnerable to these effects, with their extensive rural populations, high reliance on natural resources and ecosystem services, and great exposure to weather-related hazards and ocean changes. Combined and increasing, such threats can overwhelm response and recovery efforts, leading to a breakdown in governance and security and stimulating unrest with wide-ranging consequences for well-being and livelihoods in the region. As to the Pacific response, Pacific leaders have affirmed the security challenges resulting from climate change in the Boe Declaration on Regional Security and the Kainaki II Declaration for Urgent Climate Change Action Now. The security risks are stark, but the remedy remains clear. The best way to reduce climate-related conflicts is to take substantial action on climate mitigation. States must do more to lower emissions to reduce future climate-related impacts through implementing and not just communicating national determined contributions. It is crucial that we maintain the global momentum created by the Paris Agreement on Climate Change to ensure it is anchored firmly in its objectives and principles and that it is effectively implemented. For the shared prosperity and security of our Pacific Islands Forum countries, urgent action by the international community to limit global warming to 1.5°C is critical. Anything less would signal to the world that we are not serious about climate change. While climate mitigation remains the most effective way to reduce climate impacts, more investment is also needed to ensure vulnerable States can effectively adapt to the impacts of climate change that are already occurring. Building resilience, disaster risk reduction and adaptive capacity allows countries to better cope with climate-related events before they become security challenges. With regard to the specific security implications of climate change, the United Nations response should be coordinated by a newly appointed special rapporteur on climate and security. With regard to COVID-19 and the Pacific, as we turn towards the recovery from the pandemic, we have a once-in-a-century opportunity and a responsibility to prioritize investments in the transition to a low-emissions, climate-resilient economy. Every State should reflect on the Secretary-General's climate-related principles to shape the recovery when developing their response. The Security Council has a crucial role to play, both in highlighting the security dimensions of this multifaceted challenge and in encouraging efforts to address these risks before they lead to conflict. This, we believe, is in the spirit of the preventive-security element espoused by paragraph | of Article | of the Charter of the United Nations. International and United Nations mechanisms, including the Council, must recognize climate change as a unique and consequential threat multiplier in all relevant work and activities. The Security Council can and should add its weight to calls to ensure that the global economic response is in line with these principles and the goals of the Paris Agreement. The members of the Pacific Islands Forum intimately understand the fundamental importance of climate to international peace and security. We encourage the Security Council and all States Members of the United Nations to take action to address this global challenge in an integrated and innovative manner. The litmus test for the humanitarian and development nexus 1s before us now. There can be no sustainable development without peace and human security and no peace without sustainable development. We remain committed to undertaking this urgent and crucial work alongside all members of the international community.
