Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and
Ambassador Saikal for their enlightening briefings on
peace efforts and the electoral process. I would also like
to warmly thank Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for his briefing,
which clearly illustrated the essential role played by
Afghan youth in building a peaceful, democratic, just
and united society. In Afghanistan and elsewhere,
young people must be fully recognized as agents of
sociopolitical change and as key partners in efforts to
bring about peace and development. I will make three
points today.

First, with regard to the security situation, the
conflict in Afghanistan remains one of the deadliest
and most violent on the Security Council's agenda.
France is very concerned about the increasing number
of foreign terrorist fighters in Afghanistan, as well as
by the one-upmanship of the Taliban and the Islamic
State in the Khorasan Province, marked by a recent
increase in the number of terrorist attacks, in Kabul
in particular. We again condemn such attacks, in the
strongest terms, and reiterate our solidarity with the
victims of terrorism and their families. France also
commends the courage and the determination of the
Afghan forces, who were instrumental in retaking
the town of Ghazni on 10 August. Nonetheless, such
clashes confirm that terrorist groups are determined
to continue their harassment in order to destabilize
the country at a critical time, by creating a climate of
perpetual insecurity and by seeking to undermine the
Afghan forces and the authority of the Government just
ahead of the elections.

We are also concerned about the continued increase
in drug trafficking, which fuels Taliban insurgency
and threatens the lives of thousands of Afghans. The
presentation of a draft regional strategy by Afghanistan
in July in Vienna marks the renewed commitment of
the Afghan authorities to combating opiate production
and trafficking, which deserves to be highlighted. We
call on the countries of the region to resolutely commit
to fighting such trafficking at all levels. We look to the
Afghan Government to continue the important efforts
needed to curb drug production, with the support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, regional
partners and the international community, within the
framework of the principle of shared responsibility,
including the Paris Pact Initiative.

Secondly, the parliamentary and local elections
scheduled for 20 October constitute a major challenge,
given the context that I have just mentioned. France
attaches great importance to the democratic process and
the holding of free, transparent and credible elections.
It is essential that the Afghan population be able to
express itself and be represented in the Government.
All stakeholders must continue to work to ensure the
broadest possible participation of the population in the
elections, especially women. We are concerned about
the many questions that remain about the preparations
for the elections, which may compromise their integrity.
We also remain concerned about the low number
of candidates in some provinces for district council
elections, since a plurality of candidates is an essential
criterion for holding credible elections. In that regard,
we support the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) alongside the
various Afghan stakeholders and the series of measures
to combat fraud, promote trust and ensure the inclusivity
and security of the elections.

Thirdly, concerning peace efforts, the seriousness
of the security situation and the human cost of the
conflict should serve to encourage renewed efforts to
achieve lasting peace. Progress has been made, notably
through the peace offer presented by President Ghani
at the second Kabul Conference, on 28 February, and
then with the ceasefire for the Eid Al-Fitr holiday
and the unilateral Eid Al-Adha ceasefire proposal.
France urges the Taliban to respond to those gestures
of openness. A lasting solution in Afghanistan can be
only political in nature, negotiated through an inclusive
Afghan-led process for Afghans. In that respect, it is
essential to consult the Afghan population, including
young Afghans, in order to take into account their
expectations. Beyond Afghanistan, it is important that
all States in the region unambiguously support the
objective of peace.

The violence and power struggles have lasted far
too long. Time for cooperation has come with a view
towards peace, democratic good governance and
development, which are incumbent upon the Afghan
people to achieve, with the support of the international
community. The Afghan authorities and UNAMA can
count on the steadfast support of France in pursuit of that
goal, as well as the unity of the Security Council, which
is a critical and indispensable asset to make headway.

