Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The widespread transformational processes
taking place in the Middle East region in no way
diminish the fundamental importance of the issues of a

Palestinian-Israeli, and in general an Arab-Israeli,
settlement. Unless these issues are resolved, it will
remain impossible to imagine any dramatic
improvement in the situation in the Middle East.

In that regard, one cannot overstate the risks of
what has been seen of late, namely, a flagging in the
attention paid to the theme on the international and
regional levels, particularly in a situation when on the
ground we can see the deliberate creation of new
realities and the pursuit of policies based on fait
accompli. It is clear that there has been an inexorable
radicalization of approaches, which could lead to an
ever-growing spiral of violence from both sides. That
is unacceptable.

The situation can be tangibly defused only by the
resumption of a direct dialogue between Israelis and
Palestinians. Unfortunately, their fundamental
positions to date do not converge. A serious step
towards the resumption of genuine talks is offered by
the exchange of letters between President Abbas and
Prime Minister Netanyahu.

It is important that the Palestinian leader has once
again expressed his commitment to the principle of two
States and his readiness to carry out substantive talks
on a universally recognized internationally legal basis.
We expect a responsible reaction from Israel. The
negotiation process requires robust international
accompaniment. A positive element in that regard is the
continuation of painstaking regular work of the
Quartet.

It is important that its statements, including the
latest on the outcome of the ministerial meeting in
Washington, DC, of 11 April, firmly calls on the sides
to meet their obligations under the Road Map, to avoid
actions that might undermine confidence and to focus
on positive efforts that could strengthen and improve
the climate for resuming direct talks on the basis of the
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011.

In that context, the Quartet has supported the
implementation of a range of important socio-
economic programmes in the occupied territories and
the establishment of a smoothly operating mechanism
by which the Israelis can transfer customs and tax fees
owed to the Palestinians.
A particular role in accompaniment of the Middle
East peace process is by regional players as well,
above all Jordan and Egypt. The League of Arab States
has been enhancing its influence on developments, and
it is reassuring that the theme of the Middle East was
given priority in the decisions taken at the summit of
the League in Baghdad on 29 March, which clearly laid
out the interdependence of all tracks related to the
Middle East settlement, including the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights and Lebanon.

It is important to make the most effective
possible use of that useful regional leverage,
particularly in efforts to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, without which it is impossible to
conceive of any prospects for a sustainable settlement.

Russia is also making its own contributions in
that area. There is a plan to hold a second
intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow in mid-May,
during which we intend to continue work to encourage
Hamas and Fatah to achieve national reconciliation,
based on the Doha Agreements. The stalemate in the
Middle East peace process calls for active actions from
the Security Council as well. In that regard, we would
like to recall that the idea of sending to the region a
mission of the Council continues to be relevant.

If implemented, that would be a timely and
effective step on the part of the Council and would
serve as a stimulus for the parties to narrow their
differences and resume substantive talks on the
universally recognized international legal basis,
including the well-known resolutions of the Security
Council of the United Nations, the Madrid Principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

An indicator that the Security Council can
constructively work on the complex Middle East
situations is the unanimous adoption of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) on the development of a
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria. We
anticipate that its activities will contribute to restoring
peace and calm and to launching an inclusive Syrian-
led political process without interference from outside
in Syria, a country that plays a key role in regional
affairs.

