Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully supports the statement made on behalf of the
European Union by the Ambassador of Denmark.

As my country addressed the Council on this
issue on 30 June, today I wish simply to speak in
greater depth on a few points relating to the Rome
Statute and to peace operations.
First, a word about our attitude towards this issue.
France respects, though it does not share, the position
of the United States regarding the International
Criminal Court (ICC). France hopes that the many
hours of discussion in the Council and among capitals
will make it possible better to understand this subject
and thus achieve greater convergence on possible
solutions.

France very much hopes that by the end of the
week the Council will have been able to find a solution
that addresses the concerns of the United States while
fully respecting the Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

I now come to the Rome Statute. As it stands, it
offers the United States far more substantial safeguards
than does the Statute of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which,
nevertheless, has never elicited the least concern in
Washington. Allow me to demonstrate this point with
four specific examples.

First, the ICTY Statute permits the Tribunal to
compel national courts to drop a case and cede it to the
ICTY - this is called the principle of primacy -
whereas the Rome Statute provides that the Court can
prosecute persons only if competent national courts do
not prosecute; this is called the principle of
complementarity.

Secondly, indictments prepared by the ICTY
Prosecutor are confirmed by a single judge, whereas
the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor can
undertake a prosecution only with the authorization of
a pretrial chamber composed of three judges.

Thirdly, article 98 of the Rome Statute enables
any State requested to cooperate with the Court to
invoke a bilateral agreement according immunities to
the nationals of a third State in order not to comply
with the Court's request. That safeguard does not exist
in the ICTY statute.

Fourthly and finally, the Security Council, on the
basis of article 16 of the Rome Statute, may decide to
suspend an action initiated by the Court for a
renewable period of a year, which is not provided in
the ICTY statute.

Those four differences demonstrate that the Rome
Statute, as it stands, responds far better to the concerns
of the United States than does the ICTY statute. I
reiterate that, throughout the six years of its

implementation, the ICTY statute has never elicited the
least criticism on the part of Washington.
I would add that the criteria and the modalities
provided in the Rome Statute for the election of
International Criminal Court judges is scarcely
different from those provided for the election of judges
to the ICTY. Therefore, there is no reason to fear that
the work of the Court's judges will be any less
irreproachable than that accomplished, to the
satisfaction of all, by the ICTY judges.

The International Criminal Court marks major
progress in building an international order based on
law. It targets criminal leaders who have victimized
their people, such as those who have held sway in
Cambodia or in Sierra Leone, in Rwanda or in
Yugoslavia. As Kofi Annan wrote in his 3 July letter,

"... in the history of the United Nations no
peacekeeper or any other mission personnel have
been anywhere near the kind of crimes that fall
under the jurisdiction of the ICC."

The United States, nonetheless, wants to be sure
that none of its nationals serving abroad will be
brought before this Court. The principle of
complementarity, and the combined recourse to articles
16 and 98 of the Rome Statute, allow our United States
partners a near-guarantee in that regard. France has
made a specific proposal regarding article 16 and is
ready to discuss that within the limits authorized by
law - I repeat, within the limits authorized by law.
However, it cannot accept modification, by means of a
Security Council resolution, of a provision of the
treaty. Furthermore, even if the United States manages
to persuade a majority of the Council to take that
course of action, one may question the effect of such a
resolution on the decisions to be taken by the Court. It
is certainly not in the Council's interest to see any
conflict of norms arise.

Finally, I should like to say a word about United
Nations peace operations. No one contests the major
responsibilities shouldered today by the United States,
including military ones. However, there are many
crises in which Washington does not want to be
directly involved. There is only one way to help
resolve those crises: the Blue Helmets. If Washington,
by this weekend, confirms its veto with respect to the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and then proceeds to veto every mission
extension that arises, who will take over the
responsibility for those forces? Who will complete the
restoration of peace in Sierra Leone, begun so
successfully by the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, supported by the United Kingdom? Who will
have the responsibility of completing the remarkable
work accomplished by the United Nations in East
Timor? Who, at the end of July, will replace in
southern Lebanon the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, created 24 years ago at the initiative of the
United States?

Sixteen forces of various sizes are deployed today
throughout the world. They are carrying out difficult
missions. They deserve the full support of the
international community. We must recognize that they
are irreplaceable. If ever proof were needed, it would
suffice to ask - as I have just done - who would
agree to replace them. Let us not take them hostage.
Let us think of all the peoples for whom they represent
the only hope of peace and progress.

With regard to UNMIBH, if we do not reach an
appropriate agreement on the International Criminal
Court by the weekend, we shall have to decide to
extend its mandate one last time, until 31 December, as
provided in the draft resolution submitted by Bulgaria.
In order to respond to the concern of the United States,
we could - as suggested by the Secretary-General -
add to that text a paragraph stressing the primacy of the
ICTY's competence over that of the International
Criminal Court.

If that solution is not accepted by the United
States, France will fully support the draft resolution of
the United Kingdom allowing for the orderly
withdrawal of UNMIBH and its replacement, on
1 November, by the European Union Police Mission.
The Council has the duty to think first of the people of
Bosnia, who are slowly emerging from a terrible
tragedy and who deserve the solidarity of the
international community.

