Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We would like to express our
appreciation, Mr. President, for your decision to hold a
debate today, at the beginning of your presidency, on
a very relevant issue pertaining to international peace
and security. We also thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
for their briefings.

Transnational organized crime at sea is a serious
threat to international security, and international and
regional cooperation are indispensable to tackling this
scourge in all its dimensions, including the trafficking
of persons, weapons, drugs and cultural artefacts.
Maritime security is a priority interest for Italy and
we are deeply involved in fostering security and
supporting the development of related capabilities of

partner countries, particularly in Africa.

There is indeed a need for comprehensive capacity-
building assistance to African countries in areas such
as maritime governance, coast guard authorities and
functions, disaster relief, maritime search and rescue,
and maritime information sharing and integration.
At the same time, efforts are required to improve
legislative, judicial and prosecutorial capacities. The
development of a sustainable maritime economy is also
essential in order to effectively counter transnational
organized crime at sea.

Among the various forms of organized crime
at sea, the trafficking of persons is a particularly
heinous crime that the entire international community
is called on to fight against. In line with resolution
2388 (2017), among others, we need all countries to
work together at the bilateral and multilateral levels
with a View to disrupting criminal networks that take
advantage of migrants; promoting development and
capacity-building in countries of departure and transit;
addressing the root causes, thereby preventing the
smuggling of migrants and the trafficking of persons
at sea; and creating sustainable mechanisms to ensure
a much-needed shared responsibility among countries
receiving migrants.
That is what Italy has done in the past two years
through its Africa Fund, from which considerable
resources have been used to assist African countries in
dealing with migration flows, taking a three-pronged
approach: first, financing the work of international
organizations, such as the International Organization for
Migration and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in transit countries in order to improve
conditions for migrants; secondly, cooperating
with countries of departure and transit to build the
institutional capacities needed to disrupt criminal
networks and provide assistance to migrants; and
thirdly, increasing development cooperation activities
in countries of departure and transit so that the root
causes of migration can be effectively addressed.

At the multilateral level, Italy continues to lead
EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia and is one of
the largest contributors to the European Union-Africa
Infrastructure Trust Fund. By pooling together
financial resources and initiatives from all member
States of the European Union (EU), the EU has proven
how effective its shared activities can be in building
robust regional institutions and multi-agency capacity
that can guarantee security at sea and the rule of law.

Italy also actively participates in important counter-
piracy operations. In the Horn of Africa, we have been
participating in EUNAVF OR Operation Atalanta since
its inception, continuously providing one or two naval
assets, including the flagship. Italy remains committed
to Somalia's institution-building process in an effort
to address the root causes of piracy off of its coasts,
including through the contribution to the European
Union Training Mission in Somalia and the European
Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia.

In the Gulf of Guinea, the recent activity of an
Italian Navy ship announced the start of new capacity-
building and cooperation programme with the national
authorities from within the region. I also note the two
meetings of the Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
that the Italian Group of Seven presidency organized in
2017 in Rome and Lagos, as well as our support for the
Luanda Declaration on Peace and Security in the Gulf
of Guinea Region.

In conclusion, I stress Italy's commitment to
working together with its partners, especially African
countries, in fighting transnational organized crime at
sea and tackling its root causes. At the same time, we
deem it essential to fully respect and encourage local
ownership. In that spirit, we stand ready to improve
information sharing, increase legal cooperation and
cooperate on institution- and capacity-building.

