The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.

The issue of the working methods of the Security
Council is crucial to the effective functioning of the
Council. Enhancing transparency, efficiency and
interaction with non-Council members benefits Council
members and non-members alike. Such efforts are
essential for the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibility to act promptly and effectively for
international peace and security.

In all these areas, the Security Council has made
good progress in recent years. The note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) was a
useful compilation of the working methods of the
Council, setting forth clearly the Council's working
practices.

But it is also important for the Council to review
the progress periodically and make necessary
adjustments, in the light of current situation and taking
into account comments from non-members of the
Council. Some measures may need to be revisited;
some others may need further effort for full
implementation. We should take a pragmatic approach
in order to meet sometimes conflicting requirements:
first, to ensure prompt and effective action for
international peace and security and, secondly, to gain
the support of the wider United Nations membership
for full implementation.

The Security Council has been making efforts to
enhance the transparency of its work. More open

meetings are now organized. The presidency provides a
briefing to non-members of the Council on the
programme of work at the beginning of month - and
this month's was very well attended - and the
programme is readily available on the Security Council
website; the Journal sets out issues to be discussed not
only in the Council but also in its subsidiary bodies. As
President of the Security Council, I made it a practice
this month to do a press stakeout after every
consultations session. It is frequently not possible to
share much of the content of the informal consultations
because of their informal and ongoing nature. But I
believe it is important for the Council to make an effort
constantly to enhance transparency and share the thrust
of the consultations to the extent that it will be
conducive to effective implementation of its eventual
decisions.

The Security Council's interaction and dialogue
with non-members of the Council is essential to ensure
that the Council makes informed decisions, taking into
account the views of interested parties. Since a
decision by the Council binds all Member States, close
interaction with the broader United Nations
membership, in particular countries directly involved
or specially affected and countries and regional
organizations with special contributions to make, will
serve to enhance the effectiveness of the
implementation of a decision by the Council.

Above all, the recent decision for an enhanced
and timely dialogue with the troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries is a welcome
development. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is a useful forum for such
interaction.

The format of informal interactive dialogue
allows the Security Council to have discussions with
non-members of the Council that have a direct interest
in the issues being discussed. Such dialogue has come
to be utilized more frequently in recent years. The
Security Council should continue to adopt the most
appropriate modality of meeting flexibly to enhance its
dialogue with interested parties.

Japan is pleased with the many positive
comments on the usefulness of the 2006 note by the
President in enhancing the efficiency of the work of the
Council. A comprehensive compilation of the working
methods - the so-called blue book, published by the
Japanese Mission - is a useful handbook on how the
Council carries out its work, particularly for newly
elected members. As the representative of Brazil stated,
we believe that a periodic update of such a
comprehensive note on working methods benefits
members and non-members of the Council alike.

The increased participation of non-member States
of the Council in its open meetings, such as the recent
one on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6299) and
today's on working methods, is a welcome
development. At the same time, we believe it important
that the statements made in the meetings be focused
and concise. We encourage all participants, members
and non-members of the Council alike, to follow the
guidelines established by the Council and to limit their
statements in open meetings to five minutes or less in
order to allow more delegations to take the floor and to
make the meetings efficient and productive.

Regarding the way forward, the matter of
working methods is important in the context of
Security Council reform as one of the five key issues
identified through the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform. Genuine reform of the
Council must consist of meaningful change in its
composition, as well as improvements in its working
methods. Japan looks forward to negotiations on
Security Council reform on the basis of a text at the
earliest possible date.

We welcome the participation of many non-
members of the Council in today's debate, which
reflects the strong interest of Member States in this
issue. As the Chairman of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Japan will follow up the specific points raised in
today's debate.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming that
members of the Council are making efforts to ensure
access by non-members of the Council and members of
the press to the temporary conference area, within the
physical constraints, as far as possible in line with
previous arrangements.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.

