Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): The year 2018
marks the ninetieth anniversary of the Briand-Kellogg
Pact. That is an idea whose value simply cannot be
overstated, that is, the outlawing of war. The prohibition
of the use of force is a peremptory norm; it is the rule.
Self-defence and authorization under Chapter VII are
the exceptions to it. The use of armed force in any
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations constitutes aggression, as defined in General
Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX).

Given the spread of terrorism, there have been
attempts to depart from the collective security system
towards actions that reflect pre-Charter understandings.
They have included reinterpretations of the law on self-
defence as well as problematic readings on the letter of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter. Some have been
arguing that self-defence could be applied as a response
to non-State actors, sometimes adding as a condition
the criterion of unwillingness or inability on the part
of the territorial State. Brazil does not agree with such
interpretations. Let me present four assumptions that
inform our position.

I would first like to mention the general principle
of law, according to which exception to rules must be
interpreted restrictively. Article 51 is an exception to
Article 2, paragraph 4. Since the latter does mention
States, and the former must be interpreted in that light,
self-defence is a response to an armed attack undertaken
by, or somehow attributable to, a State.

Secondly, with regard to the case law of the
International Court of Justice, in the case ofRepublic of
Nicaragua v. The United States ofAmerica, the Court
made it clear that the territorial State would have to
be "sending" or have "substantial involvement" in the
acts of the non-State actor for the conditions of self-
defence to arise. In the advisory opinion on the Legal
Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, it is stated that

"Article 51 of the Charter recognizes the
existence of an inherent right of self-defence in
the case of an armed attack by one State against
another State".

Thirdly, on the travaux preparatoires, the
framework established in 1945 was a response to the
Second World War, and it is implausible to impute to the
drafters the intention to make self-defence applicable
outside inter-State conflicts.

Fourthly, on treaty law, the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties allows subsequent agreement between
the parties regarding the interpretation of a treaty or
subsequent practice to be taken into consideration.
However, the threshold for a tacit agreement between
the 193 parties to the Charter is far from being met.
The State practice being invoked by those seeking a
reinterpretation is erratic and ambiguous.

An impressive number of States have been cautioning
against expansive interpretations of self-defence. The
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries affirmed that
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations is
restrictive and should not be rewritten or reinterpreted.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States called for an open and transparent debate on the
issue. The conditions for any reinterpretation of Article
51 are strict. Those norms cannot be changed by the
practice of a few States 4 all countries have a stake in
the issue of the legality of the use of force.

Similar reasoning applies to efforts to justify the
use of force beyond the two exceptions enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph
4, does not envisage the use of force as a self-help
mechanism, or as a response to violations of general
international law. In the past 30 years, we have
witnessed a tendency to unilaterally resort to force for
protecting human rights or forestalling international
crimes. Sponsors of that view tend to read Article 2,
paragraph 4, as prohibiting the use of force only when
it goes against the territorial integrity or political
independence of another State, or when it is inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations. Brazil does not
share that view, as it considers that Article 2, paragraph
4, aims to reinforce prohibition of the use of force.

Moreover, military action 4 even when warranted
on grounds of morality and legitimacy - inevitably
results in human and material costs. Those who suffer
the most are the civilians on whose protection the resort
to force is often based. If subjective unilateral criteria
inform decisions on the use of force, peace will be a
far-distant objective. While Brazil is a strong advocate
of prevention, we do not deny that force might be
envisaged in exceptional circumstances. Yet our resolve
to stop human rights violations and defeat terrorism
cannot make us turn a blind eye to international law.
Narratives developed to justify actions in one part of
the world have systemic repercussions.

Such narratives for self-defence are based on
conceptual uncertainties. Not only do we lack a
definition of terrorism, but also the preferred notion
seems to be non-State actors, a category that can
involve scenarios outside the purview of the Council.
In addition, States cannot disregard the resort to
multilateral solutions to fight hostile non-State actors,
including the authorization of the use of force by the
Security Council. We should be careful not to open
the door for unilateralism, thereby jeopardizing the
collective security system.

Security Council resolutions are adopted on
behalf of the international community. It is a basic
notion that those authorized to take action on behalf
of others are accountable to those that authorize them.
States that engage in military operations to implement
measures envisaged in Article 42 should have to report
periodically to the Council, so that their adherence to
the mandate can be multilaterally monitored. Those
troops might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act
on the authority and legitimacy of a blue text.

In conclusion, as the primary guardian of
international peace and security, the Council should act
as a defender of the integrity of the norms that form
our collective security system. Whenever the Council
deliberates, international law should be central, not
a distant part of the landscape. Above all, we must
remind ourselves of a notion that should be self-evident,
namely, that full respect for international law is the
only way to achieve peace and sustain it.

