The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Gambia.

Throughout the crisis over Kosovo, the Security
Council has endeavoured to set out clearly the concerns
of the international community. The more resolutions and
statements the Council adopted on this issue, the more
Belgrade brazenly stepped up its repression and violence
against the civilian population in Kosovo. Such violence
and flagrant violations of human rights have shocked the
collective conscience of mankind. The subsequent massive
influx of refugees into neighbouring countries and their
accounts of the atrocities inflicted on them and their
families can leave no one indifferent. The international
community could no longer afford the luxury of being a
helpless spectator while the policy of ethnic cleansing was
going on in Kosovo. It is regrettable that force had to be
used to arrive at where we are today. We therefore
welcome wholeheartedly the agreements reached a few
hours ago for a political settlement of the Kosovo crisis.
The delegation of the Gambia always upheld the view
that the plight of the refugees and internally displaced
persons would persist unless and until the underlying
political problems were addressed.

The whole world has a lot to celebrate today. We
would, however, guard against euphoria, because there
remains a lot of healing to be done. As far as the United
Nations - and especially the Security Council - is
concerned, it is a happy day, in view of the fact that the
issue of Kosovo has divided the Council for so long. At
long last, the Security Council is once more able to find
unity around this issue and, above all, it is again able to
assume its primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its authority has been
recognized and restored.

 

Furthermore, the preponderant role of the Secretary-
General has been clearly spelt out. It is high time we gave
to Caesar what belongs to Caesar. The resolution that we
have just adopted takes on particular importance for my
delegation for two reasons. First, it is a comprehensive and
well-balanced text - in other words, a blueprint for the
peaceful resolution of the Kosovo crisis. Secondly, it
recognizes and restores the authority of the Security
Council and places it on a firmer footing to tackle other
major crisis situations that are still pending. That is the
beauty of it, and we therefore voted in favour.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has thus concluded its voting procedure.

I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Arman, to make a statement.

