The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his thorough
briefing. I would also like to offer our condolences to
the representative of Iraq, his authorities and the family
members of the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in
his country.

Uruguay acknowledges the arduous efforts being
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in close coordination with
the Iraqi Government, in fulfilling a very important
and effective task in order to address the different
emergencies that have been affecting the country for
several years.

Iraq continues to face many enormous humanitarian,
political, economic and security challenges, but today
the main challenge remains without doubt the fight
against terrorism. For that reason, we support the
significant efforts made by the Government of Iraq in
the fight against the serious threat represented by the
terrorist group Da'esh for its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the security of its entire population - a
threat that also affects the Syrian Arab Republic and
to which no country today is immune, since the crimes
perpetrated by that group and associated individuals
and entities do not recognize any borders.

We agree with the need expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2017/37l) to find an appropriate
mechanism to ensure accountability for the horrendous
crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq, which include war
crimes, crimes against humanity and possibly even
genocide. We trust that unlike what has happened,
unfortunately, thus far in Syria, the Council will be
able rapidly to reach a consensus in order to investigate
and prosecute these crimes, including the possible use
of chemical weapons.

We reiterate that the fight against the terrorist
scourge must be carried out within the framework
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law and must take place within the United Nations in
order to prevent atrocities similar to those committed
by these groups from happening again. However,
it must be made clear that military operations in
themselves will not be eliminate the threat of terrorist
in Iraq. Iraqi political leaders must work in order to
overcome their divisions and historical mistrust with
a view to achieving a broad agreement on national
reconciliation that would close the chapter on so many
years of suffering for the Iraqi people as a result of deep
sectarian and religious divisions.

A topic to which Uruguay attaches particular
importance is the formulation of policies aimed at
promoting the empowerment of women. In this respect,
we call upon the Iraqi Government to move forward in
promoting and defending the rights of girls and women
and to promote gender equity, strengthen political
participation for women and address the critical
problem of sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and an act of terrorism.

With respect to Mosul, the humanitarian situation
of the civilian population remaining in that town and
of those who were able to escape continues to be very
difficult. The military operations to take the city have
resulted in one of the greatest humanitarian crises of
our times, and it is far from over. We are concerned by
the situation of the hundreds of thousands of civilians
who remain trapped in Mosul, in particular the most
vulnerable, such as women and children, and the report
that they are being used by Da'esh as human shields,
yet another sign of the group's cowardice and total
contempt for human life.

In such a complex context, we continue to urge the
Iraqi authorities to comply with their declared goal of
prioritizing the protection and the security of civilians
in this offensive against Da'esh and to coordinate with
United Nations agencies the broad-ranging response
necessary to address the humanitarian emergency that
it has caused. Repairing civilian infrastructure, the
normal delivery of services and the gradual return of
displaced persons to their homes should be priorities
after the liberation of Mosul, which is on the horizon.

Likewise, it should be clear that the fight against
terrorism does not end with taking back Mosul.
The discovery of mass graves allegedly containing
thousands of bodies reflects the scope of the horrors
perpetrated by Da'esh in Iraq and Syria in recent years.
Despite the defeats that they have suffered recently
and the significant reduction of the territory under its
control, Da'esh has shown that it has a significant ability
to survive, with its fighters using for an escape route to
Syria the porous border between the two countries, a
border it has controlled for years. The battle of Mosul
should not be the end of the war against terrorism
but, rather, an important milestone that would make
it possible to consolidate the progress that we have
achieved thus far.

We will need an even greater coordinated effort by
Iraq and the anti-ISIL coalition in order to defeat once
and for all that criminal group, which never was and
never will be a State, but is simply a band of intolerant
killers whose only motivation is to destroy, using the
most cruel methods imaginable, everything that does
not reflect their extremist beliefs.

To conclude, with respect to the matter of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals as well as the
looting of Kuwaiti property during the first Gulf War,
we note the positive cooperation between both countries
and encourage the Iraqi Government to step up its efforts
in order to comply with its international obligations and
to clarify these issues as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

