The President (spoke in Chinese): I would like at
the outset to express on behalf of the Security Council
our outrage at the terrorist attack that occurred earlier
today in Moscow, killing at least 39 people and
wounding many more. The Council condemns that act
of terrorism in the strongest terms possible. The
Council expresses its sympathy and condolences to the
Victims and their families and to the Government of the
Russian Federation. On behalf of the Council, I should
like to request the representative of the Russian
Federation to convey these sentiments to his
Government and his people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2004/71)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Ireland and Serbia and
Montenegro in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Perovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr. Ryan
(Ireland) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Holkeri to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2004/71, containing the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I now give him the floor.


