Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I start
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this Council, my first chance to do so. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Mr. Boyd for their briefings, and the Secretary-
General for his latest comprehensive report
(S/2009/503).

We are very grateful for the hard work of the
United Nations Secretariat, the Special Representative
and his team, in very difficult circumstances, because
Somalia has been one of the most difficult issues on
the Council's agenda during my two-and-a-bit years
here. The Council has taken some significant steps in
the past few months towards a more stable Somalia,
and we welcome Under-Secretary-General Pascoe's
judgement that, however slowly, Somalia is moving in
the right direction. Particularly notable is the
programme support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and the work of the Department
of Field Support in delivering that package is
admirable and especially welcome.
I believe that we have the right strategy in place
now - the Djibouti Agreement, the presence of

AMISOM. supported by the United Nations,
international support for the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and its security forces, and the
engagement of the United Nations on the political and
humanitarian aspects. It is now a question of seeing
that strategy through. However, as we all know, the
situation in Somalia remains extremely fragile. As the
Secretary-General's report sets out, we have to
intensify implementation on all strands of our strategy.

First, on the humanitarian side, the situation
remains deeply disturbing. As Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe reported, over 50 per cent of the population
now needs assistance. The United Kingdom has
committed a further £2 million to addressing urgent
humanitarian needs there, on top of our previous
commitments, and the Council needs to continue to
support the TFG and the United Nations agencies able
to operate in Somalia in delivering basic security, food
and health care to the Somali people.

Secondly, we need to sustain international
support for the TFG and its efforts to engage in
dialogue and reconciliation. The Transitional Federal
Government needs to extend its influence through
reconciliation with groups still outside the broad
coalition that is now backing it. This means inclusive
politics at the national, regional and local levels, and
the international community must play its part by
disbursing the funds pledged in Brussels in April.

In line with resolution 1844 (2008), it is
important that all States support the Djibouti process
and the TFG as the legitimate Government of Somalia.
The United Kingdom is concerned at the evidence in
the latest report from the Somalia Monitoring Group
that Eritrea has provided support to those opposing the
TFG in Somalia, in breach of United Nations
resolutions and the United Nations arms embargo.
Leaders of the African Union have requested the
Security Council to impose sanctions on Eritrea in
response. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
such action. The Council will need to give serious
consideration to the African Union's request over the
coming weeks. The Council's resolutions, including
resolution 1862 (2009) on Djibouti, must be upheld
and the stability of Somalia must be promoted.
Thirdly, we believe that the Council should
maintain its support for AMISOM, which is playing a
critical role in supporting the TFG. The United
Kingdom also urges Member States to provide further
contributions to the AMISOM. Trust Fund. The United
Nations Political Office for Somalia should continue to
increase its presence in that country as the security
situation allows. We welcome the further details that
the Under-Secretary-General has given us today on that.

I pay tribute to the role that Uganda and Burundi
are playing in AMISOM, a difficult operation under
difficult circumstances. We condemn the recent attacks
in Mogadishu and join others in offering our sympathy
to the Governments and condolences to the families of
those killed and injured.

Lastly, the Council must continue to play its part
in addressing the threat from piracy, including by
renewing the legal authority for operations against
pirates later this year. The long-term solution to piracy
can come only by re-establishing the rule of law in
Somalia, but in the short term active counter-piracy
operations are essential to deterring and containing the
problem and to protecting the sea lanes around the
Horn ofAfrica.

The Council has taken significant steps over the
past few months to improve the prospects for a more
stable Somalia. The coming months now need to be
used to make sure that these actions are translated into
tangible improvements in the lives of the people of the
country. The conflict in Somalia remains one of the
most troubling in Africa; resolving it and maintaining
stability will remain among the biggest challenges to
the Security Council over the coming months and years.

