Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Ijoin with those who have congratulated you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We are optimistic that your wisdom and
experience will help you in conducting the Council's
business as we all would wish.

I also extend appreciation and thanks to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the United Kingdom,
for guiding the Council's work last month.

Once again, Israel has affirmed its disregard for
international law and norms. Once again, it has
affirmed that it does not care about any agreement,
convention or international legality. The Israeli air
force has committed an unprovoked aggression against
a civilian site in Syria that posed no threat or danger to
anybody. Israel's violation of Lebanese and Syrian
airspaces and its aggression against Syrian territory is a
blatant contravention of international law and norms,
confirming the aggressive, terrorist nature of the Israeli
Government.

The Israeli Government is resorting to every
pretext to export its internal crises, terrorizing and
intimidating the countries of the region and pursuing
its continued aggression against the Palestinians and
repressive practices in the occupied territories. The
Israeli Government is trying to confuse everybody,
wrecking havoc on the region and raising tensions in a
very volatile situation.

We agree with the statement made by the
Secretary-General in which he denounced the Israeli
aggression and warned against escalation in a region
that is already extremely tense and against a rising
danger that may be difficult to contain. We need to
implement the road map through the Quartet's
insistence on the implementation of all its provisions
with due impartiality.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia denounces Israel's
aggression against sisterly Syria. This aggression is a
provocation that may undermine the peace process in
the area. It threatens international and regional security
and represents a dangerous deterioration of the
situation in the region.

Saudi Arabia, while affirming its solidarity with
the position of Syria - which has showed great
restraint in the face of this aggression - calls upon the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security by
condemning the Israeli aggression and by putting an
end to this organized State terrorism, to the inhumane
practices of the Israeli occupation against the
Palestinian people and to its aggression against Syria
and Lebanon. In order to maintain peace and security
in the region, it must not repeat its act of aggression.

