Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you again on your
leadership of the Security Council. I should also like to
congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto on the assumption of
his important and daunting tasks and to commend him
for his clear, comprehensive and professional report.

As we sit here today at the behest of the
Palestinians, we should all ask ourselves, why indeed
are we here? Are we here to deal once again in
acrimony and spend precious time on diatribes and
distorted facts, as we have just witnessed and heard?
Or should we, at this watershed moment in the history
of our war-torn region, seize the moment to see the
larger picture and paint the wide canvas our people
deserve and that the Council should, and I believe truly
wants to, paint.

However, I feel a certain degree of gratitude for
the opportunity given to us today by this Palestinian
initiative to discuss the situation in the Middle East, or
as the initiators of this meeting have chosen to call it,
"the dire situation on the ground". Let me share with
the Council the situation on the ground, which is truly
dire. The situation that has seen more than 25,400
terrorist attacks against Israelis in less than five years
is indeed dire.

To put things in perspective in this world we live
in - which, as we have witnessed again today, is a
very cruel and cynical one - that is an average of
more than a terrorist attack every two hours, 24 hours a
day, 365 days a year, for five consecutive years.

On the ground, in Netanya, on 12 July, a young
Palestinian strapped with explosives detonated himself
at the entrance of a shopping mall. Five people,
including two teenaged girls, died in that suicide
attack: Julia Voloshin, Anya Lifshitz, Moshe Maor Jan,
Rachel Ben Abu and Nofar Horowitz - fathers,
mothers and children. These halls must never forget
their names. Ninety more people were wounded in that
horrendous attack alone.

The situation on the ground in the Israeli
community of Beit Hagai is also dire. On 24 June,
Palestinian terrorists driving a vehicle opened fire on
several Israeli civilians, all of them just teenagers,
killing one of them.

The situation on the ground is dire in the Israeli
village of Nativ Ha'asara. On 14 July, a 22-year-old
woman was killed while sitting on the porch of her
home, as a result of a Qassam rocket. Hamas and the
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade have showered the skies this
month with Qassam rockets. That tiny community has
suffered nearly 1,000 such rockets in recent years.
Several other communities were also shelled on
14 July, with rockets landing near a nursery school,
near a playground, and directly hitting people's homes.

The situation on the ground in Shlomi is also
dire. On Israel's Independence Day, only a few weeks
ago, in the midst of celebrations, members of a terrorist
militia in southern Lebanon fired a 107-millimetre
mortar shell specifically at civilian targets.

Those are only a few examples of the incessant
terrorist activities resulting in the murder of innocent
civilians. The situation on the ground for those who
died, their families, neighbours and friends is
gruesome, cruel and, indeed, dire.

The situation in the Middle East is also dire,
given that on the other side of our northern border the
only force that is in control of the territory is a terrorist
organization helped, sponsored and guided by two
States Members of the Organization.

As we speak, the Government of Israel is
preparing to implement a fateful and unprecedented
initiative: the disengagement of all Israeli civilians and
forces from the Gaza Strip and the dismantling of four
settlements in the northern West Bank. Israel is taking
bold, courageous actions to reinvigorate the peace
process on behalf of all those involved in this drawn-
out conflict.

As I have said, that initiative is unprecedented in
its scope, in the challenges it raises and in the hope it
has the potential to give to the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples alike. As anyone following developments in
our region is aware, this is a painful and heart-
wrenching moment for the Israeli people. The
implementation of this plan, in the absence of any
corresponding acts of good faith from our Palestinian
neighbours, has created troubled divisions within our
society. But the Israeli Government and its leaders, at
no small political and, sadly, personal risk, are
determined to follow through on their commitment to
implement that important and bold initiative.

The disengagement initiative is not Israel's first
plan of choice. We would have preferred a fully
negotiated agreement with our Palestinian neighbours.
Indeed, Israel's Prime Minister made that clear in
December 2003, when outlining the disengagement
initiative for the first time. Addressing the Palestinians,
he said:

"We would like you to govern yourselves in your
own country: a democratic Palestinian State with
territorial integrity and economic viability, which
could conduct normal relations of tranquillity,
security and peace with Israel ....We hope that
the Palestinian Authority will carry out its part.
However, if in a few months the Palestinians still
continue to disregard their part in implementing
the road map, then Israel will initiate the
unilateral security step of disengagement from
the Palestinians".

Since then Israel has waited not months, but years; and
the Palestinian Authority still shows no sign of
implementing even the first commitment in the road
map, which calls for

"an unequivocal end to violence and terrorism
and visible efforts on the ground to arrest,
disrupt and restrain individuals and groups
conducting and planning violent attacks on
Israelis anywhere".

The terrorist attack in the shopping mall in
Netanya just 10 days ago gives voice to the sad truth
behind the plethora of terrorist attacks: they endanger
not just the lives of Israeli citizens but also innocent
Palestinians, the new Palestinian leadership, the
disengagement plan and the peace process as a whole.
It should be very clear, however, that Israel will not
waver in its intention to complete the disengagement
and pursue peace. We should hope that the leaders of
the Palestinian Authority will confront the threat of
terrorism accordingly. If the Palestinian leadership
does not eradicate terrorism, terrorism will ultimately
eradicate it.

The prevention of terror emanating from
Palestinian areas is entirely the responsibility of the
Palestinian Authority and its leadership, a
responsibility that it has thus far has failed to fulfil.
Moreover, even the previous period of quiet was only
superficial. In that time, dozens of terrorist acts were
carried out every month, and a far greater number
prevented. In fact, the campaign of terror has continued
unabated, at varying levels of intensity, since
September 2000. As I stated before - and this number
must resonate in the Chamber yet again - nearly
25,400 terror attacks were committed since then, of
which 142 were homicide bomb attacks.

The Palestinian delegation requested the
convening of this meeting of the Security Council in
order to discuss the conditions on the ground. Let there
be no confusion about the situation in Israel: we are in
the midst of a historic, courageous political decision in
order to improve the lives of Israelis and Palestinians.
It is almost cynical that the Palestinian Authority is
raising these issues with the Security Council at a time
when the deteriorating security situation is the result of
Palestinian terrorists and the Palestinian Authority's
unwillingness to fulfil its obligations. The impression
one gets is that this debate is somehow a smokescreen
for more broken Palestinian promises. And, in their
wake, Israel must do everything within its ability to
combat terrorism. That is the foremost responsibility
and right of any nation: to protect the lives of its
citizens.

The onus of preventing Palestinian terrorism in
all its forms lies clearly with the Palestinian Authority.
Israel has transferred control over cities to the
Palestinian Authority and armed Palestinian security
forces in exchange for promises that the Palestinians
would combat terror, which is a commitment reiterated
in the road map. As a result of the Palestinian
leadership's failure to confront terrorism, Israel was
left with no choice but to find defensive measures to
protect itself, such as the security fence.

The reality is that the security fence works. It
saves hundreds of lives. There has been a reduction of
over 90 per cent in the number of successful terrorist
attacks, a 70 per cent reduction in the number of
citizens killed and an 85 per cent reduction in the
number of wounded. All of that can be attributed
directly to the effectiveness of the security fence. In
Samaria, for instance, 448 individuals died as a result
of terrorist attacks prior to the completion of the
security fence in August 2003.

Israel remains sensitive, however, to the impact
of the necessary defensive measures it has been forced
to take. Israel is coordinating with Palestinian
Authority officials in order to facilitate humanitarian
passage in all areas. As we speak, teams of Israeli and
United Nations experts are examining the
consequences of those measures on the freedom of
movement of Palestinian civilians. Israel and the
Quartet's Special Envoy for Gaza Disengagement,
James Wolfensohn, are working together to enhance
contiguous movement between Palestinian areas.

Indeed, the fence's routing has been altered a
number of times, either as a result of the continuous
judicial review to which it is subjected or as a result of
humanitarian concerns that have come to light only
upon the completion of a certain section. Each section
of the fence is scrupulously examined in light of strict
humanitarian criteria as determined by the Israeli High
Court of Justice, the only justice system in the region
where an Arab or Palestinian can go to court against
his own Government, seek justice and get it, rather
than be thrown in prison or get beheaded. It should also
be noted that the construction of the fence has enabled
Israel to remove checkpoints, thus relaxing day-to-day
freedom of movement in northern Samaria.

Israel has further established methods to address
difficulties that might arise as a result of the fence's
construction, both on the practical level - such as the
more than 70 agricultural gates in the fence - and on
the legal level by providing affected landowners the
possibility of lodging objections to the proposed route
and of claiming compensation from a special standing
fund established precisely for that purpose. That
mechanism guarantees appropriate compensation for
those affected and obviates the need for any alternative
measure, such as the ill-proposed register.

In the absence of any demonstrable leadership on
the Palestinian side, it has fallen to Israel to implement
its disengagement initiative. Even as a reluctant
fallback plan, however, the disengagement initiative -
let it be clear - is not a replacement for negotiations.
Indeed, as Israel has repeatedly stated, the initiative
can pave the way to the implementation of the road
map and lead the parties back to the road to a
negotiated resolution of the conflict.

However, for the disengagement initiative to play
the role as a bridge to increased cooperation and a
return to the road map process requires recognition -
both from the Palestinian side and from the
international community - that there are rights on
both sides of that equation, including the Israeli side,
and responsibilities on both sides, including the
Palestinian side. The road map sponsored by the
Quartet, of which the United Nations is a member, is
predicated on the assumption that both sides have
commitments and responsibilities for which they must
be held accountable.

Initiatives that seek to focus exclusively on and
exaggerate Palestinian victimization, while avoiding
Palestinian responsibility, not only ignore genuine
Israeli concerns, but do a grave disservice to all those
Palestinians seeking reform, transparency and
accountability. For there to be any genuine possibility
of a lasting resolution to the conflict, all parties,
including the international community, have to
abandon the simplistic and one-sided representations
that have distorted the true reality, and recognize that
no side has a monopoly on suffering and that the
dreams of neither side can be fulfilled in full.

The Security Council convenes today to address
grievances that do little to improve peace efforts in the
region. Critics of Israel were historically obsessed with
ending the occupation of disputed lands, yet once Israel
engaged a plan to hand over land in an act of good will,
as it is doing today, its critics obfuscate the issue by
diverting the attention of the Council to this untimely
and unnecessary discussion. Let this Council see
through that diversion and the very absurdity it
represents.

Let there be no mistake - Israel has great respect
for the Council and the revered principles upon which
it was built. It is precisely because of our deep respect
for those principles that we find dismay in the
pernicious attempt to hijack its mandate and actions.
Today's discussion signifies yet another blemish in this
Council's agenda. It is such diversions that influence
the need for United Nations reform. We call upon this
Council to look beyond the diversion and witness the
larger picture: a tiny country, marred by terrorism,
mobilizing its citizenry and political will to take a bold
step for peace in the region.

Let us not be diverted by false rhetoric. Let us not
be blinded by distorted images. Let us not be derailed
by old tactics. Let us rise to the occasion, observe the
large and hopeful picture, and seize this moment to
allow this historic process to be successfully
completed. Let us march forward rather than
backwards, in hope rather than despair, towards a
better future for our children - Israeli and Palestinian
alike.

