Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express the appreciation of the
delegation of Egypt for the efforts that have been made by
the countries participating in the multinational protection
force, which is playing a significant interim role in
restoring security and stability in Albania. Appreciation is
particularly due to the Italy for its leadership of the force,
as well as to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. We would also like to express our appreciation
for the valuable periodic briefings provided by the
delegation of France to the Security Council during the
previous period.

When the situation began to unravel and crisis erupted
in Albania, the Security Council adopted resolution 1101
(1997), which welcomed the offer of a number of countries
to establish the multinational protection force to facilitate
the prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in
need and to create a secure, appropriate environment for
the work of the international organizations in Albania,
including those providing humanitarian assistance.

We would also like to express our appreciation for
the periodic reports that were presented by the
multinational protection force during the past months.
They contributed to briefing the Council on the evolution
of the situation in Albania, as well as on the operations to
contain the crisis which erupted at the beginning of this
year. These reports have also highlighted that the
multinational protection force performed the tasks
assigned in accordance with Council resolutions 1101
(1997) and 1114 (1997).

The multinational protection force is an example of
regional cooperation making an undoubted contribution to
the enhancement of international peace and security. Over
the past four months, the force has been able to restore
stability and security in Albania, and it succeeded in
creating a properly secure environment for the holding of
elections last June - which promoted increased voter
participation and made it possible to achieve results
qualified as acceptable by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

But successful operations such as that of the
multinational protection force can be no substitute for a
United Nations role in containing crises throughout the
world, particularly in Africa.

At the end of the force's mission in Albania, the
international community - and especially the donor
community - along with international funds and United
Nations development agencies must play a greater role in
enhancing long-term stability through serious, genuine and
effective help in solving the economic and development
problems facing the Albanian people.

