Mr. Odawara (Japan): I would like to welcome
Malaysia's timely initiative to convene this open debate
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), amid the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Before turning to the issue of non-proliferation with
regard to non-State actors, I would first like to refer
to North Korea's nuclear test in January and its series
of ballistic missile launches, including the most recent
launch, which fell into Japan's exclusive economic
zone on 3 August. Those blatant violations of Security
Council resolutions pose clear challenges to the global
non-proliferation regime and cannot be condoned for
any reason. Japan strongly urges North Korea to refrain
from further provocations and to comply faithfully and
fully with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2270 (2016), as well as other
commitments, and calls upon all Member States to
redouble their efforts to fully implement and enforce the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Those efforts are
crucial, and their significance and impact must not be
underestimated. We must strongly support the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) and ensure that the Committee
and its Panel of Experts can function effectively.
Let me now move to the issue of preventing
WMD proliferation with regard to non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime because it requires States
to prevent proliferation and establish domestic laws,
regulations and effective measures for that purpose.
However, we should also recognize that the global
situation has dramatically changed since that resolution
was adopted, in 2004. Increased globalization has
greatly increased the risk of the proliferation of WMDs.
Indeed, we have witnessed cases where non-State
actors have used WMDs to advance their goals. The
ongoing comprehensive review presents a golden
opportunity to identify the challenges facing the current
non-proliferation regime and discuss how we address
them. In that regard, Japan would like to propose two
specific points.

First, export and border controls are essential
for the prevention and detection of proliferation
activities. The review process has pointed out that
the implementation of paragraph 3 of the resolution,
which calls for establishing domestic controls such
as export and border controls, has fallen far behind
the implementation of paragraph 2, which calls for
prohibiting the proliferation activities undertaken by
non-State actors. We underscore that clear definitions
of the restricted items and activities are the key to
facilitating the implementation of the obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004). Japan is therefore ofthe View that
requiring the establishment of national control lists in
accordance with a Security Council resolution is a good
step towards enhancing the non-proliferation regime.

Secondly, another observation from the review
process pointed out that the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) is currently unable to effectively match offers
and requests for technical assistance. One of the prime
reasons is that requesting States do not necessarily
recognize their own needs. In order to address that
situation, Japan would like to strongly suggest that
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts be
given a mandate to propose and initiate dialogue with
requesting States in a more proactive manner. That
would enable the Committee and the Group of Experts
to serve as consultants mediating between donors and
recipient countries by identifying actual needs based on
clear information acquired through direct interaction
with the requesting State.

The security environment today requires us to
take effective measures to tackle the threat of the illicit
use of WMDs by non-State actors. Once again, Japan
would like to emphasize that the strengthening of the
global non-proliferation regime, with resolution 1540
(2004) as its cornerstone, provides the foundation for
international peace and security.

