Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in French): Allow me, at
the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

(spoke in Arabic)

I should like to say, for the purposes of the record
of this meeting, that our participation today does not
mean that we recognize the International Criminal
Court (ICC) or that we are going to cooperate with it,
since the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute. My
statement is addressed solely to the Security Council,
in line with the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties.

What we have heard from the ICC Prosecutor
reminds one of the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of a Member State of the Council to
justify her country's failure to join the ICC: that the
privileges conferred upon the Prosecutor amounted
to powers greater than those of Governments. The
briefing we have heard today is a perfect example of
that. The Prosecutor has addressed the Council as if she
were giving members orders.

While serving to highlight that justification, the
briefing also did not address the crux of the matter
and strayed into addressing the relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the status of
Abyei - almost as ifthe Prosecutor had become ajudge
and had more power than Governments. The briefing
serves to underscore the fact that the ICC has taken on
the role of a judge and become the political rival of the
Sudan. The Prosecutor provided alleged information
without citing the sources or without any member of
her team having been given impartial information. The
information came from biased sources.

The briefing ignored all the positive developments
in Darfur as a result of the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace by the Darfur transitional
Authority, including all the steps taken by the special
court to begin to bring to justice those alleged to have
committed crimes in Darfur. The Prosecutor also did not
mention the willingness ofthe Sudanese judicial system
to combat impunity, nor its ability to do so. We have
provided the Council with a great deal of information
concerning the special court for Darfur and the trials of
those who committed crimes. That serves to highlight
the willingness of the Government of the Sudan to end
impunity and the fact that the judicial system in my
country is willing and able to do so.

Perhaps the Council has taken note of the position
of the African Union following its contact group to the
region in November. I also wish to recall the emergency
Summit held in Addis Ababa in October. Perhaps that
will serve to remind us that the African Union has
lost entire confidence in the ICC given the distortion
of the Rome Statute owing to the politicization of
international justice, which many had warned against.
We also recall the decision taken by African leaders
that no African President should not be brought before
the ICC or any foreign court while they are in office. A
failure to respect Africa's will and its right to deal with
its own cases would run counter to the right of people to
democracy and freedom. Great strides have been made
to implement all aspects of the the Doha Document for
Peace, including justice and reconciliation.

As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
we have provided the Council with ample information
on the measures taken by the prosecutor of the special
court for Darfur. Those measures have resulted in
sentences of capital punishment against six people on
the Abu Zereiga incident. We also recently provided
the Council with information on an investigation into
crimes against peacekeepers of African Union-United
Nations Mission in Darfur and aid workers, as well as
information on all ongoing judicial proceedings. We
will also transmit to the Council information about the
sentences of the court.

All that clearly shows the willingness and ability
of the Sudanese justice system to deliverjustice. It also
serves to highlight the fact that national legal measures
are ongoing in Darfur - in contrast to the briefing and
the report that was presented to the Council.

