Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Today's
Security Council open debate commemorating the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004) provides
an opportunity to reaffirm the need for us as States
Members of the United Nations to fully comply with
our obligations and commitments with regard to the
non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. We believe that international peace and
security will be fully realized only once the world is
free from weapons of mass destruction, from the threat
that they represent and from the risk that they will be
used by armed non-State actors or terrorists.

Resolution 1540 (2004) not only complements
international efforts to achieve disarmament, to ensure
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to strengthen the fight against terrorism, it also
identifies a new threat, namely, the possession of such
weapons, their delivery systems and related materials by
non-State actors or terrorists. We therefore reiterate the
importance of effective compliance with international
legal instruments on weapons of mass destruction
and the implementation of their main pillars, that is,
disarmament, non-proliferation and the promotion
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and chemical
substances.

In compliance with paragraph 4 of the resolution,
which provides for the presentation of reports on
implementation measures adopted or to be adopted
by members, Colombia has submitted three reports on
its national implementation. The most recent report,
submitted in 2013, sets out, among other things, details
of the regulation of radioactive and/or nuclear materials
in Colombia and of its compliance with Security
Council resolutions on that issue.

Resolution 1540 (2004) also establishes that
international cooperation and assistance provided to
States for effective implementation are crucial elements
for prevention. In that context, Colombia has hosted, in
previous years, meetings attended by representatives of
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and various national authorities
in order to deal with priority areas in the physical
protection and management of nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological materials. During the
meetings, national authorities reported on progress in
their implementation of the resolution and noted the
need for cooperation on various areas.

Likewise, with the support of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the backing
of the Stimson Center and the Stanley Foundation,
my country organized in 2012 the a seminar for the
Andean Community States on resolution 1540 (2004).
Its objective was to discuss national and regional
compliance with the resolution among representatives
of the Andean countries and a select Panel of Experts,
as well as to explore the possibility of assistance and
international cooperation to strengthen capacity in that
area.

As a result of those two workshops, Colombia
prepared, in coordination with its main partner in
that regard, the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), a national action plan, which
included cooperation guidelines for strengthening
its national capacity in implementing resolution 1540
(2004). My country plans to hold an event to launch the
national plan in cooperation with CICTE and the 1540
Committee in the second half of this year.

That activity will bring together Government
authorities with jurisdiction in the matter and possible
contributors and will seek to reiterate the importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the responsibility ofnational
institutions for its effective implementation. In the
same way, the event will seek to raise the awareness of
national institutions on the clear and concrete benefits
of implementing the resolution and to inform the
international community of national efforts to develop
and strengthen institutional implementation capacities.

The role of the national police has been considerable,
given that it has achieved progress in establishing a
response unit on weapons of mass destruction to deal in
a timely and effective way with criminal acts involving
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical agents.
The unit received support from the Governments of
Canada, through the Royal Canadian Mounted Police,
and the United States, through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, as well as from international bodies, such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in training personnel on identifying and responding to
incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.

My country sees nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation as part of a comprehensive process
towards general and complete disarmament in all its
aspects. Hence the importance for all bodies of the
United Nations, within their respective competencies,
and the international community to resolutely commit
themselves to achieving concrete goals, such as the
early entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty,
stronger implementation of the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

