Mrs. Hailey (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, and Italy for your leadership on
this matter. We also thank all the briefers for their very
informative reports.

We want to extend a special thanks to the Secretary-
General for his strong condemnation of reports of
African migrants being sold as slaves in Libya. To see
the pictures of those men being treated like cattle and
to hear the auctioneer describe them as "big strong boys
for farm work" should shock the conscience of us all.
There are few greater violations of human rights and
human dignity than that. There is no place in our world
for slavery. The United States urges a full investigation
of those appalling acts. The perpetrators who are
responsible for those crimes must be held accountable.
That is literally why we are here today - to put a stop
to that barbaric practice and other acts of exploitation
of human beings.

Human trafficking is of concern to the United
States because of its destructive impact on individuals.
But it also has consequences beyond its immediate
victims. The United States was the first country to
bring human trafficking in conflict to the Council's
agenda as an international peace and security issue in
2015. More recently, we have advocated treating far
more human rights abuses and violations as peace and
security issues.

Human trafficking in conflict is a prime example
of the kind of human rights abuses that threaten entire
regions and the world. Terrorist groups like Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) use
human trafficking to support their aggression, fuelling
a cycle of violence that leads to more vulnerable,
displaced people who are then exploited by traffickers.

A young boy named Abdul was kidnapped by Boko
Haram from his village in Nigeria when he was just
14 years old. The terrorists trained him in the use of
heavy weapons and forced him to carry out operations
in which he killed 14 civilians. He was also forced to
gather intelligence on Government forces for Boko
Haram. As far as we have seen, far too often kidnapped
girls and women play a different but no less horrific
role for those terrorist groups. Amal was captured by
ISIS in Libya, along with a group of 71 other migrants.
She testified that her captors separated the men from
the women and the Christians from the Muslims. She
was forced into sexual slavery and kept underground.
She did not see the sun for nine months.
Those are just two examples among many. Across
sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, vast human
displacement due to ongoing conflicts and dire economic
need has resulted in rampant human trafficking.
Violence on the part of State and non-State actors
alike has driven thousands across the region to Europe
in search of a better life, exposing already vulnerable
populations to human traffickers. The children who are
forced into those situations live in conditions that most
of us are blessed not to be able to imagine. For those
who have escaped traffickers, the nightmare is not over.
Their trauma continues long after the victimization
ends. Many will never fully recover.

The United States continues to combat trafficking
in persons by focusing our efforts on prevention,
protection and prosecution.

On prevention, we fund research to better
understand the connection between conflict and
vulnerability to human trafficking, especially in
places most affected by the outflow of refugees from
the Syrian civil war. We also support the International
Organization for Migration's efforts to increase
screening, victim identification and services among
vulnerable populations.

On protection, the United States stresses the critical
need to immediately identify trafficking victims in
conflict situations, and to see that they are provided
with the necessary protection and assistance. As noted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/939), victims
of trafficking by violent extremist groups, such as ISIS
and the Taliban, suffer from particularly severe trauma.
Not only is the United States fully committed to the
complete defeat of those Violent extremist groups, but
we join the Council in our complete commitment to
helping those Victims.

On prosecution, we appreciate the Council's focus on
accountability for human trafficking. In addition to the
impressive efforts of our colleagues at the Department
of Justice to bring perpetrators to justice, we have
elevated our diplomatic engagement on that effort by
highlighting prosecution throughout the Department of
State's 2017 Trafficking in Persons Report.

We believe that a victim-centred approach to the
investigation and prosecution of human trafficking is
critical to the overall success of law enforcement efforts.
That includes commitments by States not to prosecute
trafficking victims for acts committed as a direct result
of being subjected to human trafficking. We are also
committed to partnering with Governments in order to
enhance their capacity to document human trafficking
cases. We welcome the Council's unanimous call for
an investigative mechanism in Iraq to document ISIS'
crimes, including its heinous practice of forcing women
into sexual slavery.

Finally, we are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's focus on improved United Nations
coordination on trafficking of persons in conflict,
as expressed in his report. As armed conflicts and
trafficking in persons continue to converge and
contribute to global peace and security challenges,
the United Nations must also improve coordination to
address that challenge. We join the Secretary-General's
call on remaining Member States to become party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. That would be an important show of the
unified, international front against human trafficking.
We will continue to work with the Council and
partner Governments to end that barbaric assault on
human dignity.

