Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): After
listening to preceding speakers, I obviously wish to
discuss something that might be a bit prickly -
everyone is tempted to do so: the roles that we have
been able to play in the various mediations that we
have encountered. In that context, I wish to commend
the Burkina Faso presidency. I wish to pay tribute to
President Compaore for the eminent role that he has
played and, taking advantage of his absence, to
commend the effectiveness of his mediation on many
occasions, particularly in Cote d'Ivoire and Togo.

I also wish to commend Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
because I perceived the technician and the man of
commitment in his statement. He was quite right when
he spoke of the slowness required to attain an objective
quietly yet swiftly. Bravo! That takes time.

In addition, I welcome what my friend Franco
Frattini said, because the role of women and, in
particular, of civil society - which was also referred
to by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium - is
essential.

Let me say that to give a scientific aspect of
mediation is very praiseworthy, but there is something
intangible, perhaps invented on the fly, in analyzing a
situation, maybe a bit of spontaneity or chance - a
terrible chance to take sometimes. We do not really
know why we make a mistake, but we know we will
make mistakes, but sometimes a door opens and the
chance works out.

I would like to recall that 60 years ago Count
Bernadotte was sent as the first mediator of the United
Nations in order "to promote a peaceful adjustment of
the future status in Palestine", and we are still at it.
These ambitions were stymied, the Council will recall,
by an act of terrorism in which Bernadotte and his
French military counsel Serot were assassinated. Folke
Bernadotte was the first United Nations mediator, but
also the first representative of the United Nations to
give his life in an attempt to find a solution through
dialogue and cooperation. Since then, other well-
known United Nations mediators, and others who were
less well known and were invisible, have also paid - I
should, obviously, cite Dag Hammarskjold and Sergio
Vieira de Mello - and have given their lives for peace.

The beginning we know; the end we do not know;
it belongs to all of us. It is a long movement. Today's
debate allows us to honour those efforts and emphasize
our support for the United Nations role in providing
solutions to difficult problems through negotiations. I
spoke of Palestine, where that is still the case, and we
speak of Darfur, which is always the case.

I wish to emphasize three points very quickly.
Mediation is at the heart of diplomatic and political
activity. Some doubt that. Diplomacy is often
criticized, but the good offices allow us to convey
messages among parties that no longer dialogue.
Mediation offers a solution, a compromise, to move
beyond a hardened situation. Those initiatives are the
instruments, the reflexes, of heads of State and
politicians working for peace. It is not enough; know-
how is needed, personal qualities, the ability to adapt
according to the balance of forces and especially the
ability to remain legitimate and credible - that is the
most difficult thing.
We are all tempted; we have all done it, wanting
to give a small advantage where there should not be
one. We are all tempted to say that one is right and the
other is wrong. That is impossible; it will not work. If I
had the time - which I don't - I would tell the
Council of the temptation we had, the French
presidency of the European Union, a few days ago to
attempt to bring forward a somewhat positive
mediation in the problem in the Caucuses between
Georgia and Russia. That could be an example, one not
achieved, and perhaps it would be a bit pretentious to
emphasize the necessary efforts.

So the establishment of a mediation support unit
and a team of experts in key areas of mediation is
certainly progress, but it is a little bit like humanitarian
affairs. At the start it was a great surprise and
everybody approved it. Then it became like university
teaching, but it is not the same thing.

Further, with regard to humanitarian affairs, I am
sitting next to the Croatian Prime Minister. In
mediation I would say that there is humanitarian
mediation that is necessary to enable humanitarian
access - I am thinking about Dubrovnik, Mr. Prime
Minister. Let us not forget that not everything is
political, or everything is political, in humanitarian
affairs also. Humanitarianism used to be trendy; it is
much less so now, and that is too bad.

There are many examples of United Nations
successes - El Salvador, Cambodia, Namibia,
Guatemala, Burundi, etc. We should emphasize them,
for they are quickly forgotten. When things do not
work, everyone criticizes the United Nations - "What
is the United Nations doing?" When they do work, we
forget everything in a moment. The list of United
Nations mediation successes over the last 20 years,
especially since the end of the cold war, is
considerable. When we criticize the United Nations, we
must also think of its successes.

Regional organizations and actors play a growing
role in mediation. I could emphasize the Organization
of American States in Haiti, the Pacific Islands Forum,
the African Union, etc. Those are essential
organizations. The European Union over the past few
years has also strengthened its mediation in the
Balkans - Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, prisoner
exchanges, Croatia, etc. Everyone knows that story.
More broadly, the European Union is prepared to offers
its support and mediation for the peace process in the
Middle East in particular. The EU believes, somewhat
legitimately, that the association of its 27 countries can
play a political role in some areas and that it is not
used enough. It is used more for giving money than for
mediation. We have experience, and it has not always
been negative.

The second point is that mediation must be part
of a comprehensive approach to a crisis. That is a very
political matter, not just a sixth sense, or tactics. If
there is no comprehensive regional approach - I
would say even almost global - then it is very
difficult to achieve progress. While the distinction
exists, we should not become blocked in a logic of
separation between Chapter VII and Chapter VI. I
would recall that every decision of the Security
Council is mandatory. Sanctions can be a tool for
mediation and conflict settlement, of course, but when
the international community refuses dialogue with
terrorists or war criminals, maybe then sanctions are
necessary. There is a whole debate on that, and
honestly, we have had positive and negative examples.
When some refuse to enter a peace process, they must
be brought to negotiate and to cooperate. For example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are
sanctions against persons who are "impeding
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration".

On the boundaries of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and coercion, peacekeeping operations
maintain a stabilizing presence on the ground, which in
some cases could be mobilized in support of efforts for
dialogue. Because the mandate is in principle the
conclusion of a peace agreement, mediators are often
the messengers of the international community's
reinvestment in a theatre of crisis. Actions must be
taken quickly. In the critical weeks that follow the
announcement of peace, the international community
must support still-fragile national institutions and
allow them to answer the critical needs of the people
and to help exit - an important word - the crisis.

We talked about mediation. We spoke - and I
did not say "interference"; it is forbidden, of course -
of the responsibility to protect. It is not very credible
here, but I will use the term. However, I will tell you
that we do not have enough of a school for crisis
emergence. Nation-building is not really taught. I think
it is necessary, when we talk about mediation, to
emphasize that that should be followed by a
deployment that could last for years, even a generation.
When we begin a mediation effort and that effort is
successful, let us not forget that it is impossible to
determine a real date when the crisis ends.

I wanted to emphasize those three small points.
We should, of course, pursue efforts to better
coordinate the actions of the international community
from the start, the early warning always too late -
and the international community's efforts - always
too late - until the end of the crisis, which is never
really predictable.

 

