Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
sub-paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The report covers
the period from 15 July to 10 December, during which
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations. At the outset, I would like to brief
the Council on the main points of the interim report
of the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2213
(2015), which the Panel submitted to the Council on
2 September.

In the light of the broadened sanctions designation
criteria outlined in resolutions 2174 (2014) and 2213
(2015), the Panel devoted a considerable section of
the report to describing political and security events
and highlighted acts that, in its assessment, fell under
those criteria. While the Panel identified individuals
and groups that consistently refused to engage in
negotiations and put pressure on those wanting to
participate, it also noted that it remained difficult to
distinguish between negotiating tactics and the actions
of deliberate spoilers.

The Panel elaborated on the security and
humanitarian situation in the country during the
reporting period, including on the expansion of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya. The Panel
perceived a continued disregard for the arms embargo
and an increased demand for military materiel in Libya.
It concluded that recent transfers of arms to Libya had
impacted the political transition as well as the security
situation in both the country and the region. Moreover,
the proliferation of arms from Libya to its neighbours
and the wider region had continued, including to
terrorist groups.

The Panel found that the current organization of
Libya's financial system was no longer tenable and
prevented an effective response to the humanitarian
needs in the country. The Panel highlighted that the
Central Bank of Libya was disbursing salaries to
members of armed groups, and elaborated further on
its findings in that regard. As other sources for income
of armed groups, the Panel identified the smuggling of
migrants, oil derivatives and subsidized goods, as well
as profits from foreign currency exchange schemes and
potential gold mining activities.

The Panel noted that the functionality of the
reporting mechanism concerning attempts to illicitly
export crude oil from Libya, introduced by resolution
2146 (2014), suffered from a lack of capacity in the
Libyan Government and the duplication of oil export
structures.

The assets freeze and travel ban sections of the
Panel's report focused on listed individuals, in the
absence of any new sanctions designations. Concerning
the travel ban, the Panel reported that an individual
inscribed on the Committee's sanctions list had
travelled without the prior approval of the Committee.

The Panel presented a total of 16 recommendations,
of which 5 were directed at the Security Council,
6 at the Committee, 3 at Member States and 2 at the
Government of Libya.

On 21 September, the Committee discussed the
interim report and its recommendations. The Panel's
report was generally well received. The main points
emerging in the discussion were concerns about
ongoing armed clashes, the presence of terrorist
groups in Libya, arms flows into and out of Libya,
the financing of armed groups and illicit exports of
crude oil. The Committee agreed to follow up on seven
recommendations, including through a note verbale
to all Member States covering issues relating to the
designation criteria and the arms embargo.

Let me now touch briefly on the activities of the
Committee during the reporting period. On 22 July, the
Committee received a letter from the Panel of Experts
regarding the above-mentioned violation of the travel
ban. In that context, the Committee sent letters to the
two Member States concenred on 5 August.

On 4 September, the Committee received a
notification under sub-paragraph 13 (b) of resolution
2009 (2011) in relation to the arms embargo, on which no
negative decision was taken. However, the Committee
requested additional information from the notifying
Member State.

On 8 October, the Committee received a letter
from the Permanent Representative of Libya, informing
the Committee about a company that was apparently
attempting to access frozen funds in a Member State
using forged documentation.

On 22 October, the Committee dispatched a note
verbale to all Member States drawing their attention to
three recommendations made by the Panel of Experts.
In that context, the Committee encouraged Member
States to share any information on attacks against
foreign missions and the financing of armed groups
by illicit exploitation of natural resources, as well as
to provide certain air traffic control data to the Panel,
upon request and as appropriate. Subsequently, the
Committee received a report from a Member State
containing information on an attack on its diplomatic
mission.
On 20 November, the Committee approved a travel
ban exemption request under sub-paragraph 16 (a) of
resolution 1970 (2011) for humanitarian reasons.

On 22 November, the Committee received a
letter from the Panel of Experts in relation to the
implementation of resolution 2146 (2014) and the
Libyan oil export and financial infrastructure.

On 2 December, the Committee received a request
for guidance on the arms embargo as it relates to the
seizures of embargoed materiel.

During the reporting period, a member of the
Committee placed on hold a draft implementation
assistance notice on the assets freeze measure, which
the Committee had been considering in follow-up to a
proposal by the Panel of Experts in its interim report
submitted on 4 September 2014, pursuant to resolution
2144 (2014).

Also during the reporting period, the Committee
received two requests for delisting, one through the
focal point for delisting and another through a Member
State, both on behalf of individuals whose names
are inscribed on the Committee's sanctions list. The
Committee did not accede to the request submitted
through the focal point, and requested additional
information from the submitting Member State on the
second request.

Furthermore, during the reporting period the
Committee received one implementation report from a
Member State.

