Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his valuable briefing before
the Council today and especially for his vision, which
takes into consideration in a balanced manner all the
dimensions of the issue under discussion today.

The current situation on the Korean peninsula poses
a major challenge to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) regime. Egypt is deeply
concerned at the increasing tensions following recent
developments, which have become one of the gravest
threats to international peace and security.

Egypt reiterates its full support for all efforts
aimed at reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis
involving the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
nuclear programme and at achieving sustainable peace
on the Korean peninsula, including all reunification
efforts. Given the unique historical ties between Egypt
and the peoples of North-East Asia, Egypt calls once
again on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
comply fully with all of its international commitments,
under the relevant Security Council resolutions, to
abandon its nuclear-weapons programme and to rejoin
the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear State,
without delays or preconditions.

Egypt is committed to taking every step necessary
at the national level to implement all Security Council
sanctions related to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. Egypt calls on the international community
and the Security Council to address all challenges to
the NPT comprehensively and without selectivity or
double standards. This is vital if we are to preserve the
credibility and effectiveness of the non-proliferation
regime and the relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 687 (1991), especially in the light of the
continued erosion of the credibility of the regime,
which is the cornerstone of the wider international
security architecture.

The continued erosion of the NPT's credibility
and effectiveness became clear when a certain number
of States decided, with no clear justification, to
prevent the NPT review process from achieving any
objective results by breaking the consensus reached
by the majority of State parties. This was done in the
service of political agendas that run counter to State
party obligations under the NPT and to the unified
message that we should all send, namely, that the
international community is committed to achieving
the universality of the Treaty and to dealing with all
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament challenges
in a comprehensive and balanced manner, without
any selectivity.

In closing, we encourage all parties to exercise
self-restraint and to resume talks to reach a peaceful
settlement as soon as possible. In this regard, we call on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to respond
to the calls made for the resumption of the talks and to
cease any activities that might lead to further tension
or escalation. We also urge all other international
stakeholders to create the conditions necessary for
an agreed settlement that would ensure regional and
international peace and security in a manner consistent
with the goals and principles of the United Nations and
the NPT.

Egypt stands ready to make every possible effort to
support such a peaceful settlement to the crisis and to
maintain peace and security in the region and beyond.

