Mr. Davies (Liberia): We have certainly heard
great remarks today, including the briefing from the
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, Mr. Alexander Zouev.

May Ijoin others and register our regrets for the
sudden death of the Permanent Representative of Cote
D'Ivoire. This has certainly dealt a huge blow to us all.

I would like to reaffirm the words of Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni, and emphasize that today is not only
a historic moment marking the final Security Council
meeting on Liberia and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), but also a moment of pride and joy
for Liberians, particularly considering from where we
have come, where we are and where we are headed as
a nation.

It has been approximately eight years since the
Government of Liberia requested the Secretary-
General in May 2010 to place Liberia on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That request received
a positive response from the President of the Security
Council on 19 July of the same year, and today we are
closing this chapter in a way. To whom can we be grateful
for all the gains we have made over the years? I would
start by thanking God Almighty, and the international
community as a whole. Particularly, we would like to
express our gratitude to the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the European
Union and, of course, all the organs of the United
Nations, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission.
We also want to highlight the support received from
philanthropic individuals and organizations. They all
matter to us. To the people of Liberia, especially our
mothers and sisters, and to UNMIL we pay special
tribute, including Mr. Farid Zarif and his team. We are
grateful. Their resilience has been a beacon of hope.
Without their fortitude, we would not have made this far.

Do we close the chapter today without challenges?
My response to that question is an emphatic no.
Challenges still loom: decentralization, land ownership
and disputes, corruption, violence against women and
girls, a struggling economy and poor infrastructure,
among others. We can assure the Council that those
issues will remain front and centre for the current
Administration. Yet for us to successfully surmount
those challenges, Liberia will need continued and
unflinching support, not just from the traditional
donors but from everyone.

Meanwhile, we would like to seize this moment to
assure all present of our renewed commitment to uphold
the rule of law, in particular free speech ~ which
is currently being enjoyed as before - and good
governance, among others. We have no doubt that the
national development plan, the Strategic Road Map for
National Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation,
the peacebuilding plan, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund
and the pro-poor agenda are invaluable and critical
instruments to ensure that Liberia remains on the right
trajectory, significantly in terms of peace sustenance
and development. Additionally, we will continue to
build on the positives of past leaderships and will
guarantee that no Liberian is left behind.
At this juncture, allow me to pay special tribute
to those who lost their lives as we together strived for
peace in Liberia, including the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers. We salute them all. We will continue to
memorialize their immeasurable contribution to the
peace Liberia enjoys today. May their souls find sweet
and perpetual rest, and may their loved ones find the
courage to move on if they have not.

In conclusion, I would like to make known the
following. Even during our darkest moments and
difficult days, and in our deepest despair, we still
believed that Liberia would rise again. And today
Liberia is rising. The briefing of Mr. Chid Liberty
is an attestation. Liberia, once a beneficiary of a
peacekeeping mission, is now a contributing nation
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your kind
consideration and for this esteemed honour.

The meeting rose at 6pm.
