I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. Consideration by the Security Council of both the political and humanitarian issues in Syria will help us tackle the Syrian issue in a comprehensive manner, while integrating political, security, counter-terrorism, humanitarian and other factors. China welcomes the agreement between the Syrian parties on the time frame and agenda of the fourth and fifth sessions of the Constitutional Committee and is pleased that the fourth session was held smoothly. We look forward to the fifth session, scheduled for January. Those developments are encouraging. China appreciates the unremitting efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen. We hope that the Syrian parties will continue to maintain communication with the Special Envoy and deepen political dialogue on the basis of existing consensus. The international community should create favourable conditions to that end. The work of the Constitutional Committee must remain independent and free from foreign interference. Since March this year, the situation has been generally calm in north- west Syria. We hope the Astana guarantors will strengthen interaction with the United Nations to maintain the ceasefire on the ground. All parties in Syria should actively respect the appeal by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy fora global ceasefire in order to stabilize the security situation in Syria. The main causes of the current security threat in Syria are foreign occupation and terrorist activities. The Syrian Government has the right to defend the country's sovereignty, in-dependence, unity and territorial integrity. The international community cannot stand idly by while terrorists find chances to wreak havoc. The international community should strengthen cooperation, adopt uniform standards and resolutely combat the scourge, in accordance with international law and Security Council resolutions. As noted by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, the Syrian people are facing very harsh conditions. In the past two months, the prices of fuel and bread have doubled, the Syrian pound has depreciated, people have lacked fuel to withstand the cold and 49 per cent of households report poor or borderline levels of food consumption, about which we are seriously concerned. For years, Syria has suffered from conflicts and illegal sanctions, compounded by economic and humanitarian crises. Effective actions must be taken to improve the living conditions of the Syrian people. We welcome the fact that the Syrian Government shoulders its responsibilities by actively advancing agricultural reform, promoting trade cooperation and reviving the domestic economy. At the same time, we call on the international community to provide assistance to Syria to support the country in rebuilding infrastructure, while safeguarding people's livelihoods and fighting the coronavirus disease. China supports the United Nations in continuing humanitarian relief operations through cross-border and cross-line mechanisms, while engaging the participation of the Syrian Government. We have provided Syria with assistance worth approximately $130 million through bilateral and multilateral channels and stand ready to continue to help and support the Syrian people. Last month, China and four other members of the Security Council co-hosted an Arria Formula meeting on unilateral coercive measures. The Secretary General of the Syrian Red Crescent, Mr. Erksoussi, gave a briefing at the meeting. According to him, unilateral coercive measures, especially the economic blockade, have severely hindered the resumption of work and production, the provision of medical supplies and humanitarian operations in Syria, resulting in an ever-larger number of people in need of humanitarian assistance, among whom women, children, internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups suffer the most. We hope that the representatives of certain countries will watch the video of the meeting to learn about the negative impacts of unilateral coercive measures on the Syrian people and determine whether the so-called humanitarian exemption is as effective as they boast. We hope that they can empathize with the Syrian people instead of turning a blind eye to their suffering. China again calls for the immediate lifting of the unilateral coercive measures against Syria to improve the living conditions of the Syrian people and ameliorate the humanitarian crisis. /
