Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish once again to convey to you and
your team my delegation's wish that you will enjoy a
very successful presidency of the Security Council
during the month of November.

I should like first to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for his presence here today and for
the information that he has provided us.

Almost four years after the adoption of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
Uruguay would like to acknowledge the efforts and
the commitment of the signatories and the guarantors
to implement the provisions of the agreement. The
convening of several high-level meetings in the past
few months, including, inter alia, the sixth Ordinary
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, held in Luanda in June, as well as last
week's meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
testify to the validity and the relevance of the provisions
of the Framework agreement, which is both a political
and a diplomatic platform established to tackle the
challenges that loom large over the Great Lakes region.
Despite the aforementioned progress in the
implementation of the agreement, I should like to stress
that the process of achieving lasting peace and security
in the Great Lakes region continues to face major
political, security and humanitarian challenges. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/840) rightly
indicates, the key here is the effective neutralization
of the armed groups that are threatening stability. In
this context, I would stress the fragile security situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is threatened principally by the actions of
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and
the Allied Democratic Forces.

The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also a source of deep concern. Several
countries of the region, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, are confronted with grave
humanitarian issues, with millions of displaced persons
whose most basic humanitarian needs remain unmet.

On the political front, the dialogues launched in
certain countries of the region have not yet yielded any
significant results. Nonetheless, we would reiterate
how important it is that in all cases the political
dialogue be open, inclusive and peaceful; bring
together all stakeholders; and guarantee protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. We must not
tire of reiterating that dialogue is the only option for
resolving differences.

Against that backdrop, Uruguay calls on the
Governments of the region and the international
community as a whole to pool their efforts to foster
political and social stability in the Great Lakes region,
with strict adherence to the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of neighbouring countries and
a renewed commitment not to tolerate, or provide
assistance and support of any kind, to the armed groups
that are active in the region. They must also ensure the
protection of civilians and respect for the human rights
of all inhabitants without distinction.

Uruguay takes note of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's letter dated
4 October 2016 (S/2016/89l) on the strengthening ofthe
role ofthe Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region. On
this point, we would like to indicate that my delegation
deems several of the recommendations therein to be
extremely relevant and deserving of due consideration
by the Security Council.

Finally, given that today is 2 November, the
International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against
Journalists, we would like to convey a message of
solidarity and express our appreciation for the work
done by journalists, especially that which provides us
with information on conflicts and political processes.
A great deal of that information, given the transparency
and passionate sincerity with which journalists carry
out their work, is in most cases very useful to the work
of the Security Council.

