We thank the briefers for their presentations. Estonia welcomes the opportunity to discuss the issue of cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). Regional cooperation can be a valuable tool in maintaining international peace and security. Estonia, also as an observer to the OIF, welcomes the work of the OIF, which helps to enhance the goals of the work of the United Nations, including the Security Council, consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations. We also welcome the attention given to multilateralism and multilingualism. We are aware that the OIF today is not only an organization of States that have the French language in common, but also an association of States that shares the same universal values as the United Nations. We would particularly like to commend the work of the OIF aimed at promoting democracy, the rule of law, human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of women, girls and young people and their active participation in society. Estonia also recognizes OIF's contribution to crisis resolution, peacebuilding and the development of cooperation in the peacekeeping sector, including strengthening the participation of francophone contingents in peacekeeping operations. The access and the ability of peacekeepers to communicate with the local population in the francophone countries is a powerful tool for building trust and, through that, the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping. We further note the important collaboration between the OIF and the United Nations in the field of electoral monitoring and assistance. Estonia commends the OIF for being present in countries that have requested and allowed the electoral monitoring missions to provide the necessary assistance and support. In that context, we have noted OIF's quick reaction to the recent developments in Mali, including its decision to suspend Mali's membership of the organization. We recognize that, at the same time, the OIF has aimed to maintain cooperation that would help the country's civilian population and a transition to democracy. Looking ahead, we anticipate our participation in the OIF summit in Tunis in 2021, to be held under the theme "Connectivity in diversity: the digital vector of development and solidarity in the French-speaking world". Estonia is committed to sharing its experience and good practices in e-governance through creative digital solutions with the countries of the Francophonie. We need a digital future protected by international rules, while preserving our green planet. Finally, we reaffirm the commitment to working together with the OIF in the implementation of its multifaceted mandate, including in relation to the maintenance of peace and security in cooperation with the United Nations.
