Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I warmly
welcome Mr. Bernard Kouchner's coming to brief us in
the Council. Some major developments have taken
place in the region since he last briefed us in
September. His update and views are therefore timely
for the Council. His briefing this morning was very
thorough, well balanced and with a statesmanlike
perspective. I thank him for that. The brief that he has
shared with us is also very much appreciated.

I would like to make the following points.

First, holding of elections. We welcome the
holding of the elections in the municipalities in
Kosovo. We particularly congratulate Mr. Kouchner
and his team in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) on the
extensive and painstaking preparations for the
elections. I remember very well our visit to observe the
registration of voters in the outlying areas in Kosovo
during the Security Council mission there earlier this
year. Mr. Kouchner was able to generate sufficient
confidence and hope in the Kosovars for their
transition into an era of democratic tradition. By
holding these elections, he has carried out one of the
most significant steps in the mandate given to him by
the Security Council.

Second, participation. The wide participation in
the electoral process of candidates as well as of voters
shows how enthusiastically the Kosovars participated
in the electoral process. The outreach programmes of
UNMIK, like the town hall meetings, proved effective,
having a turnout of more than 80 per cent at the polls.
The skilful conduct of the process, with virtually no
violence and no provocations, deserves credit by the
international community.

Third, outcome. The outcome of the elections are
important indicators of how the Kosovars View their
future. That the majority of the Kosovars are inclined
to place trust in moderate leadership only underscores
the aspirations of the population for peace. Although
there are still deep scars from the wounds of the recent
past, still many preferred to look forward to a new era
for Kosovo rather than seek ways for revenge.

Fourth, participation of Serbs. We regret the
failure of the Serbs living in Kosovo to participate in
the elections. There was nothing to be gained by
boycotting participation in a democratic process. It is
true that many of them are still waiting as refugees to
return to their pre-war homes. Choosing their own
leaders would have facilitated the process of return and
settlement.
Fifth, change in the leadership in Belgrade. This
obviously has generated mixed feelings in the area.
Rather than welcoming wholeheartedly the changes in
Belgrade and looking forward with hope, many in
Kosovo view the developments with uneasiness, and
probably with apprehension. On the one hand, there are
now greater expectations that many long-standing
problems in Kosovo will find greater opportunities for
early solution in the new setting. On the other, the
Kosovars may view these developments as a setback
for their aspirations.

In the context of the elections in Kosovo that
have taken place and the new leadership in Belgrade, it
may be time to ask how the Kosovars and their leaders
view the changed political climate and renewed
international attention to Belgrade. What is the
possibility that the problems associated with refugee
return and of detained and missing persons will be
solved with the change in the leadership in Belgrade?

With the elections over in Kosovo, UNMIK may
initiate the process of gradual and well-phased transfer
of some administrative responsibilities to the newly
elected municipal leaders. What is the time frame
envisaged for such transfer, and to what extent are
UNMIK's responsibilities expected to be relieved upon
assumption of responsibilities by the elected leaders?

We are pleased to learn from Mr. Kouchner's
briefing that the basic structure of all the municipalities
will be in place by the end of this year. This is a good
step forward.

We agree fully with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General when he says in the circulated
briefing note:

"For Kosovo, we will require an interim
constitutional document to govern relations
between the various levels of democratically
elected authority. UNMIK will also have to
define Kosovo's Central Authority without
prejudice to final political solutions for the
region."

In conclusion, we again congratulate Mr.
Kouchner and the personnel in UNMIK on their
dedication and efforts in successfully organizing and
conducting the municipal elections in Kosovo.

