Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to warmly thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
their very enlightening briefings.

The situation of the Rohingyas in Rakhine state
remains a topic of serious concern for France, as our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-
Yves Le Drian, expressed to the Burmese authorities
during his visit to Burma on 20 November. The facts
are known. They have been recalled. Since 25 August,
640,000 Rohingyas have had to flee from Burma
to Bangladesh. Still today, hundreds of Rohingyas
continue to flee to Bangadesh. Hundreds of villages
have been burned. Systematic and organized human
rights violations have been reported by the Office ofthe
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other actors on the ground. In that context, I wish
to make three main comments.

The first relates to the implementation of
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, adopted just
a month ago. Faced with a situation of - it should
be recalled - ethnic cleansing, the Security Council
mobilized itself and expressed itself in very strong
terms. That text, which is a road map in the light ofwhich
the Security Council is to assess the progress made,
acknowledges the initial steps taken by the Burmese
authorities and sets out very specific demands in order
to try and alleviate the suffering of the Rohingyas.

The agreement reached on 23 November between
Burma and Bangladesh on the issue of the return of
refugees is a first step towards providing for the safe,
dignified and voluntary return ofthe Rohingya refugees
to Burma once conditions allow. However, significant
progress still needs to be made and, to that end, it is
essential that the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees be included in those discussions and,
in particular, fully participate in the announced joint
working group.

Given the situation, we believe, particularly on the
basis of the criteria established by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, that the conditions
needed for the return of the refugees do not yet exist.
We are following the development of the situation very
closely. In order to establish the conditions conducive
for the return, it is essential that measures be undertaken
in Rakhine to promote reconstruction, reconciliation
and respect for human rights.

Progress in the humanitarian area is also
insufficient. The access granted to the World Food
Programme is the first positive step, which has made it
possible to help those who remained in Rakhine state,
but it is urgent to broaden that access in order to ensure
full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
populations who need it.

In the realm of human rights the testimonies that
continue to reach us are very disturbing. Violations
continue in full impunity, while neither the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights nor
the fact-finding mission has access to Rakhine state.
Some acts being carried out systematically in Rakhine
state could amount to crimes against humanity. At
the special session of the Human Rights Council on
5 December, High Commissioner Zeid Al-Hussein
cited testimonies about young girls who had been
raped or burned, had their throats cut or been gang-
raped to death. Incitement to hatred on the basis of
ethnicity is designed, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General eloquently put it, to dehumanize
communities such as the Rohingya and to continue
to fuel the root causes of violence. We must work
urgently to establish serious measures to enable us to
investigate violations and prosecute the perpetrators in
order to put an end to this atmosphere of impunity. It
will be crucial to shine a bright light on all of these
very serious accusations, including through the Human
Rights Council's fact-finding mission, which must be
allowed to visit Rakhine state.

Lastly, with regard to implementing the
recommendations of Kofi Annan's Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, the establishment
of an advisory committee of experts that includes
international eminent persons just announced by
the Government of Myanmar should enable regular
and rigorous monitoring of the measures that have
been undertaken. France encourages the Myanmar
authorities to continue their efforts in that area.

My second comment is on the vulnerability of
refugees and internally displaced persons to various
kinds of sexual exploitation and violence. I would
like to once again thank Ms. Pramila Patten warmly
for her presence here today and for her testimony. The
violations she has described are particularly alarming,
and we must do all we can to protect the refugees and
the displaced wherever they are and whenever they
want to return home. We are very concerned about
the information from the International Organization
for Migration on the sexual exploitation and abuse
even of young girls and children, which is completely
unacceptable. We also condemn the early and forced
marriages of young girls, some barely 10 years old, that
are going on as we speak.

My third and last comment relates to the importance
of ensuring that the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, remains fully prepared to act
on this issue. While we should welcome the initial
measures undertaken by the Burmese authorities,
these commitments must now be translated into
action. In each of the areas mentioned in the Security
Council's presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) of
last month, much progress still remains to be made.
We should therefore make the mandate of the special
adviser or envoy proposed in the presidential statement
and in the resolution adopted a few weeks ago in the
Third Committee fully operational. With appropriate
resources and means, the special adviser could
strengthen follow-up on this issue in the Secretariat and
on efforts to work with the Burmese authorities.

France would like to reiterate its full support to the
Burmese democratic transition and to the efforts of the
Government led by Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi to advance
the rule of law in Burma. Given the major humanitarian
and human rights tragedy in Arakan, we will continue
to insist, particularly in the Security Council, on the
three complementary issues that must be urgently
addressed - ending the violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya, providing full, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to the populations in
need, and facilitating the refugees' voluntary return
when the necessary conditions are established in line
with international standards. France will also continue
its dialogue with the Burmese authorities on the subject
during the visit to Burma of our Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs.

