Mrs. Raje (India): Even though the ministerial
meeting proposed by the Secretary-General will be held
next year, I welcome this opportunity to speak to the
Council about Africa, a continent with which we in India
have close and historical bonds. The Secretary-General's
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, issued
in April 1998, made a series of recommendations to the
United Nations system and to Member States. A year has
elapsed and it is time to take stock, as the Secretary-
General has done in his progress report.

As we said last year, most of the problems that the
Secretary-General identified in his report are outside the
mandate of the Security Council to address. However, since
in this debate we will look at the totality of the challenges
facing Africa - if only to set the problems of conflict and
security in perspective - I will refer also to those issues
highlighted in the report where responsibility for action lies
elsewhere than with the Council.

We note with interest the modest, practical steps that
the report suggests in the section on responding to
situations of conflict. We would all agree that it is always
sensible, as a general principle not limited to Africa, to
avoid rival mediation efforts; sometimes, this has led to
tensions between the mediators which feed back into the
conflict. Contact groups and special conferences may be
helpful, though by definition they become useful - and
should be set up - only when the parties to a conflict are
prepared to talk.

We have participated in the Interlaken process, and
would be interested to see targeted sanctions work. We
believe that the focus of the exercise should be to lessen
the impact of the sanctions on the innocent, in Africa and
elsewhere, rather than on easing the administrative burden
for the international banks through which financial
sanctions are imposed. A related but crucial point needs to
be made here: as one of the reports (E/ 1999/ 16) submitted
to the Economic and Social Council earlier this year noted,
Africa has suffered massive capital flight, estimated at
about $22 billion between 1982 and 1991; these outflows,
which have grown even larger since then, represent the
fruits of corruption and have been invested in banks in
developed countries. The Secretary-General's report calls
for steps to check corruption in Africa, but as the report to
the Economic and Social Council made clear, Africa
urgently and rather desperately needs these funds back, and
to achieve that aim it needs the help of the foreign
Governments where these banks are based. Corruption
cannot be staunched at source if bribes can be safely
squirrelled away abroad.

We note that the Secretariat is working with African
States to make the violation of Security Council arms
embargoes a criminal offence under national legislation.
This is an interesting tack to take, but since most of the
arms used in African conflicts are made on other
continents and exported there, quite often in the full
knowledge that they will be used by those on whom
embargoes have been placed, any legislation that African
States enact will be ineffective unless there are equally
strict legal checks in the arms-exporting countries.

On reducing arms purchases to below 1.5 per cent
of gross domestic product, the report notes that many
countries in Africa were of the view that this would be
difficult to implement. Again, almost by definition, this is
not a figure that can be given general sanctity.

We are surprised that the report is silent on
mercenaries. It is well established that mercenaries are
sustaining several ongoing conflicts, have committed
horrible violations of human rights and humanitarian law
and actively market their services to antagonists in Africa.
Most of them come from countries outside the continent
that have recently pruned their armies. Again, this is a
problem for Africa whose solution does not lie in African
hands.

The other important omission is terrorism, which
has bedeviled Africa and African security as it has many
other parts of the world. At the recent Organization of
African Unity (OAU) summit in Algiers, African leaders
pledged themselves to work for an international and
global convention for the struggle against all forms of
terrorism. We welcome and support this call.

We welcome international efforts to strengthen
Africa's capacity for peacekeeping. The international
conference on United Nations peacekeeping, which we
hosted in New Delhi in March this year, had a major
emphasis on peacekeeping in Africa. We made a special
effort to ensure wide African participation, and trust that
those who attended found the experience useful. We have
contributed to almost every peacekeeping operation
mounted by the United Nations in Africa, and will remain
committed to peacekeeping efforts there.

 

African peacekeeping capacities are being developed,
but this should not become an excuse for the Security
Council to abdicate its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security and refuse to set up
peacekeeping operations in Africa on the basis that they
would require extra resources, involve physical risks to
peacekeepers or could be long-drawn-out. All regions of the
world should be dealt with equally, and equally
transparently, and Africa deserves not just the Council's
attention in debates like these, but the prompt dispatch of
United Nations peacekeeping operations whenever they are
required.

Most of the points made in the section on
humanitarian assistance recapitulate the recommendations
made in the recent report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957). I
shall say only that in a statement to the Council earlier this
month (S/PV.4046 (Resumption 1)) we explained in detail
why we believe that those recommendations need much
closer examination and should not be accepted as a basis
for action.

In general, anything the Security Council does for
Africa is likely to be insufficient unless there are concrete
international efforts to address its underlying problems
effectively; as the Secretary General has said, development
is an essential condition for the maintenance of peace and
security. How has Africa done over the last year? The
figures we have from the United Nations system are
confusing.

The annual summary of the economic and social
situation in Africa submitted this year to the Economic and
Social Council put the figure for gross domestic product
growth in 1998 at 3.3 per cent, up from 2.9 per cent in
1997, the highest growth rate of any region in the world; it
reported that the 33 African least developed countries
increased their growth rate from 2.4 per cent in 1997 to
4.1 per cent in 1998. This is heartening, but the World
Economic and Social Survey 1999, prepared by the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, claims that
African growth has declined from 2.7 per cent in 1997 to
2.5 per cent in 1998. We hope that United Nations
assessments will not vary so widely; it becomes difficult
otherwise for Member States to judge what the objective
situation is.
Also, we need to break down the problem if we are
to make meaningful recommendations; western, eastern and
southern Africa have had a particularly difficult time, but
within those regions, according to the Survey, countries in
the CFA franc zone have done rather well, some growing
by 4.9 per cent in 1998 and others by 5.5 per cent. It is
clear that we need to address in other forums the specific
needs of countries and subregions in Africa and help them
craft appropriate solutions based on local endowments.

We are disappointed that section III of the report, on
building a durable peace and promoting economic growth,
considers aspects of good governance in far more detail
than it does practical measures to promote growth.
Effective, transparent and accountable governance
responsive to the needs and priorities of the governed is
important, but linking assistance and investment to
arbitrary norms not related to economic parameters will
promote neither human rights nor prosperity. In contrast,
the report to the Economic and Social Council clearly
establishes the close relationship between income and
well-being. Eight of the 10 best performers in the Borda
rankings in Africa were also among the top 10 in terms
of per capita income, countering that claim often made
that human development is not necessarily dependent on
income growth.

The report urges African countries to create a
positive environment for investment, including through
greater attention to human resources and public health,
but other reports from the United Nations system fill out
the picture. On investment, the World Investment Report,
published by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, pointed out last year that foreign direct
investment in Africa yielded greater returns than that in
any other region. That report also found that, above all,
foreign investors looked for African countries with an
open, well-regulated macroeconomic environment; the
recommendation in the Secretary-Generals report that
African countries should create an enabling environment
to attract investment is therefore a sound one.

However, the World Investment Report also found
that almost all foreign direct investment into Africa was
sunk into the quick exploitation of natural resources. In
other words, if two African countries had natural
resources, such as oil or gas, of immediate interest to
foreign investors, the one with the more stable
environment would stand a better chance of getting the
investment. However, those African countries that do not
have commercially attractive natural resources, no matter
how well they are governed or how stable their
macroeconomic environments may be, are unlikely to get
substantial foreign investment. Since these are the
countries that often need foreign direct investment most,
there is a clear disjunction between need and supply,

 

which needs to be addressed. Across the continent, to
illustrate this point, industrial-sector growth, which has
driven development in all regions, has declined from
3.8 per cent in 1997 to 3.2 per cent in 1998, largely
because investments are absent.

Even more telling, the Economic Commission for
Africa has reminded us that the gap that needs to be
financed by external resources if Africa is to reduce poverty
is 9 per cent of African gross domestic product, which is
almost the same figure as for official development
assistance. In most developing economies that have taken
off, that gap was hardly ever more than between 2 per cent
and 3 per cent. The figure for Africa demonstrates the
qualitatively different nature of African need; the decline in
net inflows and the limited scope of foreign interest are
therefore even more disturbing.

On public health, the report refers to the challenges of
both HIV/AIDS and malaria, again perhaps without spelling
out the magnitude of the problem Africa faces. The World
Health Report 1999, published by the World Health
Organization, describes the challenge of malaria in Africa
as a social and economic development issue, not just a
health concern, and it also goes on to say that because the
adverse economic impact of malaria in Africa has been
estimated to be greater than 1 per cent of gross domestic
product, it could be considered a cause, and not just a
consequence, of underdevelopment. Determined
international action to eradicate malaria could thus add at
least 1 per cent to African gross domestic product; this is
far more doable than putting an arbitrary cap, for instance,
on defence spending.

On AIDS, the latest World Health Organization
figures for Africa are 54 million infected, and the Human
Development Report published by the United Nations
Development Programme informs us that the cost of the
medication developed by Glaxo Wellcome has come down
from $10,000 to $3,000 per patient per annum, which is
still well beyond African means. If all 54 million Africans
are to be treated, the cost to the continent per annum could
well be $162 billion. Where is this money to come from?
This touches upon the general question of neglect and non-
application in the developing world of cutting-edge
scientific and technological research in the areas of health
and upon the need for urgently exploring innovative ways
of financing the application of this research, particularly in
Africa.

India has contributed to the best of its ability to the
promotion of peace and sustainable development in Africa.
We attach the highest priority to economic cooperation
with Africa. A primary instrument of our technical
cooperation with Africa has been the Indian Technical
and Economic Cooperation Programme, which has trained
some 20,000 African nationals so far in fields including
banking, foreign trade, hydrology and water resources,
communications, electronics, satellite imaging, agriculture,
small and medium industry, software, renewable energy
sources and the like. Over 15,000 African students study
in India. We provide 1,350 training slots every year in
our best educational institutions, of which nearly
60 per cent are reserved for nominees from Africa. The
Programme also implements a variety of technical
assistance projects in Africa. Training and mutual
cooperation in human rights, in the conduct of elections,
in parliamentary procedures and in public sector
administration are important components of our
multifaceted relationship.

Several Indian companies have established joint
ventures in Africa, infusing capital, upgrading technology
levels and promoting job creation. Indian industry is
involved in a significant way in the development of
African infrastructure in sectors such as railways. In 1998,
we set up a revolving fund for Africa for promoting trade,
investment and technology sharing, as well as for
revitalizing our bilateral trade with Africa and for
investing in Africa's development.

Africa will remain the highest priority for us as a
partner in cooperation. We hope it will be a priority for
the United Nations system as well.

