Ms. Ramirez (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Republic of Argentina is pleased that the
Security Council has taken the initiative of considering the
problems of demining in peace-keeping operations.

In the View of my delegation, this debate takes place
in the framework of the various bilateral and multilateral
initiatives taken by many States, including the Republic of
Argentina, aimed at eradicating anti-personnel mines from
the face of the Earth.

We consider very timely the Secretary-General's
drawing attention to this issue in the "Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace". We are aware that the Security
Council, through its presidential statement of 22 February
1995, reiterated its profound concern at the terrible
humanitarian problems caused by the presence of mines
for the population of the countries in which they have
been laid, stressing the need to step up removal activities
with the assistance of the international community.

There are at present some 100 million active mines
in the world, scattered throughout more than 60 countries,
although some estimates give a considerably higher
figure. Every month anti-personnel mines kill or wound
about 60 people, 87 per cent of whom are non-
combatants. Argentine personnel in peace-keeping
operations have also suffered from the deadly effects of
such mines. In 1993, Captain Jose Rojas lost his life in
Croatia and Sergeant Sergio Valla was maimed when
their vehicle ran over an anti-tank mine.

We must add to the humanitarian consequences of
mines the fact that they also constitute a considerable
obstacle to the economic development of the peoples, as
vast expanses of land cannot be used for agricultural or
industrial purposes. At the regional level, and with the
aim of trying to eradicate the 1 million mines in Central
America, Argentina has actively supported the
Organization of American States demining programmes in
Nicaragua, Honduras and Costa Rica.

For all these reasons, and firmly convinced of the
need to take specific action in this field, the Republic of
Argentina, through decree 435 of 1995, adopted resolution
48/75 K, which had been adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 December 1993, suspending the
exportation, sale or transfer of all types of anti-personnel
mines, without exception, for five years.

The Republic of Argentina strongly and
unambiguously maintains that the proliferation and the
indiscriminate use of anti-personnel mines constitute
problems whose very existence alone justifies that priority
consideration be given to this item. In this context my
country has carried out a series of actions designed to
reverse this situation, in the framework both of the United
Nations and of competent regional organizations.

Argentina is therefore a party to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
This Convention was signed by Argentina in 1981, and on

 

2 October 1995 my country deposited the relevant
instrument of ratification.

The Republic of Argentina has taken part in the three
sessions of the Review Conference of that Convention. It
took part as an observer State in the first two sessions and
as a State party in the third session. In that context, we
hailed the adoption of the new Protocol IV of the
Convention, relating to blinding laser weapons, and the
amended Protocol II on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices.

With regard to measures adopted by my Government
in the United Nations context, the Republic of Argentina
has offered qualified personnel to the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs office of mine clearance policies and
activities, for possible participation in each of the stages of
the mine-clearance activities undertaken by the
Organization. The Republic of Argentina views with
satisfaction the response of the international community to
this serious problem. The presence of 100 States and 60
organizations at the International Meeting on Mine
Clearance, held in Geneva from 5 to 7 July 1995, shows
the will of States to increase their political and financial
support to halt the proliferation of this scourge. In this
context, my country announced that its contribution for
clearing mines from the Malvinas Islands should be treated
as its contribution to the Voluntary Trust Fund established
under General Assembly resolution 48/7.

We also took part in the international conference on
mine clearance technology, which took place in
Snekkersten, Denmark from 2 to 4 July 1996. That
conference was organized with the support and cooperation
of the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Government of Argentina has traditionally
co-sponsored every resolution dealing with this problem in
the General Assembly.

I should like to emphasize that my country, which is
committed to the objective of a ban on the use of anti-
personnel mines, has since 1993 provided a group of
engineers to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission (UNIKOM) who are entrusted with the job of
clearing the explosives and mines laid during the Gulf war.
This unit of engineers has been carrying out its hazardous
mission in the demilitarized zone between Iraq and Kuwait.
These operations are being conducted efficiently thanks to
the cooperation of military observers and the inhabitants
themselves, who very often report the presence of explosive
devices. However, it has not been possible to avoid
accidents or the loss of children's lives as a result of the
explosion of military equipment.

The Government of Argentina is also considering the
possibility of taking part in the demining programme
conducted by the United Nations Office for Humanitarian
Assistance Coordination in Angola.

On the bilateral front, the Republic of Argentina has
made an offer to the United Kingdom to take charge of
the removal of mines planted in the Malvinas Islands
during the 1982 conflict.

In recent years, the Security Council has become
more aware of the specific problem represented by anti-
personnel mines during and after armed conflicts. We
believe that the mandates of peace-keeping operations
should be more specific on this issue. We further believe
that it would be useful for the Secretary-General's reports
to be more explicit on the kinds of demining tasks that
the United Nations, through its various agencies, is
carrying out in the field. In this way coordination between
such agencies and Member States would be improved.

We are convinced that this timely debate will
contribute to greater awareness on the part of the
international community of the scourge these mines
represent and will allow for renewed cooperation in
demining between our Organization and its Member
States.

In conclusion, the Argentine delegation would like
to say that it agrees with the delegations of New Zealand
and Chile that it would be useful for the Security Council,
through a presidential statement, to require a review of
mine-clearance activities in peace-keeping operations.

