Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation voted in favour of this resolution with very
great satisfaction. It is a resolution marking the fulfilment
of the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL). After Cambodia and after
Mozambique, this peace-keeping operation is concluding
with indisputable success.
The United Nations has enabled an end to be put to
the civil war in El Salvador. It has contributed to bringing
the parties closer together, to creating confidence between
them and to implementing the Peace Accords signed in
Chapultepec. The United Nations operation had several
aspects. Beyond restoring peace and disarming the parties,
the United Nations devoted itself to establishing
institutions and laying down rules for democracy,
enabling a revolutionary organization to become an
opposition political party respectful of democratic voting
procedures. The United Nations also made it possible to
train a National Civil Police - a measure that has been
viewed as essential in all the new peace-keeping
operations. Finally, we must welcome the importance
given to respect for human rights. The society in the
country has been profoundly changed and El Salvador's
organization last year of an international conference on
the culture of peace demonstrates the far-reaching
influence of the action carried out there by the United
Nations. My delegation pays tribute here to all the
Secretary-General's Representatives and to the entire
ONUSAL team.

While the mandate is indisputably ending on a note
of success, it nevertheless remains true that several
provisions of the peace plan remain to be implemented
and thereby contribute to the lasting stabilization of the
situation. This task devolves primarily on the parties, and
my Government, which welcomes the recent progress in
this area, calls upon the parties to speed up the
application of the Peace Accords, and particularly of
certain critical points: the land-transfer programme, the
reintegration of ex-combatants, the reform of the judicial
system and the strengthening of the police.

The peace-keeping operation is ending the day after
tomorrow, 30 April, but not the involvement of the
United Nations. El Salvador is now embarking upon a
critical phase of the consolidation of peace, and the
establishment of a small team entrusted with verifying the
implementation of elements of the Peace Accords which
have not yet been carried out and with providing its good
offices is a good measure to ensure the transition.
Moreover, United Nations agencies also have a pivotal
role to play in the country's development.

It remains for me only to call upon the Salvadorans
to take full advantage of the opportunity provided them

 

by the United Nations action to lead their country on the
road of democracy and sustainable development.

