Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Stephen O'Brien for his briefing. As Stephen O'Brien
has described, the humanitarian situation in Syria is
devastating. The numbers verge on incomprehensible,
although we know that for Syrians, their ordeal is all
too real. And as Mr. O'Brien has confirmed, despite
the improvements that had been made in recent months
in respect of access, the overall humanitarian situation
is worse. This humanitarian catastrophe is not just a
product of indifference by the parties and their backers
to the suffering of the Syrian people; in many cases, it
is deliberate, and humanitarian access is manipulated
for military advantage. Hospitals are routinely
targeted. The fight against terrorism is used to justify
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and any group that
opposes the regime.
It is completely unacceptable that siege and
starvation continue to be employed as methods
of warfare. The recent closure of Castello road is
particularly concerning, putting up to 300,000 more
civilians in eastern Aleppo at risk of starvation. In this
regard, we fully endorse Stephen O'Brien's call for a
48-hour humanitarian pause in and around Aleppo.
It is also unacceptable that civilian neighbourhoods
are being shelled and medical facilities bombed. In
many cases, it appears they are deliberately targeted,
in blatant Violation of international law and resolution
2286 (2016). As we have heard, five medical clinics were
hit in Aleppo province on 24 July alone. The growing
humanitarian situation on the Jordan-Syria border is
also of great concern. Over 100,000 people are now in
need of ongoing assistance. It is a bleak picture, bleaker
still because every bomb and blockade takes us farther
away from the political solution to this brutal conflict.

There has been progress. We acknowledge Syria's
positive response to the United Nations June and July
plans. We welcome the efforts of the United States and
Russia, as humanitarian co-chairs of the International
Syria Support Group, to get aid to the people who need
it. We acknowledge the extensive effort that Russia has
been making on the ground to facilitate access and to
ensure that agreements made by the Syrian regime are
kept. While the level of approvals in July represents a
slight improvement, it still provides for assistance to
less than 50 per cent of Syrians in need, and that is if all
the aid gets through, which it regularly does not.

Too often, we see the Syrian Government using
administrative obstacles to block humanitarian access.
We agree with the Secretary-General that humanitarian
access must not be a one-off or occasional event.
It cannot be limited to particular segments of the
population or to specific kinds of aid. It is not a favour or
a bargaining chip for negotiations - it is an obligation
under international law. There are 5.47 million people
living in besieged, hard-to-reach and priority cross-
line locations. Providing intermittent, symbolic access
to a few of these areas each month is not enough. We
call on the Syrian Government to fully implement the
July plan based on the needs assessment conducted by
the United Nations. The continued removal of certain
items, including medical supplies, is unacceptable.
What possible justification can there be for removing
paediatric kits and diarrhoeal disease sets from
convoys?

We also call on all parties to the conflict to take
all feasible measures to protect civilians, as required
under international humanitarian law and reaffirmed
in various Council resolutions including resolution
2258 (2015) in order to safeguard the lives of all
civilians living in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria.
We all need to pressure the parties and their backers
to prioritize ending the suffering of the Syrian people
over their own narrow aims. This means getting the
cessation of hostilities back on track, ending the brutal
and cynical attacks on civilians and hospitals, and
getting humanitarian assistance to the millions who
need it. Tangible improvements on the ground are a
humanitarian imperative. They can also help create
the space and momentum needed for a successful
resumption of intra-Syrian talks and progress towards
the sustainable political resolution to this conflict that
the Syrian people so desperately need.

