Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia was unable to support today's resolution 2507 (2020). We sincerely appreciate the penholder's efforts; however, not all of our arguments were taken into account in the drafting the text of the resolution. We advocated for a greater easing of the arms embargo. Unfortunately, neither Bangut's official appeal nor our position were duly considered. The arms embargo on the Central African Republic may have played a positive role in the early stages, but now it is effectively an obstacle to the rearming of the national army and security forces - the very institutions that bear the primary responsibility for upholding the peace and security of their own citizens. Meanwhile, the saboteurs of the peace process among the armed groups remain unhindered in replenishing their stockpiles of weapons through smuggling. Simplifying procedures for the Central African Republic to obtain certain categories of armed vehicles for its own needs, as provided for by the present resolution, is another small step in supporting the Central African Republic. However, we must not forget that the legitimate Central African authorities have urged the Council to fully lift the arms embargo, and in our view they have every reason to do so. We aretherefore determined to further review the Security Council's restrictive sanctions in July with a view to their easing and, ultimately, their full lifting. Sanctions are one of the many important tools in the Council's toolkit to stimulate the peace process and political dialogue, and they should be used with the full measure of responsibility and caution in order to avoid causing harm. Moreover, any Security Council restriction must evolve and adapt in line with the changing dynamics on the ground. We wish to assure the Council that Russia will continue to provide assistance to the Central African Republic, both in its process of national reconciliation and in the context of strengthening its security forces, with a view to normalizing the situation in the country and reaching a sustainable settlement to the protracted armed conflict.
