Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Guatemala thanks
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for convening
today's open Security Council meeting on the situation
in Venezuela.

Today's meeting is very timely owing to the events
in recent days and because yesterday the 11th meeting
of Foreign Ministers of the Lima Group was held
in Bogota, Colombia. Taking part at this meeting
were the President of the Republic of Guatemala,
Mr. Jimmy Morales Cabrera, and our Foreign Minister,
Ms. Sandra Erica Jovel Polanco, which shows my
country's commitment to restoring constitutional
order in Venezuela. They reiterated our support for the
Interim President of Venezuela, Mr. Juan Guaido, and
the importance of alleviating as soon as possible the
humanitarian and security crisis that the Venezuelan
people are enduring.

As already mentioned by several member countries
of the Lima Group, our Foreign Ministers adopted
a declaration yesterday supporting the process of
democratic transition and reconstruction in Venezuela,
and condemning the deliberate actions of the Nicolas
Maduro regime, which, without taking into account the
suffering of the population or the insistent calls of the
international community, prevented, on 23 February,
the entry of basic necessities and international
assistance through acts of violent repression that
caused multiple injuries and deaths on the border with
Colombia and Brazil. We express our repudiation for the
violent actions of the illegitimate Maduro Government
that have further worsened the humanitarian crisis
that represents an enormous challenge for millions of
Venezuelans, as well as for neighbouring countries
and for our entire region. We urge that international
humanitarian assistance be allowed to enter without
further hindrance or delay.

We reiterate the urgent call for the immediate
restoration of democratic order in Venezuela through
the holding of free, transparent and fair elections,
called by the legitimate authorities, in accordance
with international standards, and as soon as possible.
These elections must be conducted with appropriate
guarantees and the participation of all political leaders
and with international observation, as well as the
appointment of a new national electoral council.

Keeping Nicolas Maduro and his illegitimate regime
in power represents an unprecedented threat to peace
and security, freedom and prosperity in the region. We
support the interim President, Juan Guaido, in pursuit
of his efforts to defend and comply with Venezuela's
Constitution. More than 50 countries around the world
have extended support to him and have recognized the
constitutional authority of the National Assembly and
the interim President Guaido.

It is important for any democratic order to
fully respect the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all its citizens, which are the conditions needed
for institutional, economic and social rebuilding in
Venezuela. We call upon the United Nations, including
the Office ofthe High Commissioner for Human Rights,
to act in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter for the prompt resolution of
the crisis in Venezuela.
It is important to emphasize that, for Guatemala,
the transition to democracy should be conducted by
Venezuelans themselves, in apeaceful manner andwithin
the framework of their Constitution. It is important to
reiterate that we reject any military solution or threat
of use of force or any act of provocation that endangers
peace and security in our region. Together with the
countries that make up the Lima Group, Guatemala will
continue to work with the objective of achieving the
restoration of democratic order in Venezuela, peace and
security in the country, respect for the human rights of
all Venezuelans and the recovery of a dignified life for
them, without confrontations and through dialogue.

