Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I start by
thanking Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michele
Coninsx for their briefings today, which I think set out
very clearly, as does the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/6l2), just how much of a challenge remains.
While military successes have removed Da'esh's
territorial control of the so-called caliphate, Da'esh and
foreign terrorist fighters continue to pose an ongoing
and serious challenge to our individual and collective
security. It is not only Da'esh, as other colleagues have
also talked about other groups, particularly Al-Qaida
and Al-Qaida-affiliated groups. We must be very
concerned by those.

I think that, faced with a problem that affects many
countries in many regions of the world, Member States
naturally look to the United Nations, and in particular
to the Security Council, through its resolutions and
committees, to give guidance and support. I believe
that means that we need not only a timely and effective
set of responses but also even better coordination
and evaluation.

We, as the United Kingdom, therefore welcome the
number of guidance products that are being developed
to assist States in navigating some ofthose complex new
challenges. But I would like to stress - I am sure that I
am preaching to the converted to my left i the need to
ensure that those are complementary and reflective of a
whole-of-United Nations approach.

To that end, we would particularly like to encourage
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to continue to conduct its assessment visits and
strengthen its own dialogue with Member States, and
for Member States to engage CTED in requesting those.
I can say that the United Kingdom is looking forward to
its own CTED assessment in October.

I would also like to stress the need for proactive
follow-up by CTED and its partners, and that is where
the Office of Counter-Terrorism particularly comes
in with its capacity-building capabilities. It is so
important that, where CTED carries out an assessment,
in partnership with a Member State, that capacity-
building and support be in place for those Member
States to really be able to make a difference. I think
that I would start there, ifI might, in responding to the
briefings that I heard. The Secretary-General's report
sets out a number of challenges. Let me just focus on
a few.

First, I share the concerns raised by a number of
colleagues and our briefers about the conditions in
the camps in north-east Syria, particularly for family
members and children. That should be of great concern
for us all. We welcome the United Nations increased
attention on the challenge of addressing those
conditions, while also integrating efforts to prevent
violent extremism and incitement to terrorism among
camp populations. That is clearly a task beyond the
United Nations; it is for all Member States to think
about how we can support such work.

An important element of that is accountability for
the crimes committed by Da'esh. I was very pleased
to hear the remarks by our colleague from Equatorial
Guinea on the subject. We, like them, fully support
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
in particular when it comes to sexual and gender-based
violence. We have increased our funding for UNITAD,
and I hope that we all support their efforts to collect,
preserve and, of course, use that crucial evidence.
It is also alarming that Da'esh still reportedly has
$300 million in reserves. We know that terrorist attacks
are increasingly low-cost and low-tech. In recent cases,
we have seen that transfers of small amounts of money
using new technologies, inspired by narratives both
online and offline, can terrorize our citizens. That
amount of money could cause huge damage. We again
collectively need to tackle the financing of terrorism
and ensure we are doing so in a way that keeps pace
with modern money flows. That is ajob for us all.

I would like to say how much we agree with the
analysis of the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/612)
with regard to the risk of radicalization and mobilization
taking place in prisons. Prisons, of course, are a place
of risk. But, at the same time, they can be an important
place for disengagement and rehabilitation efforts. We
would encourage the United Nations and its partners
to support Member States in developing measures in
that area. I would note that the Council has placed
great emphasis on prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration. That is something that we have taken to
heart in the United Kingdom. I would like to say just a
couple of words about our experience in that area.

In the United Kingdom, rehabilitation work is
focused on a broad range of individuals, not just those
serving a prison sentence for a terrorism-related offense
and notjust those in prison. We also work with those on
probation in the community and those subject to court
orders of other kinds, such as returnees from Syria.

Let me finish by expressing our concerns about the
increase in the number of terrorist attacks motivated by
extreme right-wing ideologies. We know that terrorist
narratives, incitement and resources are moving across
borders - both real and virtual. We fully support the
Christchurch Call to Action and efforts to remove
terrorist content online, while protecting human rights
and freedom of expression. We look forward to working
with our partners in Member States, the United Nations
and the technological industry to strengthen those
efforts and combat incitement.

Across all forms of terrorism and extremism, let
me say that we strongly support the United Nations
initiatives to prevent violent extremism, which place
civil society at their centre. The cornerstone ofthe United
Kingdom's own prevention model is our local work
with communities and civil society organizations. We
support civil society organizations across the country
to build their awareness of the risks of radicalization
and their resilience to terrorism and violent extremist
narratives and propaganda. As I have said before in the
Chamber, that is not something that can be done from
outside of a community or from outside of a country.
It can be done only at the local level by communities
themselves being empowered to tackle extremism and
terrorism before they start. That is one of the places in
which the United Nations could be so very helpful in
sharing best practices. I encourage members to step up
their efforts even further in that area.

