Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to say how much
we appreciate the fact that you have chosen Africa as the
subject to be discussed in the Security Council. This
reflects the importance that the international community
attaches to the refugee problem in Africa, and it should
encourage the international community's interest in giving
more serious attention to this problem that can threaten
stability of States, thereby threatening peace and security
throughout the world, especially in Africa.

I would particularly like to express my thanks and
high esteem to Mrs. Sadako Ogata for her important
address, in which she talked about the magnitude and
importance of this problem and how to deal with it. We
would like to commend the tremendous efforts that she
and her co-workers have made to deal with this problem.

Mrs. Ogata and previous speakers have approached
this topic from many different angles. They have touched
upon the dramatic situation caused by the existence of
millions of refugees and displaced persons in African
countries, which entails human suffering, particularly for

 

women and girls, who suffer the most. This provides fertile
ground for crises and conflict.
We have noted that the refugee problem, which is
growing daily, has two essential aspects. On the one hand
is the protection of refugees and providing assistance to
them - medical and emergency services and foodstuffs.
On the other hand there is the need for respect for the
national sovereignty of the States that are providing them
with asylum until they can exercise their right to return.
These are integral parts of the international community's
responsibilities. We must decide how this problem can be
dealt with, taking into account the sovereignty of States and
fundamental human rights.

Tunisia considers that this means that there must be a
debate in the proper bodies - within the General
Assembly, in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), or in the context of
an international conference especially convened for that
purpose. We note that a study is under way in the
Secretariat to that end. We hope that it will be concluded
soon. The conclusions of the study would, of course, be
submitted to all parties concerned for their approval.

It goes without saying that the subject of refugees has
taken on great importance within the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). As you know, the OAU Council of
Ministers set up a special committee to deal with refugees
that in 1999 travelled to the field in quite a few African
countries with a view to getting first-hand information
about the situation in the countries most affected. Those
visits are taking place under the OAU Convention
Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in
Africa that was ratified by 44 States, including Tunisia, in
1969. The first international conference on refugees and
displaced persons in Africa was held in Khartoum in
December 1998. That Conference had as its priority
subjects enhancing the capacity of African States to deal
with the refugee problem, mobilizing resources, raising the
international community's awareness, and a way of
attenuating the burdens on States. At its most recent
meeting in Algiers, the OAU Council of Ministers made a
similar appeal.

Today, in this supreme forum, the Security Council,
we again urge the international community to help African
States to deal with the refugee problem and address the
essential problems evoked by Mrs. Ogata, and to address
the establishment of machinery to put an end to the various
conflicts and crises that exist in the African continent and
impede our achievement of international peace and
development.

This involves political, economic, social and human
aspects, all of which must be addressed when dealing
with this problem. My country supports all of Mrs.
Ogata's proposals and I thank her once again.

