Mr. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Independent State of Samoa and my own country,
Timor-Leste.

Allow me, Sir, first to thank Guatemala, as the
most recent State party to the Rome Statute, for having
organized this important open debate under your
presidency. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, International Criminal Court (ICC) President
Song, and Mr. Mochochoko of the Prosecutor's office
for their briefings today.

The nexus between peace and justice are complex
and intertwined. As such, the role and importance of the
International Criminal Court in fighting impunity and
promoting the rule of law is ever more interconnected
with sustainable peace and the delivery of justice.
Those linkages were clearly articulated in the outcome
of the recent High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels.

For peace to be sustainable, justice and the rule of
law must be guaranteed. The ICC plays an integral part
in the architecture of the rule of law at the international
level. The establishment of the Court 10 years ago
was a major achievement in the protection of human
rights and in upholding international humanitarian and
criminal law.

Recently there have been major developments in
the work of the Court. The first verdicts were delivered,
in the cases of Thomas Lubanga and Charles Taylor.
Those verdicts send a strong message to the victims
of violence that the global community is serious about
fighting impunity and ensuring justice for the most
heinous crimes against humanity.

The mandates of the Security Council and the
Court are complementary in nature, as international
peace and security must go hand in hand with justice
and the rule of law. We note the unique relationship
between the Court and the Security Council and hope
that such initiatives as this continue, to allow for this
relationship to be further strengthened.

Greater cooperation between the two entities would
allow the Court's work to be carried out in a more timely
and efficient manner. We note the lifting of the travel
ban on President Gbagbo, allowing him to be present
for ICC proceedings at The Hague, and the increase
in the number of references to the Court in Council
resolutions, the most recent being in resolution 2071
(2012), of 12 October, as examples of such cooperation.

The growing faith of the international community
in the ICC is evident not only in the increasing caseload,
but in the growing number of ratifications of the Rome
Statute. Currently there are 121 States parties to the
Statute as the Court moves towards universalization,
becoming the globaljustice institution it was envisaged
to be. In this regard, we encourage those States that
have not done so to consider ratifying the Statute.

Given the number of referrals, both nationally and
from the Council, we must also strengthen the ability of
the Court to implement its mandate. Security Council
referrals should include a financing mechanism to
ensure that the ICC has the resources and capacities to
fulfil its mandate in an efficient and effective manner.
The Council's support of the Court, however, is not
limited solely to providing the adequate and necessary
funding. Referrals to the Court under article 13 of
the Rome Statute should also seek to encourage the
cooperation of States with the Court.

The aforementioned challenges create impediments
that affect the Court's ability both to carry out its
mandate and that prevent the delivery of justice to
victims. Justice needs to be seen to be done and must
happen in a timely manner. As the growing number
of States parties to the Rome Statute shows, the fight
against impunity is universal. As such, States Members
of the United Nations and the Security Council should
support the efforts to strengthen the Court's capacity to
deliverjustice and to receive the necessary cooperation,
when needed.

The ICC is charged with fighting impunity for
the most serious crimes against humanity. Last year,
the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute were
unanimously approved, adding crimes of aggression
to the list of those crimes that cannot go unpunished.
In that regard, we note Samoa's ratification of the
Kampala amendments on crimes of aggression during
last month's United Nations treaty event. In ratifying
the Kampala amendments, Samoa reaffirmed its faith
in the rule of law and the vital protection that the law
provides all States, especially to weak and small States,
without having to resort to armed forces or to belonging
to a military grouping to guarantee their protection.

In conclusion, we appreciate the holding of this
open debate and we hope that it becomes an annual
event on the calendar of the Security Council. I would
like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the strong
commitment and support of both Samoa and Timor-
Leste for the mandate and the work of the International
Criminal Court. I congratulate you, Mr. President, once
again on holding this debate.

