Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the statement to be made
later by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Abe for the report that he introduced (S/2005/69) on
the question of small arms, which goes right to the
heart of a number of conflicts on the Security Council's
agenda.

In keeping with your recommendation, Sir, I will
keep my statement brief. I will distribute the full text
of the statement that I had been planning to make,
which includes further details of our position.

Ever since the United Nations Programme of
Action to combat the illicit trade in small arms was
launched, France has participated actively in its
implementation. Moreover, my country is considering
new initiatives in which the international community
could participate to combat the illicit trade in small
arms more effectively.

With regard to implementing the Programme of
Action, France has sought to promote the activities of
regional organizations to which we belong and to
develop cooperation with other regional entities. We
have promoted the activities of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and of the
European Union. On the African continent, we have
financially supported the implementation of the
moratorium of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) since 1999. We have also
provided long-standing support to the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
at Lome, and we shall continue that effort. Finally, in
multilateral forums, France hopes that the negotiations
begun in New York in February 2004 will lead to a
legally binding instrument that will eventually permit
the international harmonization of national and
regional norms in this area.

In addition to the initiatives already undertaken,
we must now determine what proposals might be able
to command a consensus. We believe it is on the basis
of practical needs, such as those arising in the regional
dimension of combating the illicit trade in small arms,
that such proposals will be found.

France's approach to this subject within the
European Union has two aspects. First, we must
respond to the requests of Eastern European and
Central Asian countries aimed at reducing their excess
stocks of small arms and light weapons and
ammunition resulting from the cold war. Those stocks
could indeed be diverted and could help to fuel illicit
trafficking, particularly to non-State actors in Africa.

Secondly, we need to support the efforts of
African regional organizations in implementing
instruments such as the ECOWAS moratorium.
Particular attention should also be devoted to
transborder problems and, in that context, to combating
the illicit aerial transport of small arms and light
weapons. That is a favourite method of bypassing
embargoes and a source of particular concern for the
Security Council. We must also think about how to
supplement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities with a view to improving their
effectiveness, and how United Nations peacekeeping
operations could contribute to tracing small arms and
light weapons.

At the national level, we are also thinking about
the impact of the illicit circulation of small arms and
light weapons on human development and about ways
in which to include those issues in bilateral cooperation
instruments.

Those are the points I wanted to make. France is
now trying to make progress in those areas with our
European Union partners. We hope that our thoughts
will be more widely echoed within the United Nations.

