Briefing by the Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service, Agnes Marcaillou I am honoured to address the Security Council on the threat posed by Al-Shabaab's use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in Somalia and their impact on the civilian population, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops and the Somali security forces. I am also honoured to present the activities carried out by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to mitigate the threat posed by explosive ordnance in Somalia. With respect to the IED threat, the number of IED-related incidents has risen from 402 and 492 in 2017 and 2018, respectively, to 529 in 2019, with 161 such incidents recorded through April 2020. Between | January 2017 and 30 April 2020, 153 AMISOM troops and 489 Somali security force personnel were killed in targeted IED incidents. Without counting the close to 600 people killed in the horrific 14 October 2017 IED attack that occurred in Mogadishu, a reported 787 civilians have been killed and 1,779 injured. We have noted the drop in civilian casualties in Mogadishu in 2020, which we attribute to the positive impact of the current Mogadishu security plan and Operation Badbaado in Lower Shabelle, which have limited the infiltration of explosive devices into Mogadishu. The decrease has been from 1.17 vehicle-borne IED incidents per month in 2019 to only one such incident to date for the whole of 2020. Meanwhile, as Somali security forces have led military operations in Lower Shabelle since the second quarter of 2019, there has been a concomitant increase in Al-Shabaab's IED attacks targeting the Somali National Army (SNA), causing an alarming increase in SNA casualties, which, in the first quarter of 2020, and for the first time, have exceeded civilian casualties. In recent years, Al-Shabaab's manufacture of IEDs has shifted from using military-grade explosives to more readily available compounds and components, hence demonstrating both its ability to adapt and its determination to continue to use this method of warfare. With regard to UNMAS in Somalia, the Mine Action Service is an integral component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). UNMAS provides the Federal Government of Somalia with expert advice on the development of legislation, plans and policies to mitigate the threat of explosive ordnance. It also produces regular Somalia-specific IED threat analyses, which inform preventive and responsive actions by the SNA, AMISOM and other partners. UNMAS also assists UNSOM and carries out clearance activities following indirect-fire attacks against the United Nations compound in Mogadishu and the airport area. With the support of UNSOS, UNMAS maintains a physical presence in all AMISOM sectors and provides advice, analysis, training and mentoring to AMISOM uniformed personnel to find and destroy IEDs and to safely operate in this high-threat environment. Since 2017, UNMAS has trained over 50,000 AMISOM troops on subjects ranging from IED-threat awareness to search and detect techniques as well as to deploy techniques for defeating IEDs. UNMAS uses and promotes a number of standardized training materials that it has drafted to support the consistent growth of IED-disposal operators across troop-contributing countries. UNMAS training and mentoring of AMISOM mission enabling units has increased troop confidence in the utilization of main supply routes and led to vastly increased consignment movements on these routes from Mogadishu to the sectors. UNMAS provides AMISOM with an explosive-ordnance clearance capacity of 21 teams, working with 42 explosive-detection dogs, to protect such key infrastructure as airports, airstrips and AMISOM bases. The Service's survey, detection and clearance capacity also facilitates the construction of AMISOM forward-operating bases. UNMAS support has contributed to a strengthened AMISOM capacity to respond and adapt to the evolving IED threat. While the number of IED incidents reported as targeting AMISOM has remained high, the AMISOM casualty rate per incident has decreased from 2017 to the present. Moreover, while there has been a gradual increase in IED incidents, no impact on AMISOM has been observed. As I speak, despite coronavirus-disease pandemic restrictions, all UNMAS activities in support of AMISOM are ongoing, except for predeployment and in-person training. In the past few years, UNMAS has responded to requests from the Somali Government to build the threat-mitigation capacity of the Somali police. To date, UNMAS has trained and equipped the existing 14 Somali police explosive-ordnance disposal teams. I want to thank those Member States that have provided UNMAS with the voluntary financial contributions necessary to support these activities. In conclusion, UNMAS action has proved, and continues to prove, that it enhances AMISOM's force protection, mobility and operational effectiveness and has contributed to reducing casualties and fatalities among the AMISOM ranks. According to our analysis, Al-Shabaab is likely to continue its IED attacks against SNA personnel, using available precursors and ever-evolving and complex designs. To be better equipped to operate safely and effectively in this IED-threat environment, SNA troops need appropriate training, mentoring and equipping consistent with standards that match those guiding UNMAS support to AMISOM. Effective, sustainable and accountable IED-threat mitigation capabilities for Somali security forces would support the transition of security responsibilities from AMISOM. As an integrated component of UNSOM and UNSOS, UNMAS stands ready to extend its support to the SNA. It is our hope that the Security Council will consider expanding the categories of the United Nations non-lethal support package provided to the SNA through the United Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security institutions to include IED-threat mitigation support, namely, the training, mentoring and equipping I just mentioned. Accordingly, I would call upon Member States and other partners to channel funding towards the strengthening of the SNA's IED-threat mitigation capabilities through the United Nations Trust Fund mechanism.
