Mr. Denisov (spoke in Russian): As Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), I should like
to brief the Security Council on the Committee's
activities over the past three months and to submit to
the Council our thirteenth work programme for the
next 90-day period, from 1 October to 31 December
2004.

On 8 October 2004, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1566 (2004), which not only reconfirmed its
commitment to combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations but formulated clear and practical
measures to strengthen the global, coordinated
response to this growing threat to peace and security.
Charged with the mandate of monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC
intends to implement the relevant provisions of
resolution 1566 (2004) and to play a leading and more
proactive role in reinforcing an effective counter-
terrorism framework at the global, regional and
national levels. It is from that perspective that we have
approached the planning of the Committee's work for
the thirteenth 90-day period. Resolution 1566 (2004)
clearly prioritized the main tasks of the CTC.

First, it calls for a more coordinated approach by
the Security Council to fight terrorism and, in that
regard, calls for closer CTC cooperation with other
Security Council bodies dealing with different aspects
of counter-terrorism. Secondly, we must more actively
and effectively strengthen practical cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
all areas related to resolution 1373 (2001). Thirdly,
mindful of paragraphs 8 and 11 of resolution 1566
(2004), it is vitally important to speed up the
revitalization process on the basis of the organizational
plan of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), in order to enhance the structural
and operative capabilities of the Committee. And
fourthly, we must step up our efforts to develop direct
dialogue and information exchange with Member
States on all aspects of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitate the provision of
technical assistance, in particular through the practical
organization of the first visits to States with their
consent.

The thirteenth 90-day period work programme
seeks to build on the main achievements of the CTC
during the previous three months. The twelfth work
programme marked the beginning of the revitalization
process, as set forth in Security Council resolution
1535 (2004), both in terms of consolidating the
structure of the new Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate and of creating new tools to enhance the
effectiveness and capability of the Committee to
combat the escalating threat from international
terrorism. During the period covered by the thirteenth
90-day period work programme, the CTC will have to
take further steps in order to finalize the transition to
the new organizational structure and will begin to put
into practice its new way of working.

On 29 July the Committee endorsed the
organizational plan for the CTED that was submitted to
the Committee plenary by Mr. Javier Ruperez,
Executive Director of the CTED, in consultation with
and through the Secretary-General (S/2004/642, annex II, enclosure). The endorsement of the plan by the
Security Council on 12 August opened a new phase of
the CTC revitalization process. The CTC plenary will
continue to maintain close cooperation with the
Executive Director of the CTED in order to coordinate
our efforts on the practical implementation of the plan,
adopted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1535
(2004), and to make the new structure fully operational
as soon as possible.

In coordinating and monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC
continued to work with Member States by reviewing
reports submitted to the Committee pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001). Intensive work
by the CTC group of experts enabled the Committee to
speed up the process of reviewing the reports of
Member States. The experts prepared 65 letters in
response to reports, and the CTC will take all
necessary measures to enable the subcommittees to
consider those reports as quickly as possible.

By 30 September 2004, the Committee had
received 526 reports from Member States and others.
That figure included first reports from the 191 Member
States and 6 from others, 160 second reports from
Member States and 2 from others, 117 third reports
from Member States and 1 from another, and 49 fourth
reports from Member States. However, 78 Member
States had not submitted their reports on time.
Upholding the need for the universal compliance of
Member States with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC reminds the
representatives of States that they should submit their
reports as soon as possible. The Committee will
maintain its course of cooperation and dialogue with
Member States and will provide them with the support
needed to resolve any problems that may have delayed
the submission of their reports.

In line with the provisions of the twelfth 90-day
work programme, the Committee continued its efforts
to integrate an analysis and assessment of each
country's assistance and other needs into the report
reviewing process. The CTC approved a guidance
document for making those assessments, which, with
the consent of the States concerned, can be shared with
interested donor States and organizations. The
Committee will rely on the assistance assessment
process in order to enhance the dialogue with Member
States and the donor community with a view to making
technical assistance efforts more effective and better
adjusted to the real needs of Member States.

Pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), during the
thirteenth 90-day work programme, the CTC, in
consultation with the relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations and United Nations
bodies, will prepare a set of best practices to assist
States in implementing the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) related to the financing
of terrorism.

The Committee continued to develop a database
of needed and available assistance by regularly
updating the Directory of Counter-Terrorism
Information and Sources of Assistance, and the
Assistance Matrix, which contains information on
requests by States for assistance and on the assistance
offered by potential providers, including international,
regional and subregional organizations. On 29 July
2004, the Chairman of the CTC, in a special note,
requested all Member States to submit relevant
information on a regular basis so that it can be used to
update the database and the Assistance Matrix. The
provision of that information is a vital tool to help all
Member States seeking technical assistance in various
fields.

One of the main objectives of the CTC has
remained to encourage Member States to become
parties to the relevant conventions and protocols
related to terrorism, and to implement their provisions
in their national legislation, whether or not they are
parties to any regional convention related to terrorism.
The Committee will continue to regularly monitor the
progress of ratification and implementation of those
treaties, considering those activities to be key to the
contribution of Member States to strengthening the
international legal basis for combating and preventing
terrorism.

Over the past three months, the CTC has
concentrated on the preparation for CTC visits to
Member States. Such visits were recognized in
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) as a new tool
to help the CTC effectively to fulfil its mandate to
monitor implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). The Committee has adopted general
guidelines for conducting CTC visits to Member States
and procedures for the preparation, conduct, and
evaluation of CTC visits. Pursuant to the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1566 (2004), during the
period covered by the thirteenth 90-day period work
programme the CTC will accelerate the practical
preparations for visits to Member States with their
consent.

Pursuant to the action plan agreed upon at the
special meeting of the Committee held on 6 March
2003, the CTC continued its efforts to facilitate
outreach and coordination among a wide array of
international, regional and subregional organizations.
During the past three months, the CTC has been
actively engaged in the preparation for the fourth
special meeting of the CTC, working with one regional
organization that had expressed an interest in
co-hosting the meeting. Taking into account that that
organization is unable to follow the practices and
procedures that prevailed at previous meetings, the
CTC has had to identify another organization to
co-host the next meeting. The CTC is continuing
consultations with interested organizations, with a view
to arranging the fourth regional CTC meeting as soon
as possible.
The CTC has been strongly committed to the
principle of transparency in its activities. The web page
of the Committee has recently been substantially
improved and updated. In this regard, I would like to
note the special contribution by the Secretariat. The
Committee will continue its efforts to enhance its
capacity for - and its methods of - communication.
There are plans for the Chairmen of the CTC and of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities to give
a joint briefing to interested delegations with an
emphasis on cooperation between the Committees,
including in the exchange of information.

To further the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1566 (2004), the Committee will
continue its course of closer coordination with United
Nations structures dealing with the various aspects of
combating and preventing terrorism. The CTC will
take further action aimed at strengthening cooperation
between the CTC and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The practice of
informal coordination meetings of the Chairmen of the
two Committees and their experts is expected to be
instrumental in consolidating the single approach of the
Security Council to combating terrorism. The CTC will
also seek appropriate working contacts with the
Security Council committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) concerning
non-proliferation problems in the context of the
terrorist threat.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
fight against terrorism needs to be sustained effectively
and with dynamism. It requires a consolidated and
wide-ranging multinational response. By strengthening
its structural and working capacity, the CTC is
determined to continue to play a proactive role and to
provide guidance for international cooperation in
preventing and combating terrorism, one of the
strongest threats to peace and security.

