Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our condolences to the

Government and the people of France, as well as to the
peoples and the Governments of the other countries
that have suffered the latest terrorist assaults, including
the downing of the Russian airliner and the attack early
this morning in Mali. We would also like to pay homage
to the thousands upon thousands of children who die in
Syria every day - especially in connection with the
reprehensible murder of more than 200 children at the
hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) for
not wanting to join that group.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted
in favour of resolution 2249 (2015) in line with our
categorical rejection of the commission of terrorist acts
in all forms and manifestations and regardless of the
motivation, who commits them or where. Such acts are
deliberate attacks on international peace and security.
Terrorism is a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, all the while being and affront to the right
to life. We therefore believe that addressing terrorism
should be done without double standards: there are no
good or bad terrorists. It is time to be consistent in our
efforts - to take joint, coordinated and consensual
actions and to meet our responsibilities as members
of the Security Council under the mandate conferred
upon us in line with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

The world has watched in bewilderment as the
violence and terrorism practiced to subjugate societies,
civilizations, religions and creeds has assumed multiple
manifestations. Ultimately, however, they remain the
outcome of practices related to intolerance, violent
extremism and sectarianism, while they often follow
geopolitical interests imposed to undermine legitimate
Governments and destabilize the Middle East and
Africa.

We reiterate that terrorist acts threaten not just the
territorial integrity but also the political unity of States,
as well as the security and stability of States, regions and
the international community. We are deeply alarmed at
the extraordinary military and logistical support enjoyed
by such terrorist organizations as ISIS and the Al-Nusra
Front, giving them tremendous military capacities to
develop and deploy indiscriminate violence, destabilize
legitimate Governments, overthrow their constitutional
order, halt the social and economic development of their
people, and destroy their infrastructure, institutions
and response capacities.

My delegation reiterates the need, today more than
ever, to address the root causes that fuel these phenomena
and to develop effective and innovative strategies to
interrupt terrorist and extremist narratives with the
aim of preventing radicalization and achieving tangible
short-term and long-term results. The Council must act
in a more preventive manner to resolve and anticipate
conflicts that could be unleashed by terrorism. Recent
events have shown that vulnerability to terrorism and
foreign terrorist fighters is now global. That is why
the role of the Security Council will be decisive in the
fight against an extraordinary and unprecedent threat
that is undermining the future of humankind. We
must therefore fully adhere in particular to resolutions
banning the financing and training of and illicit transfer
of arms to terrorist groups.

Finally, my country is convinced that the fight
against terrorism must be waged in the context of
international cooperationunder the binding international
and regional instruments in this sphere, including
relevant Security Council resolutions and the norms
of international law, in full respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, and taking
into account that if we do otherwise, we will contribute
to the further radicalization of these individuals. We
hope that the action taken pursuant to resolution 2249
(2015) and the fight against terrorism will always be
coordinated with the countries concerned and that no
participating actor will have a political agenda other
than the defeat of terrorism and, in the case of Syria,
support for the negotiating process among its people,
Government, the countries of the region and the
international community, which are backing an effort
that we all hope will be fruitful and successful.

