Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I should like to add a
comment with regard the return of refugees to their
homes and property.

The return of displaced persons - Serbs - to their
homes and property is continuing. As the country's
Prime Minister, I personally have visited them and
talked with them. We have created security conditions
to accommodate them to enable their return to their
homes and to their property. I personally encourage
them to return to the entire territory of the Republic of
Kosovo. I am fully confident in saying that the process
will continue and that all institutions in Kosovo, at the
national as well as the local levels, will be ready to
assist returnees.

As for the conflict in Syria, not only Kosovo but
also other countries in the region have had volunteers
go there to fight. As Prime Minister, I am very proud to
say that last week we adopted legislation forbidding the
participation of Kosovo citizens in the conflict in Syria,
or in other countries.

As for the continuing dialogue, I want to stress that
it has produced tangible results for Kosovo in bettering
the lives of its citizens and facilitating the path towards
European integration. The dialogue has brought about
improvements in relations between Kosovo and Serbia
and sent a message to the region. The Government of
Kosovo will continue the dialogue in 2014, including
by addressing other issues that may be of importance
or concern to help improve our neighbourly relations. I
would also like to stress that the Republic of Kosovo has
respected all the agreements made so far, and we call
on Serbia to increase its commitment to implementing
all the agreements reached in Brussels.

On 14 December, we started to implement the
agreement on collecting taxes on the border. We have
also consulted a managing board on establishing a fund
to develop the municipalities in northern Kosovo. At
our next meeting, which will take place in Brussels on
12 February, we will discuss the justice system based
on, and in accordance with, the 19 April Agreement.
The State of Kosovo will act responsibly in the dialogue
to normalize the bilateral inter-State relations with
Serbia.

