Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Despite
all of the emotion in the air, we must have an honest
and even-handed discussion of recent events in Gaza.
In Gaza and adjacent areas of Israel, the Hamas-
led Palestinian Authority Government has continued to
play a role in perpetuating instability and violence.
There is no question that Israel has a right to defend
itself and the lives of its citizens.

On 7 November, Israeli forces withdrew from
much of Gaza, and almost immediately Palestinian
terrorists resumed firing rockets into Israel targeted at
civilians.

We deeply regret the injuries and loss of life in
Gaza on November 8 in and around Beit Hanoun. We
have seen the Israeli Government's apology and
understand that an investigation has begun. We hope
that it will be completed quickly and that appropriate
steps will be taken to avoid a repetition of this tragic
incident. We call on all parties to act with restraint in
order to avoid causing any harm to innocent civilians.

We also call again for the immediate and
unconditional release of Corporal Shalit as well as that
of the two Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers -
Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser - kidnapped on
12 July by Hizbollah during its terrorist attacks across
the Blue Line.

It is the responsibility of the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority Government to prevent terror and
take the necessary steps to stop attacks from within
Gaza. Progress towards peace needs a Palestinian
Government that disavows terror and violence. We call
on Hamas to accept the Quartet principles:
renunciation of terror, recognition of Israel and
acceptance of previous agreements.

Statements by the Hamas leadership that the truce
with Israel is over and that armed struggle can resume
are alarming, and calls by the military wing of Hamas
to Muslims worldwide to strike American targets and
interests should be condemned by the international
community.

More terror, whether directed at Israel, the United
States or the European Union Office in Gaza City, is
not the solution. Nor will it enable the Palestinian
people to achieve their aspirations. In fact, the opposite
is the case.

It is the responsibility of the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority Government to prevent terror and
take the necessary steps to stop attacks and dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure.
The Road Map and the principles contained
therein remain the only agreed international basis upon
which to move forward towards the two-State goal.

The Quartet has welcomed efforts by Palestinian

Authority President Abbas to form a Government

explicitly committed to Quartet principles, and the

United States stands ready to renew engagement and

assistance to a Palestinian Authority committed to
peace and the Quartet principles.

We support diplomatic efforts to engage
responsible leaders, help the Palestinians strengthen
and reform their security sector and assist Israel and
Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come together to
resolve their differences.

The United States is acutely aware of the
economic and humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
people. We continue to work with the Israeli
Government and Palestinian Authority President Abbas
to help meet critical humanitarian needs in the West
Bank and Gaza, where humanitarian conditions have
deteriorated as a result of the Hamas-led Palestinian
Authority Government's refusal to govern responsibly.

Progress requires a commitment to peace from
both sides of the conflict. Since assuming control of
the Palestinian Authority Government last winter,
Hamas has failed utterly in this regard. We urge the
Palestinian Authority Government to renounce terror,
accept the Quartet principles and become a legitimate
partner for peace.

