Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Mr. President, at the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadic, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and to thank him for his statement. I would also like to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, and his delegation, and to thank him for his
very thorough and informative briefing on the current
situation in Kosovo.

Fully adhering to the principled approach to the
Kosovo issue eloquently expressed in the European
Union statement, I would like to touch upon some
specific issues that, in our view, might be of
importance for ensuring lasting peace in the region of
the Western Balkans and in Europe as a whole.

As an active contributor to international stability,
Ukraine is closely observing the situation in South-
Eastern Europe, and in Kosovo in particular. Agreeing
that there is a need to give new impetus to the ongoing
political process, and supporting the efforts of the
Contact Group to achieve a viable and lasting
settlement of the situation in Kosovo, we think we
should be guided by the need to attain final
stabilization of the political, economic and security
situation on the basis of relevant decisions of the
Security Council, including resolution 1244 (1999), in
full compliance, of course, with the principles of
international law.

Ukraine endorses the negotiating process between
Belgrade and Pristina, the establishment of an effective
dialogue between all Kosovo communities and the
search for a mutually acceptable compromise
settlement. We attach particular importance to
standards implementation and to guaranteeing human
rights and the rights of all Kosovo ethnic groups.

In our view, the political process of determining
the future status of Kosovo, which was initiated by the
United Nations and which we fully support, should be
handled with utmost care and delicacy, taking into
account its possible implications for the whole
European security architecture. Protracted or frozen
conflicts still remain on the continent, representing a
threat to common security and stability.

Therefore, any imposed decision or hasty action
can destabilize the situation in the Western Balkans
region and can create dangerous precedents. We
support a decision on Kosovo's status that would
strengthen security and stability in the region and in
Europe as a whole. In that specific context, it would be
quite natural to assume that the political process of
settling Kosovo's status represents a specific case and
that it should not be claimed as a precedent for any
other issue.

From the very outset of the Kosovo crisis,
Ukraine has made efforts aimed at settling it through
political means and has been assisting with post-
conflict stabilization in the region. Ukraine actively
participates in the peacekeeping efforts of the
international community in Kosovo.

Fully understanding the need for a continued
international civilian and military presence in Kosovo
during the whole process of standards implementation
and the need to ensure security throughout the region,
Ukraine remains committed to making a tangible
contribution to the efforts of the international
community in this important area.

