Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's meeting. I am grateful for the
tremendous efforts of Ambassador Chowdhury and his
delegation in sharpening the Council's focus on the
humanitarian aspects of its work.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his introduction. As always, he has identified the key
problems in this area. We encourage him to continue to
include humanitarian issues in his briefings to the Council.
The Secretary-General's exercise of his prerogative under
Article 99 of the Charter is an indispensable means of
ensuring that the Council can discharge its duties in cases
where humanitarian crises endanger international peace and
security.

As the current holder of the presidency of the
European Union, Portugal will participate in today's debate
with a substantial statement on behalf of all members of the
European Union, as well as 14 other like-minded European
States. I will therefore limit myself to three brief comments
that are to be seen in conjunction with the statement to be
made by Ambassador Monteiro.

My first comment concerns the need for an integrated
approach to the various aspects of the Council's work in
this field. Many of those aspects rely for their practical
implementation on a variety of United Nations organs and
agencies, any number of which may be involved alongside
the Council. The Council should therefore encourage the
use of instruments such as strategic frameworks to provide
for the integration of all relevant elements and actors.

My second point concerns reconciliation, to which the
Secretary-General again referred today in the context of
humanitarian action. Reconciliation is an essential
prerequisite for lasting peace; also, there can be no
reconciliation without accountability - and without
accountability peace is invariably compromised. The
Council should therefore always stress the necessity of the
full investigation of war crimes and atrocities, in intra-State
as well as inter-State conflicts, as an indispensable means
towards national reconciliation.

My third and final point concerns the issue of
internally displaced persons. We are grateful to Ambassador
Holbrooke for drawing the Council's attention to this
problem in such a forceful manner last month, and again in
his statement today. It is unacceptable that civilians should
be denied protection or relief solely because of their status
as internally displaced persons. People fleeing the horrors
of armed conflicts and terror should not be treated
differently according to whether or not they have
managed to cross an international border. Although the
responsibility for the appropriate assistance belongs
primarily to the States concerned and to the United
Nations and other humanitarian aid agencies, the Council
has an important role in making sure that this assistance
can be provided and that sufficient and secure access to
the internally displaced is provided. Furthermore, where
the State concerned cannot provide for adequate safety
and security of internally displaced persons, the Security
Council must address the question of how best to secure
such conditions.

