Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to welcome Mr. Asselborn, Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Luxembourg.

Today, I will not describe the scenes of carnage and
destruction in the Gaza Strip. Words cannot describe
the lifeless bodies of the children of Gaza, or their
limbs spread across its streets of Gaza and in what is
left of hospitals. Words cannot describe the feelings
of the mourning mothers in Gaza, or the situation of
the impoverished families or of those families who do
not know if one day the future will come. The least the
Security Council could do for to the people of Gaza
today is to assume its moral and legal responsibilities to
uphold international peace and security and to work for
an immediate cessation of the unjust Israeli aggression.

Jordan refutes and condemns in the strongest
terms the savage aggression against the Gaza Strip. in
particular the atrocious carnage exacted by the Israeli
occupying force in the area of Shujaya. Jordan condemns
the disproportionate and unjustified use of excessive
force, which has in no measure, small or large, to do
with the right of self-defence. The events under way
in Gaza represent a deliberate targeting of Palestinian
civilians and a policy of collective punishment adopted
by Israel against the Palestinian people.

The current Israeli actions serve to expose the
deeply held belief on the part of the Israeli Government
that human life has no value ifthe victim is a Palestinian,
or even ifthe victim is a Palestinian civilian. Israel must
realize that military force cannot bring about peace
and security, nor can a policy of humiliation bring the
Palestinian people to its knees.

The international community must take a look
at the far-reaching human suffering and dangerous
situation in Gaza. The international community
should work to rapidly provide humanitarian aid to
those people. Jordan has sent military personnel to
the hospitals in Gaza, as well as emergency medical
aid to the Gaza Strip. We also continue to receive an
influx of wounded Palestinians. United Nations reports
and those of emergency relief organizations speak to
the emergency needs of the people of Gaza in the areas
of medication and vital supplies. The international
community needs to swiftly respond to the appeals of
the United Nations and the humanitarian agencies on
the ground, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

We reiterate our call for a total ceasefire and for
a halt to the targeting of civilians, wherever they may
be, as well as for compliance with international law. In
that framework, Jordan supports the Egyptian initiative
for a ceasefire and will also support efforts made by
the Secretary-General and by United States Secretary
of State John Kerry.

The dangerous Israeli escalation distracts the
attention of the international community from Israel's
daily ongoing efforts, condemned by everyone, and
from the aggression targeting East Jerusalem and holy
Muslim and Christian sites, in particular the sacred
Al-Aqsa Mosque. We in Jordan are fighting daily
against that type of aggression and unilateral measures
and violations. We do so by safeguarding Hashemite
authority in East Jerusalem, which is carried out by the
Hashemite King Abdullah II ibn Al-Hussein.

Israel must end its discriminatory measures,
not only against the Palestinians in the occupied
territories but also against its Arab citizens. In that
regard, I wish to refer to the unprecedented draft law
on citizenship. Even though it is legal discrimination,
Israel nevertheless calls itself the only democracy in the
Middle East - as again repeated by the representative
of Israel just a few minutes ago.

Jordan, under the direction of its King, is working
intensively in close cooperation with the leaders of the
region to achieve a ceasefire. We reiterate that the only
solution is one that ensures that there is no repetition
of the Israeli attacks and aggression. That would be a
political solution achieved through the resumption of
serious, comprehensive negotiations on the basis of the
two-State solution, the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on Palestinian national soil with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and on the basis of the relevant
international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve security and stability for all the States and
peoples of the region.

