Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presiding over the Security Council this month. I am
confident that, with your well-known experience and
wisdom, you will lead the work of the Council to the
ends that we all desire. Allow me also to express my
thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China, for his excellent
leadership of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting once more to
discuss the deteriorating and dangerous situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. This comes as a result
of the continuation of the bloody and unjust military
campaign of the Israeli military forces against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem; a campaign that is
spreading terror and fear among the unarmed
population and that is increasing the pain and agony of
the Palestinian people, who are experiencing punitive
and inhumane actions and violations of their human
rights. A few months ago, hundreds were killed,
thousands were wounded, property was demolished,
infrastructure was destroyed, farms were destroyed and
the Palestinian economy has been damaged in order to
make the Palestinians submit.

It would have been possible to save the people
who were killed during the Israeli occupation. It would
have been possible to save the victims and those
wounded as a result of Israeli aggression. It would have
been possible to put an end to the demolition and the
violation of human rights. It would have been possible
to put an end to violence and to calm the situation, if
the Security Council had assumed its responsibilities
and had maintained peace and security, which is its
primary responsibility, and indeed the raison d'etre of
the United Nations.

A country that assassinates a people, usurps land,
chases children, besieges the elderly, quashes values
and violates rights is a State that is fond of terrorism
and practises it. Yet, the Security Council is watching
helplessly, instead of confronting the aggression, while
others in the international community try to find
illogical justification for the Israeli aggression.
Principles of international legitimacy are ignored.
Human rights are discarded, and the right to self-
determination and all norms and laws attached to it are
swept under the carpet.

The fact that the Security Council did not take
necessary and effective measures to end Israel's
transgressions and efforts to starve the Palestinian
people and render it homeless, or to protect its
legitimate rights, has increased that country's
determination to pursue a policy of terrorism against
the Palestinian people. The Palestinian people therefore
believe that Israel is the only country that, with
enormous and rather strange daring, does not recognize
human rights and in fact disdains moral principles and
disregards international public opinion. They also
believe that the current Israeli Government's official
course of action includes kidnapping, assassination,
eroding the authority of the Palestinian Authority and
eliminating its leaders and demolishing houses.

It is indeed regrettable that the Security Council
continues to be a spectator while the forces of the
Israeli occupation pursue their daily acts of aggression
and indulge their addiction to violating human rights
and to perpetrating crimes against the unarmed people
of Palestine. Does not the Council see in the policies
and practices of the Israeli occupation forces a need to
apply international law? Does it not see in the violation
of the rights of Palestinian human beings a need to
intervene or call for the application of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War? Does the Council not
see in the bloodshed and the growing number of
demolitions a reason to intervene to preserve peace and
security? Do not the aerial bombardment, artillery
shelling, demolitions and burning undertaken by Israeli
occupation forces give the Council reason to be
concerned and, therefore, reason to involve itself?

The serious developments taking place in the area
call for the Security Council to stop being a neutral
party and to take measures that can put an end to
Israel's aggression and to the way it deals with the
Palestinians. It is unacceptable and irrational to have
neutrality between the aggressor and the aggressed.
How can there be neutrality between a murderer and
his victim? How can there be neutrality between the
occupier and those who are defending their rights and
calling for their independence?

Israel's ongoing aggression against Palestinians
and their territory is indeed a result of the fact that the
international community does not want to interfere.
This is reflected in the inability of the Council to take
effective measures to end the inhumane acts and
practices that the Israeli occupying forces are pursuing.
That inability has given Israel some cover in its attempt
to alter the balance of power in the region and to create
new colonial facts on the ground before resuming
negotiations on a final settlement. Israel has realized
that the timing of the final settlement does not suit it
and that the road to peace and settlement will not help
it achieve its expansionist goals.

The policy of murder and assassination being
pursued by Israel only confirms the terrorist nature of
the current Israeli Government. It also proves that
Israel does not take seriously the lives and rights of
human beings and that it is violating international law
and international humanitarian law. Those who commit
such crimes must be held responsible. They should be
tried for the crimes they have committed against
humanity. Any reluctance to do so will only lead to
more crimes.

The occupation of Orient House is a clear and
flagrant violation of the Oslo agreements, by which
Israel undertook never to attack Palestinian institutions
in East Jerusalem. Moreover, excessive Israeli
measures, founded on a policy of brute force, will have
very negative and destructive results. They will not
lead to peace or security; they will only serve to take
the situation into chaos and destruction.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns these
arbitrary and inhumane actions and holds Israel
responsible for the consequences of its actions and
policies. It strongly condemns the serious escalation of
violence against the Palestinian people by the
aggressive Israeli forces. We also condemn the air raids
against civilian residences using every sort of heavy
weapon, and the assassination of Palestinians. All these
inhumane tactics are contrary to civilized behaviour.
They constitute a violation of all the relevant
international instruments aimed at bringing about
peace.

In that context, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
appeals to all peace-loving countries to do all they can
to end the aggression and transgressions against the
people of Palestine. That would contribute to bringing
about peace, security and justice. It will also avoid
double standards. We look forward to the Council's
assumption of its international responsibilities and its
role, as well as its taking a firm stand against this
inhumane aggression by Israel and its marginalization
of all international treaties and agreements.

It is quite clear that the violence taking place in
the occupied Palestinian territories is the result of the
hopelessness and frustration born out of decades of
occupation and the inhumane practices of the
occupying Power, foremost among which are the
building and expansion of Israeli settlements, the lack
of any Israeli will to fulfil its commitments and the
procrastination of that State to implement the
agreements it has entered into. It is quite clear to the
Security Council and to the international community at
large that the genocide that Israel is perpetrating
against the Palestinian people through its brutal forces
and numerous actions is intended to uproot all the
hopes of the Palestinians. Although genocide cannot be
quantified, it is nevertheless quite clear in Israel's
policies of assassination, destruction and burning. It is
also quite clear that Israel is seeking to enslave the
Palestinian people and deprive them of their legitimate
rights to a decent life.

Policies of collective punishment - the closure
of roads, checkpoints, land confiscation, restricting the
movement of Palestinians, depriving them of work,
subjecting them to starvation - and the effects of all
this on the Palestinian economy and the growing
number of acts of terrorism and assassinations that the
Israeli authorities are pursuing emphasize the
international character of the problem and, therefore,
the responsibility of the Security Council towards that
problem. The Council is morally, politically and legally
responsible for the Palestinian people, who are seeking
to exercise their inalienable rights. It is incumbent
upon the Council to continue assuming its
responsibility towards the Palestinian question until a
satisfactory solution is found, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and international
law and until the rights of the Palestinian people are
fully realized.

The Security Council for a long time has laid the
necessary basis for solving the problem of the
Palestinian question in its resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). If the Council has given up dealing with
the Palestinian problem and left the issue to the two
parties with the assistance of the mediators and the
Madrid principles to push forward the peace process
and to realize a final settlement, the Council must, after
the deterioration of the situation, intervene and seek to
restore peace and security to the occupied Palestinian
territories. Among the Council's responsibilities is the
preservation of international peace and security.

The peace process has witnessed difficulties and
challenges before. However, the standstill that it is
facing now and the serious deterioration of the
situation may lead to very serious and grave
international consequences. This makes it essential for
the Security Council to reconsider the issue in depth
and seek the help of the parties to settle the problem
and to send an observer mission, which will help to de-
escalate the situation, stop the violence, and to resume
dialogue and negotiations.

