Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): Allow me,
like previous speakers, to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for the
briefing he has given us on the situation in East Timor. I
should like to thank the Secretariat and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, for the significant amount of work done since last
September in East Timor. There were huge difficulties: the
infrastructure was destroyed, the population became
dispersed, and there were real social problems and a certain
trauma felt by the people. Also, as Ambassador Holbrooke
and Ambassador Eldon have said, we can only note that
this situation is improving; I believe they used the
expression "encouraging situation". I think that Ambassador
Holbrooke also indicated that what we are doing in East
Timor could serve as a model.

Of course, there are still enormous difficulties. Mr.
Annabi has described them to us. Members of the Council
are aware of them, and this is partly due to the useful
practice of our having Secretariat reports on situations. But,
in spite of the considerable problems, we note that there has
been an improvement inter alia, in the security issue.

Among the continuing difficulties, about which Mr.
Annabi has spoken with us at some length, as have the two
previous speakers, there is the problem of refugees
remaining in West Timor. Of course, their number has
decreased since Ambassador Holbrooke visited the camps
in West Timor, but approximately 100,000 are still in
West Timor. In this connection, I have a question for Mr.
Annabi. Among those refugees, there are a number of
former officials of the Indonesian administration of East
Timor. I understand that the Indonesian authorities have
guaranteed payment of retirement pensions to those
former officials. Can Mr. Annabi tell us, in the event that
those refugees wish to come back to East Timor -
which, of course, one would hope does happen, and some
of them might then offer their expertise to the
administration of East Timor - then what would happen
to pensions paid to them by the Indonesian authorities?

I have a second question for Mr. Annabi, about the
economic aspect. As we know, there are huge economic
difficulties, and it is difficult to re-establish a real
economy in East Timor. I am led to understand that the
United Nations administration is in contact, inter alia,
with the Australian authorities on delimiting the maritime
border and especially on the allocation of underwater
resources along that border. Could Mr. Annabi tell us
about the current status of these interesting talks on the
exploitation of seabed deposits lying between East Timor
and Australia?

On the question of the important issue evoked by
Mr. Annabi and Ambassadors Holbrooke and Eldon -
that is, the future of the United Nations presence in East
Timor, and more precisely the date of independence -
we agree with the remarks that have been made today; it
is very difficult to determine the right time for this. But
I did want to say that, first of all, one has to hear from
the Timorese themselves. It is, after all, a little bit up to
them - and perhaps Mr. Annabi could tell us more about
this. When I say it is "a little bit" up to them, this is, in
fact, a euphemism; it is, above all, up to them to tell
us - and right now is undoubtedly not the time - the
moment when they consider themselves ready to assume
their responsibilities of independence.

 

