Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting at
France's request. I also thank Ms. Bintou Keita for
her briefing. It was essential for the Security Council
to meet today in an emergency meeting given the
developments in Libya over the past few hours. The
Libyan conflict is indeed at a critical juncture.

My thoughts go out, first and foremost, to the
personnel ofthe UnitedNations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) who were victims of an attack on a Mission
convoy to Benghazi, which, as Ms. Keita indicated,
killed three and injured at least two Mission personnel.
France condemns that attack in the strongest terms and
extends its condolences to the families and relatives of
the victims. France demands an immediate investigation
of the circumstances surrounding the events and calls
for the parties responsible to be held accountable. In
these tragic circumstances, I reiterate France's firm
support for the Special Representative and staff of
UNSMIL, who work tirelessly work for peace in a very
difficult and dangerous context.

France welcomes the truce accepted today by
both sides, which represents an important first step to
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people and create
the conditions to move towards a lasting political
solution allowing Libya to restore peace and stability.

We met here on the 29 July (see S/PV.8588) to
call on the Libyan parties to work with the Special
Representative to strike a truce for Bid Al-Adha. We
reiterated this call in our press statement of 5 August
(SC/13910) and expressed the unanimous support
of the Security Council for the efforts of Ghassan
Salame. Since then, France, like many of its partners
and, naturally, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame', has worked tirelessly with
the parties to persuade them to commit to today's truce.

We call on the Libyan National Army and the
Government of National Accord to uphold this truce
across Libya in the long term so that the discussions
necessary to going even further can be held. There is and
can be no military solution to the crisis, and continued
fighting would benefit only criminals and terrorists.
This truce is therefore essential to prevent any further
deterioration in the situation, to allow civilians to leave
conflict areas and to allow humanitarian assistance to
reach those in urgent need.

The truce must be accompanied by
confidence-building measures aimed at laying the
groundwork for a lasting ceasefire based on credible
guarantees. The solution lies exclusively in the
implementation of a lasting ceasefire, as part of a
resumed political process under the auspices of the
Special Representative. This conclusion is shared
by Council members, and we must join together to
achieve it. France calls on the Libyan parties to resume
talks on this basis, under the auspices of the Special
Representative, so as to swiftly forge the elements of
an agreement that addresses the concerns of all parties
and, above all, the expectations of the of the Libyan
population, based on the principles agreed in Paris,
Palermo and Abu Dhabi.

These parameters must be based on security
and economic reforms that prioritize the swift
implementation of transparent governance in the
Central Bank, reformed management of oil revenue and
the unification of financial and security institutions for
the good of all Libyans. They must be complemented
by robust security provisions supported by respect
for Security Council, especially with respect to the
arms embargo.

We strongly urge all parties to seize the opportunity
provided by the truce to move towards a comprehensive
political solution, as the Council has always called for.
In this regard, we support the principles of the press
statement proposed by the United Kingdom.

I express my thanks once again and wish a happy
Bid to all those who are celebrating it.

