The Secretary-General (spoke in French): You
have before you, Mr. President, the report
(S/2003/1099) in which I have described the
preparations for an international conference on the
Great Lakes region. This is an old idea which has been
revived by developments in the situation on the ground.

Everyone knows that conflicts and instability in
one country of the Great Lakes region, even if the
result of internal factors, rarely remain internal for very
long. They tend quickly to spread because of the close
social, economic, cultural and linguistic links between
the inhabitants of the entire region. That is why a
comprehensive approach is necessary to attack the
underlying and interdependent causes of conflict in the
region.

(spoke in English)

That is why, ever since its presidential statement
on Rwanda of 14 October 1994 (S/PRST/1994/59), the
Council has supported an international conference on
the Great Lakes. This support was reiterated in
numerous subsequent statements and resolutions,
including the presidential statement (S/PRST/1997/22)
of 24 April 1997 on the Great Lakes region and, earlier
this year, in resolutions 1457 (2003) and 1493 (2003)
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The first exploratory steps towards the
organization of such a conference were taken between
1996 and 1997 by my Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes. To expedite the process, in 1999 I appointed a
Special Representative based in Nairobi to consult with
the leaders of the region on the objectives and the
organization of such a conference.

These consultations were undertaken in close
partnership with the African Union, on the basis of a
concept paper which I submitted to them. As a result,

the core countries - Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and
Uganda - agreed to the proposed international

conference, and the preparatory process was launched
in June 2003 in Nairobi.
The Nairobi meeting was essential in determining
the future direction that the conference would take and
in defining its objectives, themes, structure,
composition and tentative timetable. The core countries
stressed that the conference should be action oriented
and focus on specific themes: peace and security,
democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues. The core countries also
stressed the principle of regional ownership. To this
end, they have established national preparatory
committees. In addition, the African Union has been,
and will remain, a full partner of the United Nations in
every stage of the process.

Equally vital is the need for international
partnership. While the Governments of the region bear
responsibility to consolidate peace in their countries,
the international community has a duty to assist them
at all levels, as it has done and is doing in other parts
of the world. Indeed, the conference requires wide and
sustained participation, not only from the Governments
of the core countries but also from civil society,
neighbours and friends in the region, subregional
organizations and international development partners.

There is a new dynamic in the region, and we
must capitalize on it. People are becoming more aware
of the need to address peace, security and development
issues regionally to consolidate advances made in
national peace processes. This has helped set the stage
for the preparations of the conference to proceed as
planned. So, too, did the meeting held during the
general debate in September, when the Declaration of
Principles on Good-Neighbourly Relations and
Cooperation was adopted among countries of the
region.

Obviously, there will be a relationship between
progress in the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi and progress in the
conference. And there will also be a relationship
between our ability to meet certain challenges and the
success of the conference. One challenge is for the core
countries themselves to find a way to go further than
they have to date in addressing in detail the substantive
issues of the conference. Another is to ensure that
adequate financial, technical and human resources are
made available, including for the Office of my Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region.

To meet these challenges, I invite all involved to
work closely with my Special Representative in
support of the Conference. I also encourage all
development partners to assist in providing the
necessary support and resources to the effort. And I
look forward to the strong support of the Council for
the conference - a conference that is long overdue and
which holds the promise of a better future for the long-
suffering people of the countries of the Great Lakes
region.

