Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Mr.NickolayMladenov forhisverycomprehensivebriefing.

I align myself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

Poland firmly supports all initiatives aimed at
stabilization and strengthening peace and security in
the Middle East. Unfortunately, since our last quarterly
debate in October 2017 (see S/PV. 8072), the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has not seen any significant
progress towards achieving peace. Therefore, we must
maintain our commitment to resolving one of the
longest-standing conflicts on our agenda. We should
continue to seek an end to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by reviving the peace process. Only a return to
meaningful bilateral negotiations based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law can
have a positive impact on the process. That is the only
way towards a two-State solution and resolving all
final status issues. At the same time, we encourage the
parties to the conflict to take action so as to achieve
reconciliation and safeguard the dignity and sanctity of
the holy sites, particularly in Jerusalem.

In line with the long-standing position of the EU,
we strongly believe that the aspirations concerning
Jerusalem of both parties must be fulfilled, and a way
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States must be found through negotiations. We
will continue to respect the international consensus on
Jerusalem embodied, inter alia, in resolution 478 (1980),
including with regard to diplomatic representation until
the final status ofthe city is resolved. While recognizing
the special significance of the holy sites of Jerusalem,
Poland also strongly believes that the status quo
established in 1967 concerning the Temple Mount must
be maintained in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan's special role.

Reaching a peace agreement is possible only
through peace talks based on international law and the
principles governing peaceful relations among States
A key element in that context would be a meaningful
dialogue among the three main monotheistic religions.
We support the two-State solution and hope that the
national aspirations of both parties to the conflict will
be met, including Palestine's right to self-determination
and independence, as well as Israel's right to ensure
its security and achieve the normalization of relations
with Arab States. We call on both sides to refrain from
unilateral steps that pre-empt the outcome of final
status negotiations. We expect them to demonstrate
their commitment to peace through their actions and
policies. We continue to monitor developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. We hope that
the process will be successful. Nevertheless, we believe
that reaching an outcome accepted by the international
community could be an important step for the unity of
a future Palestinian State and may, over the long-term,
lead to a sustainable peace agreement.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The effects ofreducing support can produce
serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in the Palestinian territories but also in other
countries that host refugees. The Agency already
faces great challenges in upholding its mandate to
preserve key services, such as education and health
care for Palestinian refugees. In the absence ofa lasting
political solution, the international community cannot
abdicate its responsibility and duty towards Palestinian
refugees, or for ensuring the continuation of the
Agency's work on a sound financial basis. For its part,
Poland will continue to support UNRWA through its
financial contributions.

