Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Spanish presidency's initiative
to convene this meeting and expresses its appreciation
for Spain's work as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Morocco welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), which the
Kingdom co-sponsored.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to international peace and security. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares that conviction with the
international community, which remains concerned
about the threat of terrorism and the risk of non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction or their
means of delivery, developing them, trafficking them
or using them.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) reflected
the common desire to strengthen the fight against
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, and in particular
to prevent their acquisition by non-State actors. The
scope of resolution 1540 (2004), which is unique in
its purview and the universal support it enjoys among
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes, is
undeniable. The lO-year extension of the mandate
of the 1540 Committee in 2011 reflected the shared
determination to pursue the objectives of resolution
1540 (2004), which has filled shortcomings in
international law. Since 2011, the terrorist threat has
been exacerbated to the point of jeopardizing the
stability and territorial integrity of States. Similarly,
the efforts of non-State actors, particularly terrorist
groups, to resort to weapons of mass destruction have
increased. It is that genuine threat that reinforces the
need for the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Morocco shares the conclusions and
recommendations of the 1540 Committee's review of
resolution 1540 (2004) and encourages the Committee
to pursue its efforts to assist Member States in fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution, with the valuable
support of its Group of Experts. Morocco believes that
only active international cooperation and appropriate
technical assistance - based on the principles of
solidarity and shared responsibility and focused on the
mobilization of resources, the exchange of information
and best practices - can help to strengthen national
capacities for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), especially in Africa.
The existing assistance mechanism should be
further strengthened to meet the expectations of States
that need it. It should also be able to effectively support
States in the implementation of the resolution. Morocco
therefore welcomes the relevant recommendations
of the Committee, including those relating to the
strengthening of the assistance provided directly by
the Committee to Member States that request it. I also
reiterate that without the contribution of enhanced
regional and subregional cooperation, national efforts
will remain insufficient.

While supporting the 1540 Committee's relevant
recommendations, Morocco believes that the Committee
should take measures to facilitate and encourage
coordination, particularly at the subregional level.
That is dictated by the importance of proximity and
shared borders in the fight against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials. The 1540 Committee
should also further develop its cooperation with relevant
international organizations and agencies. For example,
the Group of Experts could further engage with those
organizations regarding requests for assistance.

The Committee should also promote the exchange
of experiences, both in New York and at the regional
and subregional levels through, for example, meetings
of national focal points. To that end, I take this
opportunity to announce that in early March 2017
Morocco will organize, along with the 1540 Committee
and the Office of Disarmament Affairs, a meeting of
the national points of contact, which will focus on
training and coordination.

I particularly emphasize the recommendations
aimed at strengthening transparency and the
involvement of Member States. I note with satisfaction
the Council's request to the Committee, in the operative
part of the resolution adopted this morning, to hold
periodic meetings open to all Member States. The
Committee could improve its dialogue with Member
States by continuing the current practice of public
information meetings and open debates of the Council,
as well as by organizing special and thematic meetings.
That would allow Member States to express themselves
directly and collectively consider the challenges and
opportunities associated with the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, Morocco will continue to fulfil its
obligations pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and will
continue its fruitful cooperation with the Committee.

