Mr. Adoumasse (Benin) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to join previous speakers
who have extended to you, Madam President, sincere
congratulations over the accession of your beautiful
country, Nigeria, to the presidency of the Security
Council and to express the full support of my country,
Benin, in fulfilling that noble mission. I express the
deep appreciation of my country to New Zealand,
Nigeria's predecessor in that role, for their leadership
in discharging their task.

Benin aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The concept note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared by
Nigeria as a guide for this open debate and the briefing
made this morning by the Secretary-General provide
highly relevant analyses of the situation. In the view of
the Government of Benin, the topic of today's debate
is particularly important because of the great interest
it holds for the future of the African continent, as we
believe that regional organizations are the appropriate
instruments to confront contemporary challenges to
global security. Moreover, that approach is fully in line
with the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.

While the Charter of the United Nations does not
impose an obligation on Member States, it implicitly
assigns them the responsibility for first-response
measures in situations that represent a threat to
international peace and security. That is the deeper
meaning ofChapter VIII, which recognizes that regional
organizations have the role of addressing matters
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security that manifest regional characteristics. It is
therefore fortunate that several regional integration
organizations, initially geared towards promoting
the economic development of their member States,
have now acquired competencies in matters of peace
and security in response to the significant impact of
political and military crises that have gravely affected
the environment in which they carry out their original
statutory activities.

Contemporary challenges in peacekeeping and
international security are many and complex, and their
resolution holds the key to the survival of humankind.
Those challenges include terrorism and violent
extremism, as embodied by Boko Haram, the Islamic
State, Al-Qaida and affiliated networks and entities,
and the multiple crises and conflicts that have plunged
our peoples into mourning. The role of regional and
subregional organizations must be taken seriously into
account in responding to and meeting those challenges.
This debate allows us to gather the varied perspectives
on ways to implement the crucial cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, particularly in Africa, to deal with
threats to international peace and security.

The most advanced regional organizations with
significant financial means, material resources and
proven expertise, should, in our view, be fully brought
to bear in actions to strengthen the capacities of
African regional and subregional organizations in the
prevention of conflicts, crisis management and post-
conflict stabilization. Benin supports the provisions
of resolution 2167 (2014), which clearly lays out the
guidelines to be followed in that context.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in most peace operations of the African
Union has proven its worth and relevance. Such
cooperation has led, inter alia, to operations such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
and enabled remarkable progress in combating the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the gradual
stabilization ofthe situation in Darfur. We must draw on
the lessons learned from those successful collaborations
to continue to improve the strategic partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, using the
most pragmatic formulas to address the challenges
by ensuring the funding of operations undertaken by
regional organizations with the approval of the Security
Council, in accordance with its mandated powers.

My delegation believes that successful cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
lies in greater coherence of action through regular
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, with a view
to a more flexible use of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and taking into account the intrinsic
realities of each crisis and conflict.

It is important to address the outstanding issues
in the development of the strategic partnership of the
United Nations with the African Union and the regional
economic communities in matters ofpeace and security,
with a forward-looking View to making the most of
such partnerships for the benefit of the effectiveness
of the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council
must assume its full, primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Member States should work towards the emergence of
credible regional organizations throughout the world
to guarantee their effectiveness in managing situations
and finding solutions to the multifarious complex
challenges of today.

I conclude my statement by commending
the European Union, whose commitment to the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly those regarding cooperation
with African regional and subregional organizations,
represents an example to follow. Through its training
of thousands of African soldiers, its capacity-building
projects and its financial and material support, the
European Union is on the frontline of cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations as a way of
resolving conflicts and creating conditions conducive
to peace and security on the continent, with a view to
the sustainable development of its States.

However beyond military action, the search for
peace must attach greater importance to interreligious
and intercultural dialogue to promote peaceful
relations among peoples. That dialogue must involve
all components of society acting collectively to
address the root causes of conflict and establish
healthy relations between grass-roots communities.
That was the overriding goal of the symposium held in
Cotonou from 26 to 28 May, which adopted the African
Initiative for Education on Peace and Development
through Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue. The
manifesto strongly urged, inter alia, the development
and implementation of national peace policies through
dialogue by working together to conceive, plan and
manage development projects broadly, embracing
religious and cultural sensitives at all levels within all
countries.

