Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation joins in
thanking Mr. Annabi for his briefing on the latest
developments in East Timor. We also wish to extend our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the manner in
which you have presided over the Council this month.

Mr. Annabi's briefing brings us to recognize that
there are numerous and difficult challenges still facing the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), as well as the people of East Timor, in
laying the foundations for the development of an
independent country. We wish to commend UNTAET for
its work and the people of East Timor for their continuing
will and determination to see the process through to
fruition.

 

My delegation has taken note of the recent
developments in East Timor in laying the foundation for the
future development of the country. Among these are the
announcement by UNTAET that East Timorese would be
appointed to top administrative positions in the new
administration and the establishment of advisory councils,
which will provide regular forums for exchanges of views
between UNTAET and district representatives. We are
pleased that these advisory councils will allow East
Timorese to voice their concerns on issues such as
development, law and order, infrastructure and public
service, as well as humanitarian issues, and will have
broad-based representation. These developments are further
steps towards creating a sense of ownership among the East
Timorese people, which will ensure that no gaps are created
when the current Transitional Administration ultimately
places control in the hands of the East Timorese people.

We are pleased with reports that militia activities have
decreased and that relations between UNTAET forces and
the Indonesian armed forces have improved considerably.
This augurs well for the future of East Timor. We are also
pleased that the return of refugees continues at a steady
pace, but we are concerned that so many refugees still
remain in West Timor refugee camps. We look forward to
a final resolution of the refugee problem as soon as
possible.

Employment continues to be one of the most critical
issues facing East Timor as the territory attempts to rebuild
its economy after the destruction and devastation of last
year. The reality is cause for grave concern. It is disturbing
to note that approximately 80 per cent of the population of
East Timor is unemployed. If this precarious economic and
social situation persists, it will undoubtedly lead to further
increases in criminal activity. The recent job creation
project which was launched on 1 April by UNTAET, the
United Nations Development Programme and the World
Bank should have a positive effect on the employment
situation. Community participation, which the project
requires, is, in our view, a good opportunity to engage local
communities in building efforts. Recent developments, such
as the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
between UNTAET and the United States Agency for
International Development, will also contribute to the
involvement of local communities.

It is important to recognize that short-term, quick-
impact and labour-intensive projects should be seen in the
context of their contribution to the long-term sustainable
development of East Timor. These projects cannot be seen
as ends in themselves, but are designed to lay the proper
foundations and create the necessary conditions and
infrastructure which will allow the East Timorese people
opportunities to obtain gainful employment in the future.

The restoration of health services in East Timor is
critical. We have observed that access to basic health
services, developing health legislation and instituting
management systems have been given priority attention.
In this regard, the plan to restore health services in the
territory is indeed timely.

Those responsible for gross human rights violations
in East Timor must be brought to justice. Last month, we
welcomed the decision by the Government of Indonesia
to invite three respected human rights groups to join
investigators in probing human rights violations in East
Timor. The recent agreement between UNTAET and the
Government of Indonesia to cooperate in judicial and
human rights matters is encouraging and will certainly
facilitate joint efforts to investigate and prosecute the
human rights violators. These efforts must continue in
earnest.

Jamaica attaches great importance to the
reconciliation process in East Timor. We note recent
reports of the return of former militia members and
combatants to their communities - an essentially smooth
process, to the credit of the East Timorese, who are
determined to heal their society.

There is much that remains to be done in East
Timor. The United Nations is seeking to create the proper
foundation for this work. While recognizing that
significant change cannot be expected overnight, we
continue to support UNTAET's work in this regard.

