Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway has a strong
commitment to the African continent. We therefore
welcome and commend the Secretary-General's report on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. We support the
broad and holistic approach of the report and the
recommendations it contains, and we appreciate this
opportunity to discuss these issues in an open meeting of
the Security Council.

Norway shares the View that conflict prevention,
including early warning and action, and peace-building are
preconditions for lasting peace in Africa. A development
perspective is, however, important. There can be no
development without peace and no peace without
development. The reduction of poverty is a necessary
condition for realistically promoting human rights, stability
and security. The Norwegian development cooperation
programmes with African countries have also increasingly
addressed questions of governance, democracy-building and
human rights, factors which are crucial in order to prevent
conflicts from erupting. We also view humanitarian aid in
close conjunction with efforts to promote peace and prevent
conflict, and we support efforts to enhance African
peacekeeping capacity.

The Secretary-General rightly emphasizes the
responsibility of African countries themselves for
developments in Africa. We welcome the involvement of
the Organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations in all stages of conflict resolution and in
enhancing the capacity for peacekeeping operations.
Improving and enhancing African capacity with regard to
peacekeeping operations and conflict prevention will
contribute to the stability of the continent. The role of the
international community should primarily be to strengthen
and support the efforts and initiatives taken by the
African countries themselves. This is part of the
responsibility of the international community, and we are
looking forward to cooperating with African countries and
others under the aegis of the United Nations.

Norway fully concurs with the Secretary-General's
identification of three critical factors in addressing the
security challenges facing Africa: the need for a clear
understanding of the causes underlying conflicts, the
political will to respond and the need for adequate
resources to address the challenges.

Poverty reduction represents one of the most urgent
challenges in Africa. Poverty reduction is crucial in terms
of economic development, political stability and regional
and global security. It is also in itself a realization of
some of the most fundamental human rights in the social
and economic area. To succeed in this endeavour, we
believe that the following factors must be emphasized.
First, the international trend of reduced disbursements of
development assistance must be reversed. There should
be, inter alia, an increase in the aid provided to least
developed countries. Secondly, increased resources must
be channelled to the social sectors, specifically to
education and health. And thirdly, the focus should be on
the poor segments of the population.

Economic development is fundamental in achieving
poverty reduction. The building of local capacity, which
is a central theme in the Secretary-General's report, is
crucial for economic development, and we see the untying
of aid as a vital step towards facilitating the growth of the
private sector in African countries.

My Government is currently working on a plan to
increase Norwegian development assistance to 1 per cent
of our gross domestic product by the year 2001. Special
emphasis will be placed on increased cooperation with
African countries, on poverty alleviation, on improved
delivery of social services and on debt reduction. Norway
has for a long time strongly advocated international
solutions to the serious debt burden of the heavily
indebted poor countries, and we have focused on
programmes which can provide efficient debt relief
operations. We regard the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt (HIPC) Initiative as an important initiative

 

and a milestone in the efforts by the international
community to ease the debt burden of the poorest and most
indebted countries. The Norwegian Government is now
finalizing a plan for debt reduction for the developing
countries.

Initiatives to stop the unlawful use and excessive
accumulation of small arms ought to be an integral part of
domestic as well as foreign policy. In some countries,
support is needed to restructure the national security sector
and train security personnel. Efforts to collect and destroy
small arms after conflicts also merit our active support. The
proposal by Mali to establish a moratorium on small arms
for West African countries is a very encouraging one, and
we were pleased to be able to participate in thorough
discussions of this proposal at a recent seminar in Oslo. We
join the Secretary-General in urging all African countries to
participate in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms.

Landmines constitute a serious obstacle to post-conflict
reconstruction. We urge all Member countries to sign and
ratify the Ottawa Convention. We join others in
emphasizing strongly the need for adequate resources for
mine-clearing activities. Norway has already stated its
intention to contribute $120 million over the next five years
to this task.

The development efforts of many African countries are
currently being hampered by the lack of adequate
coordination among donors. Sometimes one may actually
do more harm than good. Better coordination at the country
level is crucial, among donors and between donors and the
African countries. This implies that everyone should be
prepared to lower their own flags for the sake of better
results in our development efforts.

Such coordination is also crucial in responding to
conflict situations in order to harmonize policies and
actions, to avoid the possible pitfalls of a proliferation of
mediation efforts and, in cases where sanctions have been
imposed by the international community, to improve their
effectiveness. In this respect we welcome the
recommendation that sanctions should be better targeted at
decision makers. This is in line with a holistic human rights
perspective, where the effects on social, economic and
cultural rights are also duly taken into account.

Finally, I join the Secretary-General in the hope that
the report will mark a new beginning in the relationship
between the United Nations and Africa. Norway strongly
supports the call for continuous involvement by the world
community in the development and security of Africa.
Hopefully, such a partnership will contribute to the
creation of a true African renaissance.

