Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Adviser Karim Khan for his briefing.

The Security Council recently visited Iraq and
witnessed the proper responses by the Government
and the people of Iraq to the internal and external
challenges they face, their Victory over terrorism,
the gradual restoration of security and stability and
the steady progress in rebuilding the economy. China
commends these efforts.

The international community should continue

its strong support for the Iraqi Government in
maintaining security and stability, achieving inclusion
and reconciliation, promoting economic development,
improving people's living standards and accelerating
the reconstruction process. At the same time, we should
not lose sight of the fact that the fight against terrorism
is far from over, with the lingering threat of remnant
terrorist forces, or that it is still necessary to deal with
large numbers of foreign terrorist fighters and their
families remaining in Iraq. Support from all parties is
urgently needed.

China appreciates the tireless efforts and the
tremendous sacrifices made by the people and the
Government of Iraq in the fight against terrorism
and supports Iraq in bringing terrorists to justice in
accordance with the relevant domestic law. China has
taken note of the second report (see S/2019/407) of
the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). We welcome the work of
the Investigative Team in developing an investigative
strategy, setting up core working groups, conducting
field investigations and collecting and analysing
relevant evidence. We support the Investigative Team
in setting priorities for its work in the light of the
actual situation on the ground and acknowledge the
efforts and progress made by the Team. It is our hope
that the Team will continue its close communication
with the Iraqi Government and the relevant parties and
cooperate with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and other stakeholders to play an active role in
holding terrorists accountable and curbing the return
and spread of terrorist forces and their activities.

China commends the Investigative Team's good
cooperation with the Iraqi Government and believes
that the support of the Iraqi Government and the trust
of the people are of great significance in the Team's
fulfilling its mandate and effectively responding to
challenges. The Team should continue to abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, earnestly implement its mandate in strict
accordance with Security Council resolutions and its
terms of reference and, while actively and effectively
carrying out its work, fully respect Iraq's sovereignty
and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on its
territory. We welcome the appointment by the Iraqi
Government of Ms. Al-Khafaji to join the Investigative
Team and look forward to the Team's early completion
of the recruitment of other Iraqi nationals to help
strengthen the capacity of the Iraqi Government to hold
terrorist organizations accountable.

Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
Its impact transcends national borders. As such, it is
hard for any country to deal with it alone. Faced with
this challenge, the international community should be
committed to applying a unified standard and adopting
a zero-tolerance and non-discriminatory approach to
resolutely fighting terrorism. As a victim of terrorism
and an important member of the international counter-
terrorism front, China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community for new progress in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

