Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The Middle East is experiencing dangerous levels of escalation that must be of immediate concern to the Security Council. The rising tensions between the United States and Iran and the related military actions are a source of grave concern. We hope that all parties directly and indirectly involved will exercise maximum restraint and recommit to diplomacy in order to reduce tensions. The Charter of the United Nations sets out clear benchmarks with respect to the use of force, in particular with regard to very restricted and well- defined cases in which it is legal to use force against another Member State. The recent developments undermine the fundamental provisions of international law, upon which our collective security depends and which the Security Council is mandated to protect on behalf of all of us. There is an alarming trend of asserting the right to self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter as the legal basis for preventive military action without appropriate justification. Such justification would include at the very least evidence of the imminence of an armed attack, as well as of the necessity and the proportionality of measures taken in response. Excessively expansive and unchecked interpretations of Article 51 undermine the international rules-based order and are an obstacle to the United Nations mandate to maintain international peace and security. We attach the utmost importance to preserving the integrity and authority of the Charter of the United Nations in that respect. Liechtenstein is concerned at the precarious state of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), a milestone achievement of multilateral diplomacy that has yielded concrete results in terms of nuclear non-proliferation. We recognize the decision by the European signatories to trigger the dispute-settlement mechanism as an effort to preserve the security gains associated with the JCPOA. In addition, we recall that resolution 2231 (2015) continues to be binding on all States, with a special responsibility for all members of the Security Council. Recent discussions on Syria in the Security Council have demonstrated once again that the Council still cannot muster the political will to prioritize the protection of the Syrian people. We thank thosemembers of the Security Council who put their collective weight behind achieving at least a minimal solution for the continued cross-border delivery of aid. They acted responsibly against strong political opposition, in keeping with their role as accountable members of the Council who serve on behalf of the United Nations membership. The same membership has expressed itself repeatedly and clearly on the need to ensure accountability for the worst crimes committed in Syria. While the Council continues to ignore those views, in particular the call for a referral to the International Criminal Court (ICC), the International Impartial and Independent Mechanism (IIIM) has now been established as a full-fledged subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, including in budgetary terms. The IIIM is a constant reminder of the essential role of criminal accountability for the future of Syria. Peace and justice cannot be separated in a political process aimed at sustainable and lasting peace. Liechtenstein continues to support a two-State solution based on applicable international law as the only pathway to a sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Developments on _ the ground, including renewed settlement activities, risk undermining the very prospect of such a solution and are in violation of international law and relevant Council resolutions. We follow with interest the activities of the ICC Prosecutor and note in particular that her preliminary examination into the situation in Palestine concluded with the determination that all the statutory criteria under the Rome Statute for the opening of an investigation have been met. Such proceedings by a standing and authoritative international court are the expression of an effective international rules-based order as advocated consistently by large parts of the United Nations membership. We will continue our support for the ICC in providing justice undeterred and with the confidence of its broadly supported mandate.
