Mr. Tarrago (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Ghanaian presidency for convening this debate on the
situation in Timor-Leste. That country, as a new

member of the international community, continues to
deserve the support of the United Nations in its
struggle to consolidate its independence.

I wish to extend my warmest welcome to His
Excellency Jose Luis Guterres, the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. I also acknowledge the
presence of Ambassador Luis Fonseca, Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, with whose statement we associate
ourselves.

May I also mention the remarkable work done by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ian
Martin, and his team. Their thorough and insightful
report must serve as the basis for the deliberations on
the future of the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste.

The situation in Timor-Leste in the last few
months has reminded us of some valuable lessons in
the field of peacekeeping. We have had bad
experiences when the presence of the United Nations
was shortened for budgetary reasons or to comply with
artificial time frames. The drawdown of peacekeeping
operations should only be carried out upon
achievement of real progress in recovering from
conflict and in building institutions. One cannot but
recall that the precipitous decision to leave Timor-
Leste might have contributed to the security troubles of
the past few months.

The second mistake is not to give proper attention
to national ownership in the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. While the support of the
international community is valuable - indeed,
indispensable - in order to be effective and welcome
by the people, it must respect the sovereign decisions
of the Timorese.

Planning and deciding on the mission are also
essential features not to be dismissed in the case of
Timor-Leste. Suffice it to recall the words of the
Brahimi report just cited by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal. The new mission should be
endowed with a clear mandate and adequate means to
fulfil it. Depriving the mission of the necessary
means - personnel, financial or other - would only
hamstring it in discharging its mandate and would
probably entail further suffering and be more costly in
the future.
My Government believes that the Council has a
clear responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
the people of Timor-Leste. We think that the Council
will honour its commitment to Timor-Leste by taking
the decision to create a new mission in line with the
report of the Secretary-General, which has accurately
captured the meaning of national ownership and taken
on board the will of the Timor-Leste Government.

May I refer to the Brazilian Government's
concern at a tendency to transfer responsibilities of the
United Nations, and of the Security Council, to
individual countries? While such expediency may help
and be salutary in emergencies, it carries many risks if
it is prolonged; risks that range from associating the
United Nations with the condoning of "neo-
trusteeship", to prejudicing the image of the United
Nations as a neutral and impartial provider of
assistance.

It will be critical for the credibility and
implementation of the Council's decisions that the
establishment of the new mission be made in full
agreement with the Timorese authorities and that,
whatever its configuration, the mission report to the
Security Council periodically. It is our view that the
new peacekeeping operation must comprise elements in
all relevant areas. In particular, it should have a
civilian component, including a strong electoral unit; a
police component capable of ensuring public safety;
and a small military component under United Nations
command and control. Brazil is, at present, considering
seriously the possibility of contributing troops to the
military component of the mission, alongside
contributions it can make to the other elements. But it
would do so on the understanding that the mission will
be truly multilateral and fully accountable to the
Security Council.

Creating the mission is only part of the work. It is
highly necessary that countries reinforce their bilateral
cooperation with Timor-Leste in areas that are essential
to a newly born State, such as capacity-building,
electoral assistance, development planning and civil
administration. The Brazilian Government has already
taken steps to start new projects and to continue with
the previous ones.
The efforts of the Timorese towards
reconciliation and their search for justice should be
equally acknowledged. We should support the
Timorese Government's decisions that are meant to

tackle the acute problems of development and to find
ways to improve the well-being of its people.
Instability and unrest will fade only once poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy and other root causes of
conflict are effectively addressed.

The ultimate responsibility for settling the present
crisis lies with the Timorese Government and people.
But the United Nations and its Member States have a
share of the responsibility to assist that country in
setting itself on the path towards peace and
development. The way to do this is through respecting
the will of Timor-Leste, as so ably expressed here by
Minister Guterres.

