Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as
well as the European Free Trade Association country
member of the European Economic Area Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I wish to welcome the presence
among us of Minister Miranda and to thank him for his
assessment of the situation in his country. We also wish
to thank Mr. Gambari, the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General for Africa, for his statement. We
wish him every success in his mission.

The United Nations agenda this week is an
especially busy one. Nevertheless, we should like to
thank you, Madam, for having taken the time in the
Council to broach the situation in Angola. You are
aware of the considerable importance that the European
Union attaches to the situation in that country.

Angola is a country torn by decades of cruel civil
war. Recent brutal attacks on civilians and children by
UNITA have served to remind us of the inhumane scale
of this conflict. The European Union was appalled at
the savagery of the attack by UNITA on civilians
aboard a train in August, which left some 250 people
dead and 165 wounded.

In the midst of these barbarous acts, the
mobilization of civil society and of the churches in
Angola for the establishment of a peace network has
sent out a message of hope. This bold commitment to
peace deserves our fullest respect and support. It
highlights the fact that there is no military solution to
the situation in Angola and that confrontation has to be
replaced by dialogue.

The route to peace is clearly mapped out in the
Lusaka Protocol, which remains the basis of the peace
process. Lusaka continues to be the framework for the
formulation of creative solutions designed to remove
obstacles in the way of its implementation. Those
solutions must be sought in the context of an all-
encompassing national dialogue. The door must be left
open for UNITA, even if UNITA at this point is not
prepared to take the opportunity offered. We call upon
Mr. Savimbi to carry out confidence-building measures
and to enter into dialogue with the Government on how
to implement the Lusaka Protocol.

We welcome the Government's positive gesture
in the offer of an amnesty and the holding of elections
next year. It is important that these elections contribute
to the peace process. These elections have to be free
and fair. They require proper preparation. Participation
of the population should be as broad as possible. We
have also taken note of the decision by President Dos
Santos not to stand again in those elections. This brave
decision may serve as an example for the whole
continent. Furthermore, the European Union supports
the democratization and economic reform measures
initiated by the Government.

The Security Council has to play its full part in
Angola, in particular through sanctions, which remain
the most appropriate instrument for leading UNITA to
adherence to the Lusaka Protocol, particularly by
blunting its war machine. The efforts of various panels
of experts and their follow-up have made it possible to
improve the effectiveness of those sanctions. The
European Union calls on all countries of the world to
respect these sanctions scrupulously. Furthermore,
actors outside the Council can help improve respect for
the sanctions. An example is the Kimberley Process,
which aims to ban conflict diamonds from the
international market. However, it remains clear that
sanctions are not a solution in themselves and that they
must form part of a more comprehensive political
framework.

The United Nations has been making
considerable efforts on the ground. We should here like
to thank the Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for his work. The European
Union supports his mission and his efforts in the
region. We also welcome the extension of the mandate
the United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA). In this
respect, we believe that UNOA should pay particular
heed to human rights, an area financially supported by
several States members of the Union.

The Secretary-General's report presents a horrific
picture of the situation on the ground. We call on all
parties concerned to provide unrestricted access for
humanitarian agencies. The laying of mines, in
particular, is a cause of acute concern for us, and we
urge the parties to cease resorting to such methods. No
military arguments can justify further suffering for the
population. UNITA's military faction must urgently
abstain from attacking humanitarian activities
coordinated by United Nations agencies. The European
Union will continue to support the humanitarian efforts
of the international community in Angola. We also
expect an active engagement from the Government to
improve the humanitarian situation.

As in the case of many domestic conflicts, the
situation in Angola carries serious risks of spilling over
into neighbouring countries, particularly on account of
refugee movements and cross-border military action.
The relationship between Angola and Zambia assumes
paramount importance in this regard. We urge the
countries in the region to embrace dialogue,
cooperation and mutual respect for territorial integrity,
in order that the violence may be prevented from
spreading beyond Angola's borders.

May I thank you once again, Madam, for
arranging for monitoring of the situation in Angola,
which calls for our fullest attention. Positive moves
have been sketched out. It is now a matter for the
Security Council and also for the international
community as a whole to ensure that those moves are
acted upon and that progress towards peace and
stability is achieved. We sincerely hope that we shall
not have to witness again in the future the atrocities
perpetrated against the civilian population in Angola.

