Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for convening
this open debate. It is somewhat reassuring that the
Palestinian question is being discussed in the Security
Council at certain intervals against the backdrop of its
continued inability to act on this seminal concern for
the maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made today by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and by representative of Kuwait
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The overriding message is that the world expects
the Council to act in a determined, visible and
sustained manner to find a just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question. The continued occupation
of Palestinian territories, the systematic human rights
violations, the indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and the expansion of illegal settlements by Israel, the
occupying Power, constitute an affront to the values and
principles that the Organization stands for. The Council
must demonstrate its resolve to address the Palestinian
question as a matter of urgency. Immediate priority
must be given to ensuring international protection
for the Palestinian people, who have been suffering
for decades.

The continued breaches of international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territories
have given rise to an egregious culture of impunity.
In the absence of any international accountability
or sanctions, the occupying Power continues to kill
Palestinian citizens, especially youth and children,
imprisoning and abusing scores of Palestinians in its
detention centres and injuring and displacing thousands
of Palestinian families through its construction and
expansion of illegal settlements. It is obvious that
the policy of settlements and the construction of
the wall in and around occupied East Jerusalem are
being deliberately pursued in order to fundamentally
change the character, status and demography of the
occupied Palestinian territories. That will only serve
to indefinitely postpone the Middle East peace process,
and thus to destabilize the prospects for a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.

The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade in the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people, who have been suffering for decades from
Israel's policy of collective punishment.

We have stated a number of times here - and we
will continue to do so - that the continued injustice
around the Palestinian question remains at the root of
a number of scourges that bedevil international peace
and security. Among a host of potential scenarios, the
resolution of the Palestinian question will help dry
up the ideological reservoir that many international
terrorist and violent extremist groups tend to draw on.
The moral and ethical issues involved in the Palestinian
question need to be unequivocally upheld in order to
defeat the twisted and corrosive messaging used by
violent extremists to serve their own vested agenda.

In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
unwavering support for the just and legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel. Our
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has consistently
articulated this message in her annual addresses to the
General Assembly.

We continue to urge all key actors to remain
seized of efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and
the principle of land-for-peace. In that context, we
take this opportunity to reiterate our support for a
Council resolution to revive the political efforts aimed
at achieving the desired two-State solution and the
convening of an international conference to address the
multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian question in
a focused, structured and holistic manner.

