The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to discuss regional organizations and
contemporary global security challenges. I thank
Ambassador ngu for Nigeria's initiative to organize
this very important meeting.

I have always valued cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, which have gained greater
influence in recent years. Today I will focus on how
to strengthen partnerships so that we can improve our
collective response to evolving threats. My message
is simple: the United Nations increasingly shares
responsibility for peace and security with regional
organizations. We should do everything possible to
help them resolve regional problems - and to include
the States concerned in solutions. At the same time,
regional organizations should continue contributing to
United Nations peace and security efforts. We count
on them for political leverage, as well as civilian and
military capacities.

Members of the Security Council are all too
aware of the changing nature of conflict. Terrorism
and the spread of violent extremism are destabilizing
volatile regions. The stakes are high in any response.
Urbanization, unemployment and population
movements, including massive displacement, are
increasing dramatically. Technological advances in
warfare, including cyberthreats, pose grave dangers
to civilians. Against that shifting security landscape,
the United Nations is deploying into fragile and remote
environments with little peace to keep. The Security
Council has rightly given our Blue Helmets ambitious
mandates to protect civilians, but too often we lack
the proper equipment, resources and training for that
life-saving mission.

To close the gap, last year I called for a fresh review
of peace operations. I am now analyzing the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). We are identifying
the recommendations we can carry out immediately,
and those that will require action by legislative bodies,
Member States and partners. The Panel calls for a
stronger global-regional partnership to ensure that
the Council can draw on a more resilient and capable
network of actors. In recent years, we have seen how
practical cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and the European Union has
enhanced progress in Africa. Now we need to build
on this trilateral cooperation and boost our collective
ability to manage, plan and execute peace operations.

We should also be open to different forms of
engagement with other organizations, including the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the League of Arab
States, NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. The Panel recommends that we
deepen the strategic United Nations-AU partnerships. I
fully agree. Almost two thirds of our peace operations
and nearly 90 per cent of our uniformed peacekeepers
are deployed in Africa.

I applaud the AU and the regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms for significantly
strengthening their capacities and for responding
rapidly to emerging crises. In Mali, the Central African
Republic and Somalia, the African Union has deployed
robust operations in complex settings. That dangerous
work carries a high price. I honour the courage of those
AU troops who have lost their lives in the cause of
peace. The best tribute is to establish lasting security
where they served.

The report calls for greater support to Security
Council-authorized AU peace operations. The experts
recommend that the United Nations enable regional
organizations to share the burden, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. Towards that end, I
draw attention to the Panel's call for more predictable
financing, including through the use of United Nations-
assessed contributions.

There are other important forms of support. We are
helping with planning processes, logistical packages,
United Nations-managed trust funds and access to
United Nations expertise, systems, materiel and
services. The United Nations broad support for the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
also includes political cooperation, which is difficult to
quantify but still highly valuable.

Strengthening conflict prevention and mediation
saves lives. Our joint efforts have made a meaningful
difference in defusing tensions and supporting the
transition in Burkina Faso, encouraging political
dialogue ahead of elections in Guinea, resolving the
electoral crisis in Kenya and ending a political deadlock
in Madagascar through a Southern African Development
Community road map, among other engagements.
Investing in prevention will spare the much higher
human and financial costs of a crisis. Leaders must
recognize that peace will prevent humanitarian
tragedies and spur economic development. We should
place high expectations on the countries concerned and
help them to realize lasting stability.

Our partnerships have brought valuable lessons.
We have learned to manage transitions from regional
operations to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We have provided a logistics support package to the
African Union Mission in Somalia - the AU' s largest
peace operation. The United Nations Office to the AU
is strengthening our impact. Now we must optimize our
collaboration even more. We must continue working
together to harmonize standards. That would improve
the transition from AU operations to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. More systematic coordination
and consultation on policies, guidance and training
standards would ensure coherence at all phases, from
planning to drawdown. Human rights must always be
at the forefront.

The Panel rightly underscores the primacy of the
United Nations Charter and other international human
rights and humanitarian law instruments. United
Nations support to regional partners is contingent on
compliance with United Nations norms and standards,
including the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, the
highest standards of conduct and discipline, the United
Nations financial rules and regulations, as well as other
legislated procedures. We are all accountable for what
we do and how we do it. Our ultimate responsibility is
to the peoples we serve.

We have succeeded in dramatically enhancing our
partnerships. We have come to rely on each other in
critical times. We will continue to advance progress.
The United Nations and regional organizations strive
for a common approach to today's challenges. Our views
may diverge at times, but as long as we are committed
to peace, security and human rights, we will stay on
course to a more secure future.

