The President: I thank the Secretary of State of the
United States of America for her important statement and
for her kind words addressed to the Netherlands and to
me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.

I have listened with great interest to the views
expressed this morning. I will not attempt to summarize
or analyse all the points that have been made. It seems

 

we all agree that small arms pose challenges which the
Security Council, in view of its mandate, has to address. I
believe the principle that should guide us in our efforts to
tackle the small arms issue in essence boils down to one
notion: coherence.

We need a coherent approach in addressing the issue
of small arms proliferation, taking into account all aspects
of this highly complex issue. Coherence is called for in our
search for practical ways and means to curb the wrongful
use of small arms. And coherence should apply to the
efforts of the international community - individual
countries, regional organizations and civil society alike.

Efforts are made around the globe to address this issue
affecting so many civilians. Allow me to pick up on a point
made by the Secretary-General in drawing members'
attention to the valuable contribution of civil society, in
particular IANSA, the International Action Network on
Small Arms. I personally believe that this Council, too,
could have benefited from its input, its broad expertise and
its forward-looking views. But, in any case, let us see to it
that the voice of civil society is heard in the preparations
for the small arms conference in 2001.

Let me assure the Council that we in the Netherlands
stand ready to give further impetus to this highly important
process. Knowing that this readiness is shared by many
countries, I would like to suggest that, when the time is
ripe, we will offer our services. A group of Friends of the
conference could considerably alleviate the preparatory
work in the run-up to the conference.

In this process, the Security Council has its own
distinctive role to play, a role that should not be confined
to verbal support alone. Allow me to share with members
some thoughts on three areas in which the Council can
offer added value.
The first area is voluntary moratoriums on arms
exports to tension zones and conflict regions. The Security
Council can play an important role in alerting Member
States to the detrimental consequences of continued arms
flows to zones of tension and regions in conflict. The
Council should encourage Member States to refrain from
these potentially harmful exports.

The second area is that of full implementation of
Security Council arms embargoes. The Council could
consider looking into ways to enhance the effectiveness of
present arms embargoes - for example, by reviewing the
functioning of all existing sanctions committees.

The third area is the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants. Former
combatants and surplus arms are a dangerous, sometimes
even deadly, combination. The Security Council should,
whenever possible, incorporate adequate measures in
United Nations peacekeeping mandates to prevent small
arms from causing additional pain and suffering after a
conflict has ended. Small arms pose big challenges to all
of us, not least of all to the Security Council.

I thank all members for being here today and for
taking up this challenge.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security, in view of which its attention is drawn
inevitably to small arms and light weapons as the
most frequently used weapons in the majority of
recent armed conflicts.

"The Security Council notes with grave concern
that the destabilizing accumulation of small arms has
contributed to the intensity and duration of armed
conflicts. The Council also notes that the easy
availability of small arms can be a contributing
factor to undermining peace agreements,
complicating peace-building efforts and impeding
political, economic and social development. In this
regard, the Council acknowledges that the challenge
posed by small arms is multifaceted and involves
security, humanitarian and development dimensions.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned that
countries involved in, emerging from, or close to
protracted armed conflicts are particularly vulnerable
to violence resulting from the indiscriminate use of
small arms in armed conflict. In this regard, the
Council recalls the report of the Secretary-General
on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict of
8 September (S/1999/957) and its resolution 1265
(1999) of 17 September 1999.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the right
of individual and collective self-defence recognized

 

in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the legitimate security demands of all countries should
be fully taken into account. The Council recognizes
that small arms are traded globally for legitimate
security and commercial considerations. Bearing in
mind the considerable volume of this trade, the
Council underlines the vital importance of effective
national regulations and controls on small arms
transfers. The Council also encourages the
Governments of arms-exporting countries to exercise
the highest degree of responsibility in these
transactions.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
prevention of illicit trafficking is of immediate
concern in the global search for ways and means to
curb the wrongful use of small arms, including their
use by terrorists.

"The Security Council welcomes the various
initiatives that are currently under way, globally and
regionally, to address the issue. These initiatives at the
regional level include the Economic Community of
West African States moratorium on the production and
trade in small arms, the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials, the European Union Joint Action on Small
Arms and the European Union Code of Conduct on
Arms Exports. At the global level, the Council
welcomes the negotiation process on the elaboration of
an international convention against transnational
organized crime, including a draft protocol against the
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms,
ammunition and other related materials.

"The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of regional cooperation in tackling the issue of illicit
trafficking in small arms. Initiatives, such as the work
done by the Southern African Development
Community and the Southern African Regional Police
Commissioners Coordinating Organization, illustrate
how regional cooperation can be harnessed to tackle
small arms proliferation. The Council recognizes that
while regions may sometimes benefit from the
experiences of others, one region's experience cannot
be extended to others without taking into account their
different characteristics.

"The Security Council also welcomes and
encourages efforts to prevent and combat the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation of and illicit

trafficking in small arms and invites Member States
to involve civil society in these efforts.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
the growing attention paid within the United Nations
system to the problems associated with the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms. The
Council welcomes the initiative by the Secretary-
General for Coordinating Action on Small Arms
(CASA), designed to ensure a coherent and
coordinated approach to the small arms issue within
the United Nations system.

"The Security Council notes that although the
humanitarian impact of small arms in a conflict
situation is verifiably serious, a detailed analysis is
not available. The Council therefore requests the
Secretary-General to specifically include the
humanitarian and socio-economic implications of the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation and
transfer of small arms and light weapons, including
their illicit production and trade, in the relevant
studies he is currently undertaking.

"The Security Council calls for effective
implementation of arms embargoes, imposed by the
Council in its relevant resolutions. The Council
encourages Member States to provide the Sanctions
Committees with available information on alleged
violations of arms embargoes and recommends that
the Chairmen of the Sanctions Committees invite
relevant persons from organs, organizations and
Committees of the United Nations system, as well as
other intergovernmental and regional organizations
and other parties concerned, to provide information
on issues relating to the implementation and
enforcement of arms embargoes.

"The Security Council also calls for measures
to discourage arms flows to countries or regions
engaged in or emerging from armed conflicts. The
Council encourages Member States to establish and
abide by voluntary national or regional moratoria on
arms transfers with a View to facilitating the process
of reconciliation in these countries or regions. The
Council recalls the precedents for such moratoria
and the international support extended for their
implementation.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of incorporating, as appropriate, within
specific peace agreements, with the consent of the

 

parties, and on a case-by-case basis within United
Nations peacekeeping mandates, clear terms for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, including the safe and timely disposal
of arms and ammunition. The Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide the negotiators of peace
accords with a record of best practice based upon
experience in the field.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to develop a reference manual for use in the
field on ecologically safe methods of weapons
destruction in order better to enable Member States
to ensure the disposal of weapons voluntarily
surrendered by civilians or retrieved from former
combatants. The Council invites Member States to
facilitate the preparation of such a manual.

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendations of the Group of Governmental
Experts on Small Arms (A/54/258), including the
convening of an international conference on the
illicit arms trade in all its aspects no later than 2001,
noting the offer by Switzerland to host the
conference. The Council encourages Member States
to participate actively and constructively in the
conference and any preparatory meetings, taking into
account the recommendations contained in this
Statement, with a view to ensuring that the
conference makes a meaningful and lasting
contribution to reducing the incidence of illicit arms
trafficking."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/99/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.
