Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like
to start by thanking Special Representative Fall and
the Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), Ambassador Allam-
Mi, for their very useful briefings to the Council today.

As we have heard this morning, the Central African
region continues to face a number of challenges. These
include electoral processes and related challenges
to political space. Underdevelopment and the
humanitarian situation in the region are also a source of
concern. Taken together, the situation deserves our and
the region's continued attention, as it serves as an early
warning sign of even greater challenges down the line.

In such circumstances, the role of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
in conflict prevention, including through its good
offices and support for regional cooperation and
integration, is, of course, of vital importance. Regional
offices are one of the most effective operational tools
that the United Nations has to prevent conflict. They
should be supported, strengthened and multiplied. In
this regard, the Council has an important role to play,
in particular by standing by our envoys. We would like
to express our full support for the efforts of Special
Representative Fall and his team in UNOCA today.

Regional organizations such as ECCAS not
only play a critical role in promoting integration and
development, but also are key to preventing conflict
and promoting peace. We therefore encourage
continued support for building the capacities ofregional
organizations in the Central African region. We also
welcome the increased collaboration between ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), including the upcoming summit.

We remain deeply concerned by the dire security,
human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic and welcome the joint visit
undertaken by ECOWAS and the Secretary-General of
ECCAS. We also welcome the joint United Nations-
African Union visit to the Central African Republic in
April. It is important that the United Nations continue
to promote and support the African Union and ECCAS-
led African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and
the Libreville road map.

We are concerned that the situation in the north-
west and south-west regions of Cameroon remains
unresolved. The need to address long-standing
grievances is evident. In order to move forward
peacefully, it is important that all parties act responsibly,
refrain from acts of violence and contribute to the
upholding of human rights, as well as to an open and
inclusive dialogue, not least regarding the question of
decentralization. The situation in Cameroon has direct
implications for peace in the broader subregion, and we
must therefore continue to follow the situation closely,
including in the light of the upcoming elections. The
continued engagement of the Special Representative
will be essential, and he has our full support in
these efforts.

Sweden supported the organization of the Lake
Chad governors' forum on peacebuilding, prevention,
stabilization and regional cooperation, held in
Maiduguri in May. That successful meeting was
preceded by consultations with more than 1,000 women,
men and young people from communities around the
lake, including religious groups. This consultation
and the forum itself clearly highlighted the need for a
holistic, regional approach to address the root causes of
the lack of peace and stability in the region, including
the adverse effects of climate change.

The main outcome of this process was to establish
the governors' forum as a vehicle for recurrent dialogue
between the governors of the States affected, aimed at
improving coordination and cross-border collaboration.
We hope that these and other efforts to follow up
on resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin
region, will benefit the development of the regional
stabilization strategy.

