Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): C6te
d'Ivoire welcomes today's meeting on the theme
"United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining peace and
security: the contribution of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in countering terrorist threats".

We welcome the Secretary-General and the various
ministers in attendance, whose presence underscores
the importance of today's meeting and attests to our
unwavering commitment to combating terrorism.

We thank the representatives of the various regional
organizations for their excellent briefings.

Terrorism is one of the most serious contemporary
threats to international peace and security, to which
individual States cannot find solutions. Fortunately, the
awareness of the need for a collective approach to the
fight against the scourge has, in recent years, led States to
strengthen and better coordinate their efforts to combat
it, through regional and subregional mechanisms.

The joint efforts of the SCO, the CIS and the CSTO,
which cover a vast geographical area from Eastern
Europe to the Far East, are therefore the result of that
collective approach, which cote d'Ivoire fully supports.
My country believes that those three organizations
have undeniable comparative advantages, based on a
good understanding of the local political, economic and
social dynamics. They are therefore better equipped
to develop conflict prevention and counter-terrorism
mechanisms that are adapted to the situation on
the ground.

My delegation also welcomes the excellent
cooperation among those regional organizations and
the United Nations, in particular through the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

With regard to regional crises, including the
conflict in Afghanistan, it is imperative to pay special
attention to the political and security situation. My
delegation therefore calls for increased support for
political dialogue among all actors in Afghan society,
including women and young people, as well as for
capacity-building in security institutions, in order to
address the many challenges facing the country.

In the area of preventive diplomacy, the work
of the SCO, the CIS and the CSTO should further
promote initiatives to ease tensions and promote
dialogue among the States of the region in order to
help build regional peace and stability. C6te d'Ivoire
also welcomes the gains made from the cooperation
among those three regional organizations, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Despite several challenges, such
cooperation has yielded encouraging results in the
areas of counter-terrorism, anti-money-laundering and
combating arms and drug trafficking. The fight against
terrorism must also be accompanied by actions aimed
at reducing poverty and unemployment, which foster
radicalization and violent extremism.

Like the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, many regional
organizations around the world have acknowledged the
threats that terrorism poses to regional and international
peace and security and recognized the need to establish
appropriate mechanisms to better unite and coordinate
their efforts.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has in that regard adopted a counter-
terrorism strategy, based on an integrated approach
that emphasizes coordination and information-sharing
among member States. On 14 September, ECOWAS
member States decided to take another step by taking
ownership of their collective security through the
adoption of a five-year (2020-2025) $1 billion priority
action plan to finance the fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to strengthening cooperation among
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism with a view
to maintaining international peace and security.

