Mr. Corr (Ireland): First and foremost, may I
warmly congratulate Jamaica and you personally,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council in November. I would also like to thank you
for convening this important meeting. I would also
wish to thank very warmly Ambassador Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
concerning Liberia, for his work and that of his
delegation, and for the statement he made earlier.

I am very grateful also for the presence of
Ambassador Ayafor and the members of the Panel of
Experts and thank them for producing such an
outstanding report. I would also like to indicate my
delegation's welcome for the presence here today of
Mr. Tsui, from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), who has briefed us on
the Secretary-General's report of 5 October, a report
which my delegation attaches considerable importance.
Finally, I would also, of course, like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia to our meeting.

Belgium, as holding the Presidency of the
European Union, will be making a statement later in
this debate with which Ireland fully associates itself.

My delegation believes that the Panel of Experts
has clearly done an excellent job. Its report is
exceptionally well researched and impressively
detailed. It is clear that the Panel has employed the
highest evidentiary standards in its work. The case
studies detailed in the report have been meticulously
assembled.

The report is also crucially judiciously balanced.
It makes recommendations that acknowledge areas
where the Liberian authorities have made legitimate
efforts to comply with the demands of resolution 1343
(2001), as well as recommendations that deal with clear
breaches of the arms embargo by the same authorities.

We will need to be flexible to take account of
convincing signs that may appear indicating that the
Liberian authorities have demonstrated in good faith
that they have renounced their connections to the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF).

We also need to be firm in the face of evidence
that the Liberian Government is still violating the
demands of the Council in respect of the arms embargo
and the demand to expel members of the RUF from
Liberia. In this respect, there are worrying indications
in the report that the ties between the Liberian
authorities and the RUF are far from broken.

Like other members of the Council here today,
my delegation is encouraged at the recent progress in
the peace process in Sierra Leone. We are heartened by
the success achieved to date in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in that
country, and we, like others, look forward to the
planned summit meeting of the heads of State of the
Mano River Union in January and to the successful
holding of elections in Sierra Leone in May with the
participation of the fully politicized RUF, which will
have rejected decisively a military role.

But these objectives are planned, not yet realized.
They are still some way from being achieved.

My delegation does not accept that because there
has been progress that the Council should not
necessarily consider additional sanctions measures. We
believe that the progress achieved of late vindicates the
robust and highly professional engagement of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the policy of sanctions. The Council demanded last
March that the Government of Liberia, inter alia, cease
its support for the RUF. We have not seen any
indication of a demonstrable change in the attitude of
the Monrovia authorities in this regard. If the January
summit produces tangible results, we will warmly
welcome this. We owe it to the people of the Mano
River Union States to strive to preclude any relapse
into open conflict.

Ireland attaches the highest importance to the aim
of avoiding adverse humanitarian consequences when
sanctions are imposed. On timber sanctions, there is
such a broad and diverse range of views on the
humanitarian consequences of timber-related measures,
as to make it difficult to make a full and balanced
judgement. This should not be seen as criticism of any
one agency. It simply reflects the difficulty of
obtaining reliable data in a country like Liberia where
the level of financial transparency is low.

While we must require the Liberian authorities to
meet their obligations, we have, at the same time, to
avoid measures which would entail the further
suffering of an already extremely vulnerable
population. My delegation has studied carefully the
report of the Secretary-General of 5 October on the
humanitarian impact of further sanctions and listened
carefully to the points made by the Director of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) on the implications on employment,
livelihoods and national budget. We fully note,
therefore, the assessment of the humanitarian impact of
sanctions on timber and give the points made by
OCHA full weight. Accordingly, we believe that it is
important that further investigation of the humanitarian
consequences of timber-based measures be undertaken.
It is indeed clearly regrettable that some of the
revenues from the legitimate and reputable Liberian
International Ship and Corporate Registry have been
siphoned to finance arms transactions in some
instances rather than pay for desperately needed
humanitarian relief and development projects. We note
in regard, as I said earlier, what OCHA has said of the
dire humanitarian state of the country.

The misuse of Liberia's economic resources -
whether it is in the timber industry or the shipping and
corporate register - to pay for the weapons of a rebel
force which has visited such misery on the subregion is
an affront to the people of the Mano River Union. It is
also a clear violation of the demands of the
international community expressed in resolution 1343
(2001).

Accordingly, my delegation believes that
consideration should be given to the Panel's
recommendation that the revenue from the Ship and
Corporate Registry be paid into an escrow account that
would channel the funds directly towards development
needs.

The ongoing violation of the arms embargo
continues to threaten the stability and security of the
Mano River Union. Accordingly, we welcome the
Panel's recommendation that the arms embargo should
include non-State actors in the region - the Liberians
United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD) and
United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia
(ULIMO) factions, the RUF and the Guinean armed
dissident groups. In terms of preventing illicit arms
flows to the region, we commend the Panel's
recommendation that United Nations establish a
working group to develop the modalities for a
standardized arms import End-User Certificate.

It is also important that we take note that the
Panel has recommended areas where the Council might
consider the easing or lifting of particular sanctions,
such as the possible reopening of the Liberian aircraft
registry in accordance with the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), We are open to
consider any such measures where there have been
signs of genuine compliance.

It is clear that the travel ban has proved to be
effective despite the violations that are meticulously
documented in the report. We believe that this measure
is a powerful instrument, but that it also needs to be
deployed with care and flexibility. We fully endorse,
therefore, the views of Panel that the travel ban list
should not be set in stone. There is a need for the list to
have a capacity to be amended, so that if it becomes
clear that an individual should no longer be listed, then
his of her name can be removed expeditiously.
Conversely, it is equally important that there should be
the capacity to add other names where this is deemed
appropriate. We must also be vigilant to ensure that the
loopholes and implementation gaps identified by the
Panel are closed. The Panel has provided some
interesting and balanced recommendations in respect of
the management of the travel ban list. These seem
sensible, and my delegation looks forward to
discussing them in the Liberia sanctions Committee.

In summary, Ireland believes that the Panel has
provided the Council with a commendable survey of
the degree of implementation of resolution 1343
(2001), as well as a range of recommendations to help
ensure more effective compliance in the future. We
look forward to discussing these further.

We agree with the Panel that there should be an
ongoing assessment of Liberian compliance, and
therefore are supportive of the recommendation that the
Panel should have their mandate renewed for a short
assessment mission in April, as well as a later short
mission if, and only if, the sanctions imposed on
Liberia need to be renewed in May.

