Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The United States is not here today to listen and discuss. We are here to speak directly and without qualification. The United States condemns in the strongest possible terms yesterday's attacks on Turkish troops.Those attacks were wholly unjustified, senseless and barbaric. Our deepest sympathies are with the loved ones of the 33 Turkish soldiers who were killed. In the days ahead, the commitment of the United States to our NATO ally Turkey will not waver. Turkey has our full support to respond in self-defence to the unjustified attacks on Turkish observation posts that resulted in the deaths of their own forces. We have now seen Russia and the Al-Assad regime violate Astana ceasefire agreements on three separate occasions: first, in eastern Ghouta, then in Dar'a and, finally, in Idlib. This attack should serve as the final nail in the Astana format coffin. It is a format broken beyond all repair, and we cannot return to it. We cannot entrust it with the vital work of establishing a new ceasefire. With that in mind, the United States calls for an immediate, durable and verifiable ceasefire in north- western Syria. As Secretary Pompeo has stated, a permanent ceasefire is the answer to this conflict. We call for the Russian Federation to immediately ground its warplanes, and we call for all Syrian forces and their Russian backers to withdraw to the ceasefire lines first established in 2018. As President Trump has made clear, the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran must halt their offensive before more innocent civilians are killed and displaced. To that end, we also urge the Secretary- General to do everything in his power to broker a ceasefire, as the United Nations must play a central, active role if we are to avoid even greater escalation. Today's meeting is, of course, about the reckless and serious risk that the Al-Assad regime and Russia's offensive places on the security of a NATO ally, but it is not only about that. We sat in this Chamber yesterday (see S/PV.8734) and heard the stories of the people of Idlib, whose daily existence has been reduced to the simple task of survival. Amid the Russian airstrikes, the chill of the Syrian winter and the pangs of unending hunger, the Syrian people are desperate for aid; they are begging for relief and they are praying for deliverance. That is just enough. I said yesterday that each country represented here has a choice to make. It is a choice we are confronted with again today. So I am going to ask again: Are we going to sit back and watch? Are we going to remain silent, or will we deliver? How many more babies have to freeze to death before we raise our voices and say, "Enough"? And so, this is the message of the Trump administration today. To the relentless violence against innocent women, children and men; to the obstruction of life-saving humanitarian assistance; and to the embrace of unforgivable cruelty toward the Syrian people, we say: "Enough. Simply enough."
