Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Malaysian presidency for organizing
this open debate on a topic as important as that of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I also thank the Secretary-General as well as the
various speakers - Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Mr. Gregory
Koblentz and Mr. Kim Won-soo - for their briefings.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. North Korea is ardently
pursuing its forced march along the path of nuclear- and
ballistic-missile programmes. Pyongyang conducted
its fourth nuclear test on 6 January and launched an
unprecedented number of ballistic missile over the past
few months, each time improving the technologies it
needs to acquire deliverable nuclear weapons. As the
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan just pointed out, those destabilizing actions in
violation of Security Council resolutions are a clear
challenge to the non-proliferation regime, which is the
cornerstone of our collective security.

In Syria, allegations ofthe use of chemical weapons
by the regime have continued since the beginning of
the conflict, despite the Security Council's resolutions
and its unanimous condemnations. The recent chemical
attacks on 1 August in Saraqeb and 10 August in
Aleppo, airdropped from helicopters, have again killed
a woman and two children. The conclusions of the
report of the Joint Investigation Mechanism expected
this week are therefore eagerly anticipated. The Council
will then have to shoulder its responsibilities and take
the necessary measures, as it committed to doing in
resolution 2118 (2013). The perpetrators of these attacks
will be held to account. The ban imposed on the use of
these inhumane weapons must be restored.

Allegations of their use are compounded by
remaining uncertainties regarding the Syrian
Government's declaration on its chemical programme
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons: the possible existence of residual capabilities
on Syrian territory only increases the risk of the
proliferation of such weapons and their falling into
the hands of terrorist groups. The comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) requires us to
remain vigilant on this issue. The lack of transparency
shown by a State party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
weakens the global non-proliferation regime.

In the context I just described, the risk of the
proliferation of nuclear, radiological, biological and
chemical materials and their falling into the hands
of terrorists groups is unfortunately no longer some
distant potential risk, but rather an imminent threat.
Reports reaching us from Iraq and Syria on the use of
chemical weapons by Da'esh underscore the reality of
the threat. The security of radioactive sources in the
territories controlled by this terrorist group is also of
grave concern.

Twelve years ago, the international community and
the Security Council responded to this risk by adopting
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution, together
with the Committee responsible for monitoring its
implementation, marked a decisive step in preventing
the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Resolution 1540 (2004) now
constitutes one ofthe essential tools available to Member
States in the fight against this threat, and undeniable
progress in its implementation has been achieved.
Today, the majority of States throughout the world has
adopted measures aimed at transcribing the provisions
of the resolution into their national legislation. Whether
this concerns the physical protection of sensitive
materials, the strengthening of border controls or
the setting up of export-control mechanisms, the
international community is vigilant in preventing
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical materials
from falling into the hands of terrorists. Furthermore,
the main international, regional and subregional
organizations have adopted strategies to implement and
promote the measures set out in the resolution.

France, too, is shouldering its responsibilities.
Within the framework of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we coordinate the
working group on assistance, which constitutes an
essential component of the Committee's work aimed
at developing countries. France actively supports its
partner States, including through substantial financing,
in order to help them repatriate to France sources that
might otherwise become orphaned.

Today, independent assessments by the 1540 (2004)
Group of Experts show that the implementation of the
resolution has progressed throughout the world and
in all areas. But, as Mr. Koblentz stated, the threats
are evolving as well, and new challenges await us.
The comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which is currently under
way under the leadership of Spain, should provide
an opportunity for us all to tailor and strengthen our
tools to better combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and the risk of their falling into the
hands of terrorists. France supports strengthening the
operational role of the 1540 (2004) Committee, as well
as of its expertise and the matching of requests for and
offers of assistance.

Furthermore, France believes that the security of
radioactive sources should be strengthened throughout
the world, particularly with regard to highly active
sealed sources. That is the aim of the joint declaration
proposed by France at the Nuclear Safety Summit in
Washington, DC, this year, which was supported by
28 States. It is also the goal of the draft resolution
to be submitted to the First Committee of General
Assembly. Indeed, the theft of such materials, although
infrequent, is highly troubling, and there could be
serious consequences if such materials are acquired
by terrorists.

I would like to conclude on a hopeful note: the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) affords us a unique opportunity
to strengthen our collective security, to better prevent
the risks of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and to strengthen the
protection of sensitive materials and goods. We hope
by the end of this year to achieve more rigorous and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I would once again assure the Security Council of
France's commitment in this area.

