Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and
the representative of Canada for his update on the
upcoming Defence Ministerial Meeting in Vancouver
and for hosting it. I would especially like to commend
and thank Bangladesh for its contribution today. The
input of Bangladesh, as a major troop-contributing
country (TCC), is very important. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express our condolences to
Bangladesh for its recent loss of peacekeepers in Mali
just a few days ago.

Let me begin by paying tribute to all the men
and women who have served in United Nations peace
operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved countless lives. Many have lost their lives in the
service of the United Nations and, as others have said,
we owe them a huge debt of gratitude.

For us, the Secretary-General's proposal for reform
of the peace and security architecture aims to create
a better framework for more effective United Nations
peace and security efforts. It is vital that we give him
our full support and stand united behind him in that
endeavour. Among other things, his proposal seeks
to strengthen the link between political strategies
and operations. That is a prerequisite for success and
must remain our point of departure when we consider
how best to configure peace operations. It is essential
to ensure that peacekeeping operations have the
capabilities they need from the start.

We must also continue to explore concrete options
for more sustainable and predictable financing for all
Security Council-mandated peace operations, including
through assessed contributions. It is important to keep
in mind that reform and efficiency are not primarily
budgetary questions. They are about delivering better
with the resources available. Efficiency should be
measured in deliverables, the criteria for success and
the performance indicators on how well we keep the
peace and protect those who need protection.

Mandates that are more realistic, prioritized and
flexible, and better tailored to their context, will
increase the potential for a successful outcome. There
must be opportunities to make course corrections and
adjust when things are not working. That requires
frank input from across the system and from troop- and
police-contributing countries. Flexibility will ensure
that operations are tailored to the specific challenges
on the ground. To achieve that, we must empower those
on the ground and strengthen leadership capacity, as
the Secretary-General proposes.

Operational plans based on clear and measurable
objectives, accompanied by benchmarks for follow-
up and reporting back to the Security Council, should
guide integrated mission planning and leadership. The
inclusion of operational criteria for success can help
to sequence the campaign plan and thereby mitigate
capability shortfalls.

All of the above require informed analysis from
the Secretariat, including sound, strategic military and
police advice, based on troop-to-task analysis. As many
colleagues have already said, improving the Council's
ability to give dynamic and strategic mission mandates
will demand greater frankness in the manner in which
the Secretary-General reports to it and presents options
for its consideration.

A stronger common understanding of operational
needs, shared with troop- and police-contributing
countries during the force generation process, will also
make it possible for smaller contributing countries to
join together to provide the United Nations with unique
capabilities. One example of that is the contribution by
my country, together with Norway, Portugal, Denmark
and Belgium, of C-l30 air transportation for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Another is multinational
training teams with the ability to train personnel in
United Nations mission headquarters in the field so as
to improve cohesive command and control.

We welcome resolution 2378 (2017) and look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations
on a mechanism to fill existing gaps in terms of force
generation, including through effective and efficient
training and capacity-building. Contributing countries
have a responsibility to ensure that peacekeepers are
properly prepared, trained and equipped to meet the
challenges they will face in the field.

Troop-contributing countries' meetings related
to the mandates of peace operations are important.
However, we should do more to realize the full potential
for interaction between contributing countries and the
Secretariat, thereby enabling the Secretary-General
to provide the Council with in-depth and strategic
military and police advice. For that reason, we need
more predictable, uniform and coherent processes for
triangular cooperation and dialogue. The additional
TCC meeting on MINUSMA in January led to a more
open process, which has contributed to the Secretariat's
new and welcome approach to mission-specific strategic
force generation. That resulted in the MINUSMA force
generation conference in May. We truly believe that
this format can strengthen the force generation process.
As we all agree, troop-and police-contributing
countries must fully adhere to the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. We
commend the Secretary-General for his leadership
on the issue, including the event on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse held during the high-
level week. As requested in resolution 2272 (2016), we
must be prepared to replace military units and formed
police units when the appropriate steps to investigate
allegations have not been taken.

We are deeply concerned about the increasing risks
that our Blue Helmets face in difficult and complex
environments. The Council, together with the troop-
and police-contributing countries, has a responsibility
to ensure that the commanders and troops that we send
into the field have all the tools they need to protect both
the communities they serve and themselves. We firmly
support new capabilities, such as the use of modern
technology, qualified air assets and peacekeeping
intelligence assets. They are key force multipliers
that can improve performance and reduce casualties.
Denying the development of that type of capability
hampers United Nations forces' ability to protect
themselves and civilians. Those capabilities, together
with enhanced training and equipment, will enable us
to become more agile and do a betterjob with less risk.
In addition, reaching the goal of at least 15 per cent
female observers and staff officers in the field will
increase missions' effectiveness.

To sum up, we believe that force generation can
benefit from greater openness and transparency in
the process, increased frankness and better strategic
military and police advice from the Secretary-General
to the Council, sequenced mandates with prioritized
tasks and the use of enhanced new capabilities that
reduce risks and improve performance.

My country has a long tradition of participating
in United Nations peace operations, with more than
80,000 Swedish women and men having taken part
in them to date. From our very first group of military
observers, who participated in the Golan Heights in
1948, to our current engagement in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, Sweden's commitment has remained firm. We
will continue to contribute and do everything we can to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping can meet the
challenges of the twenty-first century.

