Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of Peru
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
for his briefing on protecting critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks.

The current situation of widespread cross-border
terrorism represents a major challenge facing us all. In
that regard, my delegation appreciates your initiative,
Mr. President, to include this item on the agenda of
our work.

In adopting resolution 2341 (2017), the Security
Council gauged the scale of the damage caused by
terrorist acts to critical infrastructure, in particular
ports, airports, nuclear facilities, hospitals, schools and
transport systems. The transnational nature of terrorist
acts calls for States to be more vigilant and requires
a comprehensive, coordinated and effective response.
The protection of critical infrastructure must also be
paid particular attention by States in order to protect
the lives of their people. That is why my delegation
reiterates the need for every State to increase its level
of vigilance, raise awareness among its population and
to equip itself with the appropriate means of prevention
and protection.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that the effective
and more comprehensive implementation of the various
legal counter-terrorism instruments could effectively
contribute to protecting critical infrastructure. At
the regional level, strengthening cross-border efforts
is therefore desirable by pooling counter-terrorism
tools and by sharing information, experiences and
best practices.

Protecting critical infrastructure is at the heart
of the counter-terrorism programme in cote d'Ivoire.
In 2015, the National Assembly of Cote d'Ivoire
adopted a law on the suppression of terrorism. Cote
d'Ivoire has also signed and ratified the main counter-
terrorism legal instruments at the regional and
international levels. Following the sad terrorist attack
in Cote d'Ivoire's coastal town of Grand Bassam in
March 2016, my country's authorities bolstered its
counter-terrorism arsenal by taking steps to increase
the level of vigilance in order to prevent any further
terrorist attacks, including by stepping up intelligence,
strengthening the operational capacity of our counter-
terrorism units, increasing material resources, training
and international cooperation, and by raising awareness
among the population on how to act in the case of a
terrorist attack.

In order to ensure better surveillance at sensitive
sites, my country's authorities have emphasized
prevention focused on two major areas, namely,
intelligence and operations. Specific intelligence
services have been established within different forces
and benefit from the support of some of our bilateral
partners. At the operational level, the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire has set up specialized units within various
contingents of the Defence and Security Forces of cote
d'Ivoire whose task is to intervene in any terrorist
attack. The units regularly receive appropriate training
and the necessary material resources.

Also with regard to training, with France's support,
Cote d'Ivoire will host a region-wide school in July
to train military and civilian officers on counter-
terrorism. Furthermore, Cote d'Ivoire authorities have
taken measures to prevent the financing of terrorist
groups and have established a counter-terrorism action
plan for the country.

C6te d'Ivoire world like to reaffirm once again that
it is willing to work with all its bilateral and multilateral
partners to ensure that counter-terrorism efforts are
successful, in particular as they pertain to the risk
terrorism poses to our countries' critical infrastructure.
Our States must constantly coordinate their policies to
combat the terrorist threat, whose human and material
toll is increasingly heavy. This scourge must never
triumph over our determination.

