The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is an important moment for the Security Council. It marks the beginning of an agenda that both has had enormous impact on the ground and is the source of ongoing frustration. However, above all, we should salute the work of civil society in the creation and implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, and it is its voice that should be heard today. We are inspired by the brave female protesters in Belarus, who are exemplary agents of peaceful change. While we see progress towards full, equal and meaningful participation, women's participation in formal peacemaking processes, for instance, remains limited. Many peace agreements do not include provisions that give a sufficient voice to women and adequately address their security and peacebuilding needs. We also encourage the Security Council to more consistently invite female expert briefers. As acontribution to further strengthening the participation pillar of the women and peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein commissioned a research project from the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security on the impact of women's participation in State armed forces on respect for international humanitarian law. To allow women to be agents of change and to contribute to a more peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, we need to create an environment that is enabling and inclusive, free of discrimination and unfair social norms and attitudes. Mainstreaming the women and peace and security agenda within the entire United Nations system is of the essence to that end, as is the creation of synergies with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5. We deeply regret attempts to weaken internationally agreed human rights standards and to roll back the goals of the women and peace and security agenda by members of the Security Council itself. That regress is particularly worrisome in times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has disproportionately challenged women and girls. The pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing inequalities and has been the cause of the shadow pandemic for women and girls in particular, pushing women out of the workforce, depriving girls and young women of their right to education and compounding the crisis of domestic violence. Reports of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and Armed Conflict document rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls and boys in a large number of conflict situations, many of which are on the Security Council's agenda. Harmful gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics are the root cause of sexual and gender-based violence, which affects women and girls disproportionately. However, the same stereotypes also impair men and boys and often result in underreporting, as also documented by the Liechtenstein-based human rights organization All Survivors Project. Resolution 2467 (2019) and its comprehensive survivor-centred approach are an important step forward for the women and peace and security agenda. In times of quarantines, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is particularly important to ensure that survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have access to reporting mechanisms and necessary services. In addition to ensuring the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), we call on the Council to include conflict-related sexual violence as a designation criterion in targeted sanctions regimes. We firmly believe that there can be no peace without justice and no justice without peace, and there can be no justice without justice for all women. Structural inequalities, discrimination and poverty all too often hinder women's access to justice, including transitional justice processes. We thank Belgium for its leadership in the Council on this topic, and we hope that the Council will agree on an outcome with a strong gender dimension. Achieving peaceful, just and inclusive societies, as envisioned in SDG 16, requires increased access for women to justice from the local to the national level, developing gender-responsive legal and judicial systems and promoting the greater participation of women in the justice sector, including in the post-conflict period through transitional justice mechanisms and reparations processes. We applaud UN-Women and civil society organizations, such as Justice Rapid Response, for their important work in that regard.
