Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): The legal
arsenal of international humanitarian and human rights
law and the now constant and sustained interest of the
United Nations system in general, and the Security
Council in particular, in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, provide real assurances that this
extremely complicated question will be dealt with in an
effective, comprehensive and integrated manner.

Progress has certainly been made since the
publication of the first report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations have been
reinforced, and in many cases disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes have
been implemented.

We must recognize, however, that much remains
to be done. Recent events have been a cause for
concern in many respects. Women, children and the
elderly are continuing to suffer from the devastating
effects of armed conflict. The displacement of civilians
and refugees, serious violations of human rights, the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, the
conscription of child soldiers, crime in all of its forms,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
cross-border movements, the difficulty of delivering
emergency humanitarian assistance and attacks against
humanitarian personnel are characteristic of many of
the conflicts besetting the world. We must approach the
protection of civilians in armed conflict with a
heightened sense of urgency and in a comprehensive,
coherent and concrete manner.

In this context, we would like to emphasize a
number of points. First, a far-reaching prevention
strategy to tackle the underlying causes of conflict
would make it possible to provide for the protection of
civilians in the long term. Such a strategy would be
based on the promotion of sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, good
governance, the promotion of a culture of peace and
tolerance, the rule of law and the observance of human
rights. That is what we mean by a culture of
prevention.

Secondly, the protection of civilians must comply
with the principles of universality and non-selectivity,
and must be free from political calculation.
Unfortunately, there are situations in which the
humanitarian community is doing little or nothing, as
in the case of peoples under foreign or colonial
occupation - even though the United Nations bears a
special political and legal responsibility in that regard.

Thirdly, we must be firm. We agree that all forms
of impunity must be effectively combated with regard
to violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law involving civilians in armed conflict.

Fourthly, recent events have made clear just how
vulnerable humanitarian workers are. More must be
done to ensure that humanitarian personnel can enjoy
security, gain access to those who are vulnerable and
be treated with respect and dignity. At the same time,
we must take steps against humanitarian personnel who
violate the principles of humanitarian action.

Fifthly, more effective coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council remains crucial. It is also
important to encourage regional approaches and to
strengthen coordination with regional and subregional
organizations.

My delegation has considered with great interest
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (5/2005/740), which refers
to, inter alia, the responsibility to protect. We would
like to be quite clear and transparent about this. We
recall that the September summit mandated the General
Assembly to continue the debate on that concept - a
concept about which there is still no unanimity within
the international community and whose parameters still
need to be rigorously defined. Furthermore, we believe
that it is important, when it comes to the humanitarian
dimension of the item before us today, to await the
outcome of the ongoing analysis of the United Nations
humanitarian response capacity.

Finally, we can never overemphasize the
importance of complying, everywhere and in all
circumstances, with the principles of the Charter and
those that underpin international relations.

