Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to deliver the Kingdom of Morocco's statement
on behalf of the Minister Delegate to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Ms. Mbarka Bouaida,
who has been detained in Rabat by an urgent matter.

I should like to congratulate France for its initiative
and to thank you, Sir, for inviting my country to take
part in this meeting on the protection of Victims of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in the
Middle East, an issue that demands the international
community's attention and touches the world's
conscience.

The atrocities we are seeing today in that region of
the world, the cradle of civilizations and monotheistic
religions, cannot leave us indifferent, much less allow
us to sit idly by as helpless spectators. Indeed, the
massacres and other persecutions of minorities and
communities, the destruction of places of worship
and monuments that represent a universal heritage of
humankind are actions aimed at erasing the collective
memory of humankind. These atrocities - which are
perpetrated by an entity that claims to be Islamic and
from a region that, since the dawn of time, has been a
place of peaceful and harmonious coexistence among
religions and civilizations - cannot be ignored or
tolerated, much less go unpunished.

In responding to your invitation, Sir, the
Kingdom of Morocco wishes to express its unflagging
commitment to the fight against terrorism and absolute
condemnation of the stigmatizing of religious, ethnic
and racial minorities in any form and for any reason.
However, our unanimous condemnation here is not
enough to ease our conscience. There is an urgent
need for collective and joint action to put an end to the
phenomenon and render justice, and more importantly,
to implement strategies to prevent these barbaric crimes
by attacking these problems at their root causes.

The world in which we live is in the throes of an
unprecedented identity crisis, expressed through a
conflation of prejudices and rhetoric inspired by the
so-called clash of civilizations. The economic and
financial crisis and various situations of instability,
complemented by populist ostracism, further exacerbate
this tendency to stigmatize the Other and are at the
heart of Islamophobic, anti-Semitic, anti-Christian and
other current trends.

The question that arises then is whether we want
to resign ourselves and accept this false inevitability,
or whether instead we want to mobilize ourselves and
curb it and promote a pluralistic world that draws its
richness from its diversity, where universality finds its
true and whole meaning. This is a discussion that we all
need to take up head on and turn into a daily fight on all
fronts. Political decision-makers, opinion-makers, civil
society, mass media and schools need to be at the heart
of this war against ignorance and hate speech.

The Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, adopted in October 2012 in the capital of
our Kingdom, represents the conclusion of the work
and discussion of a series of workshops on this subject
matter and is edifying from a number of standpoints.
The Plan of Action is the synthesis of brainstorming
and concerted efforts by independent experts and
representatives of civil society that have been pursued
in various regions of the world. This is a first in the
body of international alliances, thereby paving the way
for promising, collective, conscious and committed
actions to promote tolerance.

Building upon the adoption of the Plan of Action,
the city ofFez, the spiritual capital ofthe Kingdom, will
host, on 23 and 24 April, the first forum of religious
leaders on the prevention of the incitement to hatred
that leads to heinous crimes. This is an invitation to the
members of the Council to make that moment a time of
alliances against all forms of intolerance perpetrated in
the name of what is sacred.

The Kingdom of Morocco, whose identity has
been forged throughout the centuries by inputs of
various kinds and which has enshrined its confessional,
ethnic and racial diversity in its Constitution, intends
to contribute and share its modest experience in the
management and restructuring of the religious realm
that has made it, and still makes it, a land of hospitality,
openness, tolerance and harmonious coexistence
between all its component parts.

