Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would also like to thank Ambassador Oh Joon and
the entire Mission of the Republic of Korea for all the
work done over the past two years at the head of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). During its chairmanship of the
Committee, South Korea has resolutely advanced the
agenda set out by resolution 1540 (2004).

Today, the overwhelming majority of Member
States have taken steps to translate the provisions of the
resolution into their domestic law, and the Committee
and its Group of Experts continue their outreach efforts
to identify the rare countries that have not yet submitted
reports to the Committee on the implementation of the
resolution with regard to their national legislation. Also
today, most regional and international organizations
have adopted strategies to implement resolution 1540
(2004). We are proud that, since 2004, the European
Union has been among the first to provide support in
that regard.

Finally, the high-level meeting of the Security
Council held on 7 May (see S/PV.7169), which was
presided over by Korean Minister for Foreign Affairs
Yun Byung-se, helped give new impetus to resolution
1540 (2004). The presidential statement adopted on that
occasion (S/PRST/2014/7) serves as a road map today,
especially in view of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution slated for 2016.

The proliferation of nuclear, radiological,
biological and chemical weapons and their delivery
systems, as well as the risk that they could fall into
the hands of terrorists, continues to represent very real
dangers. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a vital role in the
prevention of those risks, but much remains to be done.

We remain concerned about the Iranian, North
Korean and Syrian proliferation crises.

With regard to Iran, new ideas were put forward
during the just-concluded negotiations in Vienna.
They must be carefully considered. Achieving a
comprehensive agreement will, in any event, still take
time. France, along with all its partners, has agreed that
the interim agreement reached in Geneva in November
2013 be extended for a limited time. That extension
opens up the possibility of a final solution, while
continuing to meet our immediate concerns on the
Iranian nuclear programme. Our commitment remains
the same: to achieve, if possible, an agreement that is
useful for the purposes of security and peace.

With regard to North Korea, it is difficult to
avoid mentioning the recent threats made to conduct
a new nuclear test; whereas we are here talking about
a resolution that aims to combat proliferation. I would
therefore recall that, in the event of new provocations,
Pyongyang would be opening itself up to additional
Security Council resolutions.

These proliferation crises continue to fuel
proliferation flows to areas already marked by regional
crises. We must continue to strengthen international
coordination and operational cooperation in the fight
against such flows, including against illegal exports
of conventional weapons, which for North Korea
represent a source of funding for its nuclear and missile
programmes.

Faced with the danger that terrorists may take
possession of weapons of mass destruction, all
States have the responsibility to strengthen export
controls, mechanisms for preventing the financing
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and securing sensitive materials on their territory. To
respond to this risk, among others, which resolution
1540 (2004) seeks to prevent, France proposed at the
Nuclear Securtiy Summit held in The Hague this year
an initiative aimed at strengthening security over
highly radioactive sources. Fortunately infrequent but
nonetheless disturbing thefts show the need to better
think about safety in order to avoid the disastrous
consequences of their possible use by malicious
individuals or groups.

In that regard, we welcome the adoption in the First
Committee of a draft resolution on the prevention of the
acquisition by terrorists of radioactive sources, which
France introduced this year jointly with Germany.
The draft resolution encourages Member States to
strengthen control over these dangerous sources to
ensure safety and security, particularly with regard to
their management at the end ofthe life-cycle. It will also,
hopefully, lead to a heightened dialogue on radiological
safety with the International Atomic Energy Agency.

