Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to express our gratitude to Peru
for convening today's open debate, to the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth for her briefing, and to
Mr. Graeme Simpson for his presentation of the
progress study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86), which reaffirms the important and positive
role of young women and men in the maintenance and
promotion of international peace and security. We have
carefully considered the recommendations contained
in the study on how to derive greater benefit from the
contributions of young people in conflict prevention
and resolution, as reflected in resolution 2250 (2015).
We look forward to the final version of the document
next September.

We are at a turning point for humankind, for
never before in history have there been so many
young people as now. With 1.8 billion young men and
women worldwide, equivalent to 24 per cent of the
world's population, it is clear that sustainable peace
and development, as well as global governance, must
include comprehensive consideration of the needs and
aspirations of young people, as well as their active
participation in society.

In an increasingly global world, stereotypes that
link youth and violence are propagated and generalized.
The stigmatization of young people is characterized by
cliches of young men tearing apart the social fabric
and blocking peace, or of young women as victims
or invisible actors with no capacity for action. Young
people are often perceived as threats and as part of the
problem. In contrast, the image that we should promote
is that of young people committed to finding solutions
and as agents of change, partners for peace and promoters
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
of the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals in every community and every city.

The interconnected world provides opportunities
that the United Nations and Governments must
seize. Young people are fulfilling their aspirations
through access to information sources. The political,
economic and social exclusion of young people, as
well as from justice and education, is the challenge
we must overcome. Removing obstacles is essential to
unlocking the potential of youth in promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies.

The United Nations Development Programme
indicates that poverty, lack of development opportunities
and marginalization, not religious ideology, are among
the main causes of young people joining extremist
groups. Integrating young people as the main promoters
of the Sustainable Development Goals is a clear action
with enriching and forward-looking results for all
communities. At present, the lack of data makes it
difficult to accurately estimate the contributions of
youth to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
to post-conflict situations. That is why we call for the
closing of information gaps so as to incorporate this
data into the political decision-making process.

We must therefore promote and strengthen
sustainable peace in our communities through
investment in education, job training and the creation of
sources of decent work for young people, guaranteeing
the full exercise of their rights and avoiding situations
such as the intergenerational reproduction of poverty,
scenarios of increased insecurity and the lack of
social cohesion. The participation and comprehensive
consideration of the needs and perspectives of young
women deserves special mention, bearing in mind that
communities based on gender equity generally have a
healthier, more equitable and inclusive social fabric,
in which the same human rights are promoted and
respected for all, and this makes them more resilient
to all kinds of conflict and violent expression. We
must continue to promote actions at the national and
international levels to empower women at all stages of
their lives.

Mexico is addressing the needs of young people
through its National Youth Programme, which has
provided institutional responses to guarantee the social
rights of 37.9 million young Mexicans. In Mexico,
the National Inclusion Strategy seeks to contribute to
access to social rights and the reduction of deprivation
through efficient coordination of public policies and
programmes. We have also aligned the objectives of
the National Youth Programme with the national goals
set out in the National Development Plan through the
promotion and coordination of actions to strengthen the
social participation of young people, as well as their
access to education, work, housing and health.

The Federal Public Administration of Mexico, in
conjunction with the Mexican Institute of Youth, carries
out Government interventions for specific aspects of
peace. Some examples are the National Programme
for Adolescent Health Care; the National Programme
for Public Security, which seeks to coordinate
interinstitutional linkages and incorporate a youth
perspective into the dissemination of National Security
Commission strategies; the scholarship programme
for victims of crime and human rights violations; the
National Plan for the Prevention of Abuse and Violence
against Children and Adolescents; and the Programme
to Fight Discrimination and Hate Speech on the Internet
among young people.

Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
has contributed to the normative strengthening of this
agenda, changing the way young people see themselves
in conflict. The challenge is to follow up on the actions
taken by the Member States and the United Nations
system to achieve their effective implementation. We
are confident that millions of young people around the
world are waiting to be invited to become agents for
the promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The young people of the twenty-first century are
global citizens who want to do their utmost to build
societies that are increasingly just, inclusive, equal
and prosperous.

