Mr. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you to the Chamber today, Mr. President, and to thank
you for your very valuable initiative. I also want to
thank our briefers.

Poland welcomes the adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), an important and timely resolution on missing
persons in armed conflict. We thank Kuwait for all its
efforts to see the text adopted today. We are pleased
to be among its sponsors, especially as it focuses on
an issue that has long been a global problem, with
hundreds of thousands of people missing as a result of
armed conflict or violence, whether in Syria, Iraq, South
Sudan, Colombia, Ukraine or dozens of other countries.

While the exact numbers are difficult to estimate,
what we know for certain is that in too many cases
of missing persons, families are kept waiting to find
out the whereabouts of their relatives, sometimes even
for years. Furthermore, as people missing in armed
conflicts are also members of various ethnic, religious
or other communities, those communities are also kept
in uncertainty and left anxious, which often hampers
peace and reconciliation efforts, and all of this despite
the fact that the international law on the subject is
very clear.

First of all, the necessary preventive measures
must be put in place well ahead of the outbreak of any
conflict, as they are essential for any response to be
effective and comprehensive. They must include, among
other things, systematic efforts to register persons who
are imprisoned, notify their families and collect and
centralize information. They must also include the
dignified and adequate treatment of the dead by the
authorities, as States have the primary responsibility
to respect and ensure respect for the human rights of
all individuals within their territory and subject to
their jurisdiction.

At the same time, in situations where preventive
measures have failed, States must do their utmost to
trace, locate, identify and return the missing. They
can do it individually or collectively with other States
and parties to a conflict or other non-State actors, if
necessary. In that context I would once again like to
thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, not only for their briefings today
but for their tireless efforts to offer States and parties
to conflicts every kind of support, including on the
legal and technical fronts, and to build international
recognition of the problem of missing persons and their
families, thereby promoting respect for international
humanitarian law on the eve of the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.

The right to justice, followed by effective remedies
and accountability measures, is essential to securing
long-lasting peace and reconciliation. For that reason,
we fully support the resolution adopted today and want
to continue to underscore the obligation of all parties
to conflicts to respect the principles and norms of
international humanitarian law, including by taking
all feasible measures to account for persons reported
missing as a result of armed conflict and providing
their family members with any information they have
on their fate.

The meeting rose at noon.
