Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me to begin by joining the delegations
that have preceded me in resolutely condemning the
heinous terrorist attack that took place at the United
Nation compound in Mogadishu and to express Gabon's
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan for their informative briefings.
I would also like to thank the President of the Security
Council for organizing this debate and for the work he
does in leading the Council. I also appreciate the work
of Ambassador Kodjo Menan and the entire Togolese
delegation during the month of May.

For several years now, natural resources have played
a leading role and are at the heart of developments in
Africa. In particular, while they should contribute to the
development of the countries in which they are found
and the well-being of the country's people, natural
resources, including animals and plants, have become a
source of conflict and disasters, to the point that we now
speak of the curse of natural resources. While natural
resources are not the direct cause of conflict, they
constitute an aggravating factor and, by consequence,
prolong conflicts and make efforts for peace difficult.
Without a doubt, in addition to insecurity and violations
of human rights, which conflicts tied to natural
resources can lead to, the State's loss in revenue when
it is subjected to such anarchical use of those natural
resources is enormous. It often exacerbates poverty and
contributes to unemployment. The tragedies in Angola,
Sierra Leone, Liberia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are striking examples of that.

International as well as regional initiatives by
countries affected by the illegal exploitation of natural
resources are certainly not lacking. Given the direct
link between the legal trade in rough diamonds and
the funding of armed conflicts, the international
community, at the initiative of Canada and under
the auspices of the United Nations, has implemented
a system for diamond certification so as to halt
international trafficking in that resource to benefit of
wars. Launched in 2003, the Kimberley Process has
the merit of being practical while seeking to protect
the economies of numerous countries where the
national revenue depends essentially upon the diamond
industry. More widespread accession to the initiative is
necessary to ensure its universality and better control
of the diamond trade.

Gabon also equally supports the African strategic
vision for dealing with the matter of mines. The six
tools implemented by the Great Lake region countries
include the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, which merits our support. Better monitoring
of the application of targeted sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against the perpetrators of war, or
those profiting from such wars, should be accompanied
with weapons embargoes applied in areas impacted by
the illicit trade of natural resources. Such sanctions
proved effective in Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia,
as have the investigations under way in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Liberia.

The countries, companies and industrial sectors
profiting from the illicit trade in natural resources
must impose more stringent norms and standards. The
international community must help countries in need to
improve nationwide governance and assist in security
sector reform, as well as in establishing legal norms,
including a mining code. Domestically, States should
promote good governance, in particular by ensuring
fair, transparent and sustainable management of natural
resources, and by reinforcing institutional capacities so
that such frameworks are effective.

The Security Council must also include and enhance
technical support to natural resource management
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding mandates. This
could help to prevent natural resources from being a
contributory factor to instability and conflicts and
maximize them as peacebuilding tools. Gabon supports
a new path for peacekeeping missions that would take
climate change and shrinking natural resources into
account.

My delegation hopes that this debate will bring
added value to existing initiatives to reduce the risks
of conflict, insecurity and instability arising from the
fight over natural resources. Gabon will continue to
support such initiatives. In that regard, my country,
together with Belgium, will be submit a draft resolution
in the framework of the informal working group known
as the Friends of Natural Resources. The document
seeks, inter alia, to improve the responsibility of States
in managing their natural resources so as to ensure
that they contribute fully to their own growth and
development. I hope that the document will enjoy broad
support.

