Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation is pleased to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this important public meeting of the
Council this morning. It is fitting that Singapore, a
neighbour of East Timor, is presiding on this
auspicious occasion. My delegation also appreciates
the fact that you have graciously allowed non-members
of the Council to speak before it.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to you
and to the Council for this opportunity to address it on
the occasion of the independence of East Timor. It is
indeed appropriate for the Council to commemorate
this important event by convening this formal meeting,
given the fact that East Timor has been an active item
on the agenda of the Council these past few years and
that the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) is one of the great success
stories of United Nations peacekeeping missions in
recent times. Having been associated with the
establishment of UNTAET when Malaysia was a
member of this Council two years ago, including its
participation in the two missions sent by the Council to
East Timor, my country is gratified at the successful
outcome of the United Nations process. We join
Council members and the rest of the international
community in congratulating the people of East Timor
on the achievement of their independence, which was
proclaimed in Dili last night. We look forward to
formally welcoming the Democratic Republic of East
Timor into the family of nations at the next session of
the General Assembly.

We are pleased that in spite of the many
challenges and difficulties it had to face, UNTAET was
able to fulfil its mandate successfully. This is due in no
small measure to the strong commitment to and support
of the people of East Timor by the international
community, particularly this Council. Thanks must also
go to those donor countries and to the United Nations
and other international agencies that have played
significant roles in the rehabilitation of the country in
preparation for its independence. We must also not
forget the positive and constructive role of Indonesia in
the United Nations process, which has expedited the
successful implementation of the mandate of UNTAET.
However, most of all, credit and praise must go to the
people of East Timor themselves and their leaders for
putting aside personal and group interests in the larger
interests of their nascent nation. Their wisdom,
political maturity and unwavering commitment to their
nation, over and above selfish personal and group
interests, have served their country well during its
period of tutelage under the United Nations and augur
well for the future progress and well-being of East
Timor in the post-independence period.

As we rejoice with the people of East Timor over
the birth of their nation, we must be mindful, as are the
people of East Timor themselves, of the many
challenges that will confront the young nation in the
years ahead. Many of these challenges have been
highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report of 17
April, 2002. Among these are enhancing the young
nation's capacity-building in many areas of
development and building a professional and effective
public administration and judicial system, as well as a
viable defence force and police force. UNTAET has
provided important foundations for a viable nation, but
more needs to be done in the immediate post-
independence period. All of this will require the
strenuous efforts of the East Timorese people and the
continued support of the international community,
especially that of the United Nations.

Malaysia has made some modest contributions to
this process and will continue to do so in the future. We
have also consistently and strongly supported a
continuing and credible presence of the United Nations
in East Timor after independence and are gratified at
the establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) under the
leadership of Ambassador Sharma. Its presence for an
appropriate period will serve as an important symbol
and guarantee of continuing international commitment
to and support for East Timor. Malaysia is therefore
pleased to contribute to UNMISET a total of 16
military observers, 20 interpreters and 43 civilian
police.

The future success and prosperity of East Timor
will also hinge on a number of other factors, not the
least of which is the unity and cohesion of its people.
Such unity, premised on the national reconciliation of
the East Timorese people, is particularly important
given its history of divisiveness and violence over the
past two decades. We welcome the steps already taken
towards national reconciliation, including the
commendable initiative by President Xanana Gusmao,
when he visited and dialogued with the refugees in
West Timor. We believe his statesmanlike initiative was
a step in the right direction and will go a long way in
ensuring the success of national reconciliation efforts.
We would encourage him and his Government to
undertake these and other worthwhile efforts in
bringing his people together and in healing the wounds
of the past, for the sake of the unity and cohesion of the
East Timorese people.

In congratulating the people of East Timor and
wishing them every success as an independent nation,
Malaysia looks forward to its playing its full and active
part as a member of the family of nations. We look
forward to forging close and mutually beneficial
relations, both bilaterally and in the context of the
region to which we belong. Indeed, we look forward to
its steady integration into the life and activities of the
region. In this and in other efforts, the Government and
people of East Timor can count on the support and
friendship of all of its neighbours, including my own
country.

In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for
his leadership, commitment and tireless efforts in
steering East Timor towards nationhood and to the
entire personnel of UNTAET, civilian as well as
military, for their outstanding contribution to the
people of East Timor.

