Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): At the outset,
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I welcome Special Representative Kubis back
to the Security Council and ask him to please share with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) staff and the United Nations country team
our deep gratitude for their continued hard work and
dedication. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his partnership and to congratulate Foreign
Minister Carr and Ambassador Quinlan on Australia's
assuming leadership ofthe Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and
Afghanistan-related resolutions in the Council.

Afghanistan and the international community
are at an important juncture. As we have seen in
recent weeks, challenges remain, but we continue to
work together to achieve our shared goals. President
Karzai visited Washington in January and discussed
with President Obama strengthening Afghanistan's
democratic institutions and supporting the country's
long-term economic and social development. President
Obama and President Karzai also reaffirmed the United
States-Afghanistan enduring strategic partnership
agreement that they signed in May 2012.

Security remains key. The Afghan National Security
Forces now have the lead in overseeing security for
nearly 90 per cent of the Afghan population, and with
the recent announcement of the fourth tranche, 52 new
districts in the north and centre of Afghanistan will
soon be secured by Afghan forces.

As President Obama announced last month, more
than 34,000 American troops will come home from
Afghanistan by February of next year. We expect that
the fifth and final tranche of the transition will be
announced this spring, when Afghans will lead for
security across their entire country.

While transitioning security responsibility to
the Afghans is necessary for stability, it is not itself
sufficient. In that regard, an inclusive and credible
presidential election in 2014 is critical for the country's
future and to sustaining international assistance to
the people of Afghanistan. The results of the election
must produce an outcome that is legitimately accepted
by the Afghan people. The announcement of the
election date by the Independent Election Commission
is an important step, and its timely completion of a
comprehensive operational plan will be another.

We note that Parliament is working on draft
legislation to further establish a lasting electoral
framework, including independent election institutions.
It is important that respected and professional leaders
be appointed to election institutions after a widely
consultative process. We recognize the valuable
contributions of Afghan civil society to those
preparations and the essential work of the United
Nations, notably the recent United Nations electoral
needs assessment mission.

In addition, Afghan-led reconciliation is important
for stability and the best way to end conflict and
bring lasting peace to Afghanistan and the region. We
continue to support the opening of an office in Doha,
Qatar, to facilitate negotiations between the High
Peace Council and the authorized representatives of the
Taliban.

As a part ofthe outcome of any process, the Taliban
and other armed opposition groups must end violence,
break ties with Al-Qaida and accept Afghanistan's
Constitution. The outcomes of peace and reconciliation
must respect the historic achievements that a unified
and sovereign Afghanistan has made over the past
decade, including protecting the rights of all citizens
of Afghanistan - women and men - as guaranteed
under the Constitution.

Over the past decade, Afghan women have
emerged from the total oppression imposed by Taliban
rule. Women are essential partners in and contributors
to the building of a strong civil society and a stable
nation. Afghan women hold office at the national,
provincial and local levels, and serve on the High Peace
Council and in provincial peace councils. They start
and run businesses of all kinds and organize to serve
their communities and have their voices heard. As
Afghanistan builds a better future, the contributions,
intrinsic worth and fundamental dignity of Afghan
women must continue to be embraced.

Afghanistan's progress is due primarily to the grit,
determination and hard work of the Afghan people.
It is they who have come this far. The international
community has provided vital assistance along the way
and will continue to do so.
Afghanistan's neighbours must play a constructive
role in the creation of a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan. One vehicle is the Istanbul Process, which
will have a ministerial meeting in Almaty next month
and is expected to discuss the six confidence-building
measures of counter-narcotics, counter-terrorism,
trade, regional infrastructure, education and disaster
management. Progress in those areas is vital for a
secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

Since 2002, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan has played an indispensable role in
the country's progress. As Afghanistan continues its
transition, UNAMA needs to remain a committed
partner, and we as the Council need to sustain our
support during this crucial time.

UNAMA has weathered significant budget
reductions over the past two years, and we believe that
those cuts have gone as far as they reasonably can.
UNAMA's resources should be stabilized now and the
Mission allowed to carry out its mandate with its core
functions intact. UNAMA remains a priority and must
be resourced as such. We appreciate the support of the
United Nations in Afghanistan and are pleased to have
extended UNAMA'S mandate for another year.

