Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is very
good that the Security Council has held this open
meeting, upon the request of the African Group, to
express strongly the feeling and the solidarity of the entire
international community vis-a-vis the crisis in Sierra
Leone. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
analysis of the situation and ask him to be so kind as to
convey to Mr. Bernard Miyet and the entire Secretariat
team our thanks for having mobilized to such an extent
during this ordeal. But, first and foremost, our thoughts
go out to the men of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) who are still being held hostage. This
evening the entire international community must say to all
those who are holding them, and especially to Foday
Sankoh, "Let them go! Let them do their job! The United
Nations will not accept the unacceptable. It will not back
down. It has a job to do, and it will do it."

Tonight is the time for solidarity. Tonight is the time
to say no. The initial operational measures taken by
General Jetley show the determination of UNAMSIL to
gather itself, to shore itself up, not to shrink from
carrying out its mandate. France will support any proposal
of the Secretary-General to reinforce UNAMSIL with
Blue Helmets that he deems appropriate. It welcomes the
speedy intervention of the United Kingdom. It stands
ready to think about reviewing the mandate of the force
to take into account the unilateral breaking of the Lome
Agreement by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).

Tonight Mr. Foday Sankoh and all of the RUF
officials must understand that they have no option but to
fully respect and implement the Lome Peace Agreement.
France reaffirms its support for the democratically elected
authorities of Sierra Leone who are cooperating with the
United Nations in an exemplary way. It calls upon the
RUF to resume cooperation without delay.

We must not forget that in Sierra Leone, as well as
elsewhere in Africa, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, diamonds in particular, feeds the forces of war.
In Sierra Leone, as in Angola and the Democratic

 

Republic of the Congo, the United Nations must react by
setting up a monitoring system and by taking strict
measures to dry up the financing that enables the RUF to
continue its war effort. France calls upon our Council to act
decisively in this area.

Above and beyond the immediate reactions of
determination and firmness that we must evince together,
our Council must think along with the Secretary-General
about longer-term lessons that we should draw from this
crisis. The first lesson is that there is no way whatsoever to
establish peace if all the parties to a conflict are not
resolved to do so. To achieve this objective, and together
with any deployment of a force, international pressure at all
levels must be maintained on all the actors in the crisis.

The second lesson is that there must be true
cohesiveness, a measure of genuine effectiveness, between
the mandate of a force and the size, training and equipment
of the contingents responsible for implementation. Let us
acknowledge today that this was not sufficiently the case
for UNAMSIL.

But in addition to learning those two lessons, we must
refrain from hastily confusing different issues. The Sierra
Leone crisis inevitably casts a dark shadow on United
Nations commitment in Africa. France states firmly that
each crisis has its own characteristics. The crisis that
gathers us here today must not prevent us from acting in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or elsewhere in
Africa. That is the conclusion that I can draw without
hesitation from the extended mission to the Great Lakes
region and the Horn of Africa from which six other Council
members and I have just returned.
France pays tribute to current efforts by all the African
heads of State concerned, including those of Mali, Nigeria,
Guinea and Liberia, to bring Foday Sankoh and the other
leaders of the RUF to their senses. The entire United
Nations stands with Africa to restore peace in Sierra Leone
as it does to help the continent overcome each of its crises,
fully taking into account their individual characteristics.

This evening, let us together reaffirm our
determination, our solidarity and our commitment, side by
side with our African partners, first and foremost with the
long-suffering people of Sierra Leone.

