Mr. Francese (Italy): I am particularly glad to be
speaking at the end of this very interesting debate because
this has been an occasion for learning, an occasion for
developing further new ideas on how to tackle an area of
the world that is at the centre of the interest and
affections of my own country.

We are also particularly glad to work under your
guidance tonight in this debate, Sir, for two reasons. The
first is the substance of the issue, which is very central
and very topical to the interests and responsibilities of the
United Nations. The topical character of the African issue
resides not solely in military threats to peace and security
in that region, but also in the many non-military threats.
I can mention here epidemics, smuggling, minority
problems and other social and economic weaknesses that
the United Nations has to tackle with all the powers,
instruments and mechanisms at its disposal.

The second reason, of course, is that we appreciate
how the British delegation, in charge of the presidency of
the Security Council this month, decided to hold this
meeting with modalities that allow a wide representation
of Member States to express their views in such a very
important forum as the Security Council.

Allow me to say at the beginning of my brief
statement that we endorse fully what was said earlier by
the Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf of the
European Union. I therefore wish to confine my
comments to two basic areas. The first is better use of
existing mechanisms and instruments of the Charter. We
can consider that the Charter contains a number of
instruments that can be optimized. I might refer, for
instance, to Article 65, which has a history of not being
employed. I would refer, too, to another initiative and
proposal which was advanced in the General Assembly by
the President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
himself, who emphasized the role of the open-ended
working group that the General Assembly decided at its
fifty-third session to set up but has not yet acted on. This
working group could make sure that Africa remains at the
top of the priorities of the United Nations. As the
Secretary-General himself pointed out in his address of 8
December, the working group should consolidate and
ensure the consistency of efforts to implement such a high
priority. Otherwise, the proliferation of initiatives would
threaten to create more problems than solutions.

At this stage, Sir, allow me to enter into an
interactive mode with you, because you made some very
interesting proposals at the beginning of this meeting.
You referred to how illegal trafficking worsens some
specific regional and subregional crises in Africa. I should

 

like to refer to the case of United Nations organs, such as
the sanctions committees, that are sometimes not used to
their full potential. We have examples of sanctions
committees that have not been used for an extended number
of years.

Also, you referred to the Security Council's need for
better readiness to act in connection with various crises.
Readiness would require, first of all, financial resources. I
will not return to a point that has been widely addressed
tonight and I can but underline the validity of proposals
made on how to reinforce the readiness of the United
Nations in the field of finances for peacekeeping.
Also, you yourself mentioned, Sir, and quite rightly -
we could not be in greater agreement with you - the need
for better logistical readiness. Here again, this is an area
where more can be done along the lines of what has
already been done in similar areas. I would just refer to the
existence of a logistics base for humanitarian intervention
that is located in the middle of the Mediterranean area, very
close to most of the peace and security crises that have
erupted of late. Something along the same lines could be
done to ensure a better readiness of equipment for
peacekeeping interventions.

I would refer to how the Security Council itself can
take better initiatives, for instance in the way of missions
in areas of crisis. I would just give a word of warning. In
this instance, the Security Council should take better
account of what has already been done by subregional
organizations and groups of interested countries active in
specific areas of crisis because they are located there or
because they have historical or other links of interest and
cooperation with that very area.

The second comment I would like to make is that we
welcome a focus on existing political resources. Of course,
we welcome attempts to prevent overlapping or duplication
of mediation efforts. At the same time, we support
initiatives to focus the resources of all interested actors on
a common effort within the framework of the United
Nations. For instance, we deem to be very useful
mechanisms established to bring together here at the United
Nations countries and organizations interested in specific
countries, such as happened in the cases of Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and Somalia. We support greater use of
contact groups and special conferences. In this regard, we
feel that it might be advisable to ensure in these cases the
presence of the European Union Presidency, due to the role
that Europe as a whole plays in Africa in cooperation and
other efforts.

In particular, the special meeting convened on 21
January 1999 by the Secretariat, in coordination with the
OAU, addressed ways and means of supporting African
peacekeeping capacity. We hope that another such
meeting will be convened at the beginning of the coming
year, this time with the participation of the Organization
of African Unity and of the subregional organizations
most concerned.

In the end, we appreciate most of the proposals
advanced today and fully endorse the pragmatic ideas that
the Secretary-General himself presented at the opening of
this meeting.

Now, words must be turned into action. Words must
be turned into steps to shorten the time it takes for the
Council to act and grant greater authority and
effectiveness to its actions to find solutions to specific
crises. We want to reverse the impression that has been
voiced authoritatively in the General Assembly, even of
late, by one of the prominent permanent representatives
of Africa to the United Nations when he said that the
arguments often advanced for inaction or delays had led
Africans to believe that there was selective treatment from
the Security Council and that the United Nations as a
whole was discriminating against Africa. It is the
responsibility of all of us, especially those countries better
equipped in terms of national means and resources - and
all Member States in any case - to ensure that a
different message gets out - namely, that the United
Nations is prepared to stake its credibility on Africa.

