Mr. Roux (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate France, home to INTERPOL
headquarters, on organizing the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da'esh
and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the theme
"No money for terror" in April 2018, the holding the
recent Arria Formula meeting and on the adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), on combating the financing of
terrorism. The resolution is an essential component of
the mechanism to counter this threat, which our member
States will now be able to combat with new tools.

I would also like to thank Council members
for including INTERPOL in the provisions of the
resolution, which encourages them to make the best
use of the databases and analytical tools available to
the 194 States members of INTERPOL. I have heard
clear appeals for the concrete implementation of
the resolution, which will be the subject of my brief
statement today.

The fight against the financing of terrorism is one
of the five pillars of the INTERPOL global counter-
terrorism strategy, which runs alongside, and remains
at the disposal of, law enforcement and financial
intelligence units to trace and take down financial
mechanisms for the financing of terrorism. In addition
to that specific paragraph of the resolution, references
to the mandate and know-how of INTERPOL are found
throughout the text. With regard to the text's call upon
States to enhance the exchange of information between
police and financial intelligence units, our criminal
analysis file on foreign terrorist fighters - which

currently includes 50,000 profiles - contains financial
information, personal data and information on social
networking accounts, thereby allowing cross-checks
useful to criminal investigations.
In line with paragraph 19 of resolution 2462 (2019),
we have also long been recommending providing direct
access to our I24/7 secure network and our 17 databases
to financial intelligence units. INTERPOL also has
observer status within the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units, as well as the Financial Action Task
Force, enabling common multilateral action in this area
and maintaining closer cooperation with the World
Customs Organization.

Within the United Nations framework, INTERPOL
is an active member of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, further strengthening our
cooperation with key United Nations entities such as
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and UNESCO, to name but
a few.

I would like to mention the INTERPOL services
referred to in paragraph 31 of resolution 2462 (2019).
Our member States, first of all, can benefit from
and make use of our database of lost or stolen travel
documents, which to date contains 85 million entries.
Terrorists often use such falsified - or genuine but
stolen - documents in conflict zones to carry out
illegal financial transactions.

Member States may also request the issuance of an
INTERPOL notice regarding any actor, or to report any
modus operandi relating to the financing of terrorism.
That will make the information available to all or some
of our member States, each State always retaining full
control over the dissemination of its information via
our secure communication channels. As I have already
mentioned, we currently have 50,000 foreign terrorist
fighters on file with information gathered from those
notices on each of them.

In conclusion, I wish to recall - as does resolution
2462 (2019) - the importance of sanctions regimes.
Today INTERPOL is distributing, for the benefit of 10
of the 14 United Nations sanctions committees, more
than 600 special notices concerning sanctioned entities
or individuals, more than half of which are for the 1267
Committee alone. That facilitates both travel bans and
the seizing of criminal assets.

Our headquarters, based in Lyon, France, and my
Office here in New York are at the disposal of any
delegation seeking further information or clarifications
on this matter.

