Mr. de Mistura: Thank you, Mr. President, and
all members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to convey some of our comments. I am
very glad to speak after Ambassador Tanin, because we
need to hear the voice of the Afghan Government,
authorities and people, this year in particular.

As today marks a year since I assumed my duties
in Afghanistan, perhaps this is also an opportunity for
me to reflect on the events of the past year and on what
can happen, and perhaps should be happening, over the
course of this year and beyond.

We went from the London Conference to the
Lisbon Summit. We saw those events linked together
with other important events, such as the Peace Jirga,
the Kabul Conference and the parliamentary elections,
all of which have sent a continuous message of an
increased sense of Afghan ownership and transition to
an Afghan-led future. Transition is clearly premised on
sovereignty and the build-up of Government capacity
to manage its own affairs. All of that is also further
grounded on the need for Afghans to articulate and

11-2662]
execute their own political vision of a stable, sovereign
Islamic constitutional democracy and an Afghanistan at
peace with itself, its neighbours and the international
community.

As we have heard today and seen in the letter (see S/2011/118, annex) from Foreign Minister Rassoul to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Government of
Afghanistan is increasingly and legitimately
demanding to lead all aspects of governance,
development and efforts to achieve peace. In that
regard, we interpret the recent letter as constructive.
We see the upcoming review of the United Nations
support to Afghanistan and its mandate as a good
opportunity to streamline the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the United Nations family in a coherent effort to
deliver as one.

The primary focus in the forthcoming months
will be on the transition of security arrangements as the
international forces begin the gradual transition and as
the Afghan security forces assume the leading
responsibility for security. Preparing the Afghan forces
to shoulder an increased responsibility for military and
security operations is a formidable challenge. The
Afghan security forces will be called upon to sustain
the security gains made over the past year. At the same
time, they will need to gain the confidence of the
Afghan people, despite the persistent violence and
intimidation campaign by the insurgents against
communities across the country. The spectacular horror
in the use of attacks will remain, I am afraid, a tactic of
the insurgency for the time being, as will their efforts
to interfere with the current military surge.

We welcome the transition in security. As the
Council is aware, we have been constructively
supporting that transition as active observers. We
intend to continue following up in that regard, through
our own contribution to the civilian transition in the
areas to be announced by President Karzai, likely on
21 March.

Transitioning provinces must be given incentives
and be rewarded, and not just neglected after the
transition has taken place. Secretary Clinton's recent
remarks were clear in that regard: the ongoing military
and civilian surge needs to be matched by an enhanced
diplomatic surge. Frankly, we have also been asking
for a surge to protect civilians owing to the spike in
civilian casualty rates.

Transitioning also requires the existence of
sustainable institutions at the national and subnational
levels that can continue the job. Therefore, sovereignty
comes with increased responsibility and accountability,
and that is why we need to work together.

In that respect, Afghans have made a great deal of
progress this year. Two Afghan independent electoral
bodies have carried out their work with
professionalism and have shown an improved capacity
to take the lead on electoral preparations with the
required technical assistance. Parliament was
inaugurated on 26 January by President Karzai, with all
members in attendance. The election of a minority
candidate as the leader of the Wolesi Jirga shows that,
at the end of the day, Afghans can truly find their own
solutions and meet various ethnic, factional and
regional needs. With an executive board now fully
appointed, we believe that the legislature now has a
chance to embark on its own agenda in Afghanistan.

We recognize the need to support Afghanistan
beyond 2014 in its own efforts to normalize the
country and guarantee long-term Afghan ownership,
backed by capacity-building. For that reason, while we
are keen on supporting the spirit of transition, we are
also available to go beyond that. After all, we have
been there for the past 60 years, and if the Afghan
authorities need us to be there, we will again be
helping the Afghans next year and even beyond the
transition period.

Turning to peace, reintegration and regional
issues, the beginning of the month saw a very
important meeting of the International Contact Group
on Afghanistan, held in Jeddah. The presence of the
High Peace Council representative at that meeting was
a major message to all of us. That meeting endorsed
the High Peace Council, again in line with Afghan
ownership, and called for a Kabul-based approach to
peace and reconciliation initiatives, with the support of
a group of international and regional players that
would meet, and be based in, Kabul.

On the ground in Afghanistan, UNAMA will
continue to facilitate the work of the High Peace
Council, at its own request, through the Salaam
Support Group. UNAMA will also continue to support
the unfolding of the process led by the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme, which continues
to make progress, having reintegrated some 700
individuals to date. Minister Stanekzai recently
requested that UNAMA provide further assistance in
reaching out to the provinces. By according neutrality
to such outreach efforts and having a presence in the
field, we believe that UNAMA can actually assist them
in reaching all segments of Afghan society.

With regard to human rights, humanitarian issues
and Afghan women, civilian casualties are a great
source of concern. A report on the issue was recently
released by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We share the concern
of the Government, the International Security
Assistance Force, the international community and the
people of Afghanistan about the huge number of
civilian casualties.

Since 2007, some 9,000 civilians have perished in this
conflict. The greatest number of deaths - 2,777 -
occurred in 2010. Statistics is one thing, but people are
another thing. Every death is one too many. That is
why we will continue to recognize the issue and
advocate for the situation to end.

We hope that there will certainly be a surge to
guard against further civilian casualties. Unfortunately,
as the Council is aware, although we have given
anti-Government elements an opportunity to participate
in the civilian casualties report by contributing their
own data, if they have any, and to make their own
contribution by reducing the number of casualties, we
have not received a response to date.

We should also focus on the increased so-called
conflict-induced humanitarian needs, for which there is
indeed need. It is not only poverty and natural
disasters, but also conflict that results in a great deal of
collateral humanitarian effects. That is why the role of
United Nations agencies in the field is quite important
at this stage.

On the political and socio-economic agenda,
women, girls and boys need to be supported. We are
advocating for that.

With regard to the footprint, civilian transition
per se is both an imperative and an opportunity. We
believe that the United Nations subnational presence in
Afghanistan has been supporting the Government in
many fields - coordination, governance, human
rights, the rule of law and many more areas. There are
30 United Nations agencies and programmes in
Afghanistan, working on the Council's behalf and
assisting the Government in 34 provinces. To date, they

have spent $904 million on humanitarian and
development activities in Afghanistan.

Millions of Afghans are benefiting from this, but
we do recognize that we need to carry out a review in
order to fine-tune those efforts even further. Let me
recall that the World Food Programme is reaching
approximately 7.3 million vulnerable Afghans every
day of every year. The World Health Organization and
UNICEF have supported the vaccination of 7.5 million
children this year and over the previous two years. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has been assisting Afghan authorities in the
voluntary repatriation of 4.5 million Afghans. The
United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre has
assisted 2,553 communities to remove, in partnership
with Afghans, 300,000 mines. The United Nations
Development Programme has assisted in more than
7,400 civil service positions and in capacity-building.
There has also been counter-narcotics support,
provided by United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

All of these United Nations entities are at the
disposal of Afghan authorities in order to help Afghans
feel that they will not be abandoned once again after
the transition is over and we move towards a more
sovereign and Afghan-led future.

With regard to drugs, that is an issue about which
we are indeed concerned. There is no doubt that drugs
are a threat to both Afghan and international peace and
stability. I have been in Tehran and neighbouring
countries and this issue comes up all the time. The
narcotics issue also warrants shared responsibility
among international stakeholders. The Government has
made progress over recent years, as its neighbours, and
I believe all of us, recognize. However, the situation
remains one of great concern. The facts speak of a
dramatic situation, with addiction both in Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries due to massive production.
While production has decreased, it has recently been
stimulated by increasing prices, which have tripled
during the reporting period. Therefore, the measures
taken must have an impact on the whole chain - from
eradication to crop substitutions, precursors, chemicals
and global demand reduction. I therefore appeal to the
Council to build the counter-narcotics capacity of the
Government of Afghanistan and ensure that we can see
some progress this year.

11-2662]
In conclusion, this is a crucial year. I know we
have heard this many times. Every year is crucial in
Afghanistan, but some years are more crucial than
others. The year 2011 is one of transition, leading up to
2014. That is why we need to work closely together.

We have heard Ambassador Tanin. We have heard
loud and clear the message from Afghan authorities
about their sovereignty and the fact that we cannot -
none of us, not even the Afghan authorities - work as
if it were business as usual any more. We should
therefore constantly adjust our profile in activities on
the basis of Afghan-led, Afghan-owned priorities. We
must go beyond security and political gains and give
further consideration to development.

As I have said, we have been with the Afghan
people for 60 years. We were there during the Taliban.
I myself was there during the time of Najibullah. And
we are there now. Hopefully, we will be there as long
as the Afghans need us. UNAMA has therefore
positioned itself to be supportive of the Afghan
Government in this period of great transition and
greater responsibility. We would like to continue to do
so.

