Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Children and
armed conflict is an issue in the limelight. Much of the
credit for this is owed to the eye-opening report by
Graca Machel published five years ago. Also, during
the decade that has elapsed since the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
international community has come a long way in
addressing the plight of the most helpless victims of
conflict. We have identified areas Where we - national
authorities as well as non-State actors - must take
steps. We have raised awareness and strengthened the
international legal standards for child protection. We
have decided on actions to help children overcome
trauma during the war and to assist them during the
period of post-conflict peace-building.

We were heartened to see the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict obtain the
required number of ratifications during the treaty
action event last week. Bangladesh ratified the Protocol
early and is happy that it will come into effect on 12
February 2002. Further progress in consolidating the
normative framework is expected during the scheduled
special session of the General Assembly next spring.

These achievements did not come easily.
Sustained efforts were required. We should like to put
on record our appreciation to the United Nations for its
system-wide response to the needs of war-affected
children. In particular, we would like to express
appreciation to Special Representative Olara Otunnu
and to Executive Director Carol Bellamy of the United
Nations Children's Fund for their efforts, and their
statements this morning, in this regard.

Thanks to concerted efforts by many actors, there
is "commendable progress on many fronts"
(S/2001/852, para. 5), as the Secretary-General
reported. We thank him for his remarks this morning,
as well as for his useful report and also for his
recommendations. We are pleased that this year's
Security Council resolution, to be adopted at the end of
this meeting, will be approving a number of
recommendations proposed in the report. We applaud
the role of the delegation of France in contributing to
this work.

Still, the progress that has been made is
insufficient. For over 300,000 child soldiers around the
world, armed conflict is a way of life. These children,
exploited particularly by armed insurgent groups, are
affected physically and mentally. They commit, often
under duress, atrocities of great magnitude. Their
experience fills their minds with horrific memories that
last a long, long time.

Child soldiers are only the tip of the iceberg.
Entire generations growing up in conflict areas are
permanently scarred by the brutalities of war. Girl
children are particularly vulnerable to violence and
sexual exploitation. For these children living under the
gun, the future holds very little hope or optimism and
few prospects.

And yet the children do not give up their dreams.
From conflict situation to conflict situation, we hear of
children longing to return to their homes, to rejoin their
families, to go to school and learn, to play and share,
and to care for each other. Today, we have heard the
poignant story of a child from Sierra Leone. There are
many more like him. As Graca Machel has said, the
impact of armed conflict on children is everyone's
responsibility and must be everyone's concern. We
must not only hear them but also listen to them. We
must take their views into our work. Then and only
then can we make a difference.

Bangladesh believes that the Security Council
needs to focus on five areas to address the situation of
war-affected children.

First, what the Secretary-General has called "an
era of application" (ibid) of international child
protection standards must be launched. The Council
must urge Governments and non-State actors to respect
and uphold these standards. The Optional Protocol, the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
International Labour Organization Convention 182 and
the Ottawa Convention on landmines are all relevant in
the context of such an era.

Secondly, while mandating peacekeeping
missions, necessary child protection and monitoring
elements must be established. Various peacekeeping
operations f in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Sierra Leone, for example, and in Afghanistan to
follow - should have child protection elements. There
is a need to strengthen existing elements and to keep in
mind the necessity of including such elements while
mandating future operations. Peacekeeping personnel
have to be appropriately trained in international human
rights, humanitarian and refugee law.

Thirdly, the Security Council must make it clear
that there will be no impunity for perpetrators of
atrocities. In order to ensure that, international truth-
and justice- seeking efforts have to be buttressed and
adequately funded. Justice delayed on account of
insufficient funding could very well turn out to be
justice denied. The Council should seek to ensure that
the truth- and justice-seeking processes pay attention to
the full range of children's wartime experiences and
aim at long-term interventions to ensure their
reintegration into society.

Fourthly, while implementing the post-conflict
response, it is important to encourage the United
Nations agencies and international financial institutions
to devote particular attention to the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children and their access to basic
services like education, health care and housing. Quick
impact projects have proved to be a useful tool.
Involving local communities in these efforts is crucial
for imparting a sense of ownership and long-term
sustainability in respect of these efforts. High priority
must be accorded to the special needs, and particularly
to the vulnerabilities, of girls affected by armed
conflict, including those who are heading households,
orphaned, sexually exploited or used as combatants.
Technical and financial assistance has to be provided to
countries and regional and subregional organizations
engaged in post-conflict peace-building.

Finally, we have to avoid the perpetuation of the
cycle of violence. To prevent today's victims from
becoming tomorrow's perpetrators, the values of a
culture of peace must be inculcated in every child. We
are happy that there is agreement in the Security
Council on lending support to efforts to promote a
culture of peace, including through peace education
programmes and other non-violent approaches to
conflict prevention and resolution. Robust pursuit of
these goals may change the course of history, and will
most certainly change the future of the child today and
thereby of the man and woman of tomorrow.

Let me repeat my thanks to you, Madam
President, for your work, particularly the work that you
did in the preparatory process for the special session on
children. Consideration of this topic that is so
important to us had to be postponed for two months
due to the events that took place in September.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Ms. Carol Bellamy and
the young Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their interesting
contributions in this debate.

As we stated in the General Assembly, the
medium- and long-term vision guiding Colombia's
commitment to and in favour of children is based on
recognition of the central role of boys and girls in
society and of their role as citizens and as the potential
builders and subjects of their own development. In my
country, we are making great political and financial
efforts to remove children from armed conflict, and we
work tirelessly in that conviction.

Today, we will be adopting a resolution
contemplating a set of Security Council directives on
children in armed conflicts. It will recognize the
specific responsibilities of a number of relevant actors,
including, in particular, the parties to a conflict, States,
the Secretary-General, agencies, United Nations funds
and programmes, international and regional institutions
for finance and development, and regional
organizations.

We consider this action as an effort to ensure that
the coordination and harmonization of policies between
intergovernmental organs of the United Nations
produce tangible results on the ground that
substantially improve the living conditions of children.
The challenge of coordination and harmonization is
particularly relevant in those situations under
consideration by the Security Council.

If effect, when defining the Council's role in
situations such as those of Guinea Bissau, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola, it is of
fundamental importance that we adequately consider
the efforts to help children that other actors in those
countries carry out. I want to mention an example. The
country notes agreed on by the Governments of those
countries and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) are usually approved by the Executive
Board without adequately considering the Council's
role. Nor does the Council consider the information
contained in these notes, despite the fact that they are
politically relevant. It is important to put an end to this
practice in order to generate processes that allow the
intergovernmental organs in New York to complement
each other's work, with the goal of maximizing its
benefits for children.

The resolution that we will adopt today is the
third - counting resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314
(2000) - to be considered by the Council on the topic
of children and armed conflicts. We welcome the
degree of attention this topic has received in this organ
of the United Nations. However, we would like to
invite reflection on the need to avoid in the future
emulating the General Assembly in adopting annual
resolutions that do not necessarily add value to the
consideration of an item. That is a risk for all generic
resolutions that do not address a concrete situation on
the Security Council's agenda.

We suggest that we start to examine in greater
detail the situation of children in specific cases. The
situation in Afghanistan offers us a challenge of
enormous dimensions, but also a great opportunity. The
Security Council, the Secretary-General, the agencies,
United Nations funds and programmes, international
and regional institutions for finance and development,
and regional groups and organizations can demonstrate
that they can make a real difference in the lives of the
children of Afghanistan.
In relation to Afghanistan, it would perhaps be
appropriate to look at the possibility of issuing a
decision allowing for the achievement of two goals. On
the one hand would be the goal of facilitating the
access of humanitarian aid to children, incorporating
this question into the work programme of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and creating
sustained, funded programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of children. On the
other hand would be the goal of coordinating the
Council's response with the activities already
undertaken by UNICEF and other agencies of the
system operating on the ground.

I will conclude by reiterating to the Council and
the international community the importance of the
question of small arms in the consideration of the
problem of children and armed conflict, as was
reflected in the Presidential Statement
(S/PRST/2001/21) of 31 August 2001. We affirm once
again that arms-producing countries must exercise the
highest degree of responsibility since the technological
advances that have enabled the production of lighter
arms have also enabled armed groups and terrorists to
incorporate child combatants in their ranks.

