Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, Cameroon is extremely pleased
to see Norway presiding over the Council this month,
and we appreciate in particular your having convened
this meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Today the Council is considering the report of the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
consideration is of particular importance, for it is clear
that this is a pivotal moment for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. On 5 October 2002, the elections will be
held, and, on 31 December 2002, the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) will end.

In this connection, we welcome the presence at,
and the participation in, this meeting of Mr. Solana,
High Representative for Foreign Policy and Common
Security of the European Union. We also appreciated
the statements made at the beginning of this meeting,
which enabled us to assess how far we have come and
what has been done, as the Secretary-General said, to
maintain the momentum for peace and reconciliation,
and to establish a State based on the rule of law that
respects human beings, their dignity and their rights.

Above all, those statements showed what action
has to be taken in future. We were particularly
enlightened by the statement made by the Secretary-
General, whose vision and well-thought-out proposals
will be helpful to our future work.

Having said this, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch and to Mr. Klein for
the commitment they have demonstrated, for their
creative imagination, for their very balanced approach
and for their spirit of cooperation. We would like to
commend the methodical work they have done, which
has been very helpful.

That work has been especially noteworthy in the
following areas: training of the police, education,
promotion of human rights, the establishment of State
institutions based on the rule of law, and, lastly,
facilitating Bosnia and Herzegovina's integration into
Europe. They helped to set up a multi-ethnic police
force that respects human rights, trained those
policemen and provided their equipment. We also
commend the decision of the European Union to take
over, as of 1 January 2003, from the International
Police Task Force.

The second important area they have been
working in is education. The report before us today
shows clearly the importance of the contribution that
was made in the preparation of textbooks and curricula
that help to consolidate understanding and harmony.
Cameroon believes that those efforts are important to
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As the Constitution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
states, since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed - hence, the importance of education.

The third important area, we believe, is that of the
promotion of human rights. The progress made in the
implementation of the Human Rights Chamber's
decisions, as described in the report, is important and
encouraging. It is most promising.

The fourth area is the establishment of State
institutions based on the rule of law. We welcome the
measures taken to hold elections on 5 October 2002.
We would like to hear a response to the question asked
by the representative of the United Kingdom about the
pre-election atmosphere, particularly with respect to
security.

We welcome the decision by the Council of the
European Union to recommend membership of the
Union for Bosnia and Herzegovina, because in our
view this would be a factor to lay the groundwork for
the country's future.

Finally, I wish every success to Lord Ashdown,
who is replacing Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch as High
Representative. We renew our thanks to Mr. Petritsch
for the work he has done.

