Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): As I stated
in my introductory comments, I have reserved the right
to take the floor on the question of working relations,
cooperation and partnership with the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), which
has just opened in Libreville.

We have all read the report (S/2011/704) and
followed the questions to which it has given rise. I will
not address all of those issues, which include the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), small arms and light
weapons under the Kinshasa Convention, drug
trafficking, maritime security, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, elections, and general
capacity-building. The Office has effected productive
changes in those areas. I note that the secretariat of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) welcomes Mr. Moussa's enthusiasm in
addressing those matters with the main actors from
ECCAS.

Clearly the issues are numerous. We agree that
change is necessary in order to define our priorities and
to consolidate our efforts in order to enable successful
implementation of the measures available. In
particular, I wish to emphasize one issue which is as
important as the LRA file, and which has been
addressed by the Council in resolution 2018 (2011).
The Gulf of Guinea deserves the full, sustained
attention that the Council can provide to it in the
months and years ahead. It is important that
information on this matter be provided on an updated
basis from ECCAS on how it is being addressed.

In December 2009, our Heads of States signed a
protocol to protect vital maritime interests of ECCAS
members in the Gulf of Guinea. The strategic approach
of our Heads of States emphasizes that security must
involve the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa (COPAX) and promote synergy with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and the Economic Community of
West African States. I welcome the fact that resolution
2018 (2011) is perfectly aligned with the concerns I
have mentioned and thus bodes well for the future.

I will not reiterate our objectives; I simply wished
to make a few comments on how we have set up our
machinery. We have three zones: in Zone A we have
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with Angola as the pilot State; in Zone B, we have the
Republic of the Congo and the Cabinda area of Angola,
with the Republic of the Congo as the pilot; and then
we have Zone D, with Cameroun, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, Sfio Tome' and Principe, with Cameroun as the
pilot State.

Within that structure, a centre will be established
in Pointe-Noire in the Republic of the Congo, called

the Centre for the Maintenance of Maritime Security,
which will have links with the most important strategic
agencies. We will place a coordinating maritime centre
in each pilot State. Of course, concerns regarding the
financing and operation of this machinery have been
addressed. Without imposing new taxes, we will rely
on levies collected through maritime operators, above
all via the Maritime Organization of West and Central
Africa. I should add that, in terms of implementation,
we have activated the space of zone D, which consists,
as I said, of Cameroun, Gabon, Sfio Tome' and Principe
and Equatorial Guinea. That will subsequently pave the
way for the plan adopted by the four military chiefs of
staff of those four States and, of course, approved by
their respective higher authorities, and for assessing
the results of the first phase of the maritime security
plan and then for implementing phase two. We are
encouraged by the results to date. I wish therefore to
say that the timing of resolution 2018 (2011) gives us
further impetus to build on the initiatives of the East
African Community (EAC), so much so that phase two
has already begun, namely, by building synergy with
the Economic Community of Western African States
(ECOWAS). We thank the United States for making
their facilities at Garmisch, Germany, available, which
enabled the chiefs of staff, their representatives, the
heads of the communities and the two parties to come
together to craft a model for the kind of synergy that
should exist between ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States. I believe that
their observations were useful once certain initiatives
had been launched to ensure that the safety of roads
and of the Gulf of Guinea could be guaranteed, lest the
situation sink into the sort of case we know all too well
and might call "Somalization". I would like to thank all
States for their support, along with all the institutions
such as the European Union and the United Nations
system that have responded to our concerns.

