Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome Portugal's initiative in
holding this important debate on the protection of
civilians, an issue of particular importance to my
country. I thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement and Ms. Navanethem Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for her briefing. We also thank Ms. Catherine Bragg,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their contributions to the debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, to which Chile belongs.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
subject of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been a permanent item on the Council's agenda.
Successive debates have been held, special emphasis
has been placed on the protection of women and
children in armed conflict, and the concept has been
incorporated into the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Chile welcomes that progress.

However, much work remains to be done. Some
conflicts continue to this day, others have given way to
peacebuilding processes, while regrettably, since 1999
new and bloody conflicts have emerged, to which the
Council and the international community should devote
particular attention and cooperation in order to bring
them to an end.

I would like to focus at this time on the issue of
accountability, which lies at the heart of today's debate.
Accountability is the core of the protection of civilians.
We cannot protect civilians, much less build just and
stable societies, without an adequate system for
accountability, which should be in place even during a
conflict. We should not wait for peace in order to
activate accountability. However, by virtue of the
nature of conflict, a national system's ability to act is
in all likelihood diminished, which leads to my next
point.

We need an efficient national and international
accountability system. In that regard, I would like to
call attention to the Inter-American System of Human
Rights, which has a Commission and the Inter-

American Court of Human Rights. Since their creation
in 1969 with the Pact of San Jose, Costa Rica, both
bodies, which operate in a complementary and
sequential manner, have participated in the protection
of the human rights of the populations of our countries.
More recently, at the international level the
International Criminal Court has been established, to
which high profile cases have been referred, proving
that impunity for human rights violations has no place
in today's world.

The Human Rights Council has created
commissions of inquiry to establish the facts in cases
of grave human rights violations and to use them to
take appropriate action. Chile has co-sponsored those
initiatives, because we believe that the mechanisms
established by the international community itself
should be activated whenever necessary.

That brings me to my next point, which is that the
sovereignty of States remains the cornerstone of
international relations. In that regard, in order for
commissions of inquiry of the Human Rights Council
to visit countries of concern, they need those countries'
permission. Chile urgently calls on States to open their
doors to such commissions so that together they can
duly meet their international obligations.

Moreover, the Human Rights Council, in its
consensus resolution 18/7, has established the mandate
of a special rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
Chile supported the creation of that post; there can be
no alternative. Since 1990, Chile has created three
successive commissions of truth and reconciliation,
which have sought the truth, and through it
reconciliation among Chileans. The work does not end
with one commission; reconciliation is built day after
day, and in this respect human rights education plays a
decisive role.

Despite the foregoing and the role that the
international community needs to play in the matter of
protection of civilians, the primary responsibility
remains with States. It is they that need to protect their
own civilian populations. In that regard, they have the
duty to promote and strengthen the rule of law and
judicial institutions. Those are basic elements of States
and of their development and stability.

The Security Council has already incorporated
the concept of the protection of civilians into numerous
mandates of its peacekeeping operations, and Chile

hopes that will continue to be the case. That mandate
should be carried out in compliance with the guiding
principles of each operation. Similarly, the matter has
been incorporated in resolutions that address complex
political crises, especially resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya. Experience teaches us that such
mandates must be clear, precise and time-bound. The
prestige and credibility of the Council, and of the
Organization itself, depend on the clarity and
specificity of its mandates, as well as on their correct
enforcement.

I hope that this debate and the inclusion of the
concept of the protection of civilians in relevant
resolutions of the Council will serve to ensure that
tragedies such as those of Rwanda or Srebenica never
recur.

