Mr. Savua (Fiji): Allow me to congratulate your
delegation, Mr. Minister, on its assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. We also thank your delegation for the document
distributed to guide today's debate.

The leadership and monitoring role of the
Security Council in all humanitarian crises cannot be
overemphasized. In order to assist it in administering
and controlling operations, the Council must be
supported by accurate, up-to-the-minute information
and an intelligence unit and allied network.

Good intelligence and information and a broad-
based information database should provide the Council
with contingency plans to cover all manner of scenarios,
ease the decision-making process and provide a forecast
of likely global conflagration points. They should enable
the Council to prepare plans including estimated
budgetary requirements and to estimate when the
exercise of the right to protect is justified.

The training of the police and the military of the
emerging State should be expedited as a matter of
priority, but not at the expense of the impoverished
majority by training the very same domineering
security personnel who had hounded them previously.
Proper selection, combined with a good understanding
of the background of the problems, is essential in
conducting a good training programme.

While best practices and lessons learned ought to
provide a decent basis for preparing training
syllabuses, local demands and practices must also be
factored in to ensure ownership and avoid creating an
institution that reflects another nation's doctrinal
teachings. The credibility of the United Nations has to
be resurrected, and troop-contributing countries must
deploy highly disciplined and well-trained troops so
that best practices of the recent past in that regard can
be corrected and improved.

Fiji agrees that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process should be nationally
owned. Nations must decide on the extent of
reconciliation, the time limit for prosecuting crimes
and who should be reintegrated. Where possible, there
should be a parallel, two-pronged approach giving
equal priority to the DDR process and the handling of
refugees. National ownership of the process should be
underlined, and when national ownership is instituted it
must be respected. Outside interventions must be
accompanied by an understanding of the rationale that
led to the decision. Nations, however, must accept all
the strengths and the shortcomings of their decisions.

We strongly support the involvement of regional
organizations and neighbouring countries in the peace
process. Support by international and local actors and
consistency in the flow of donor aid must be insisted
upon at the outset. We have such operations in the
South Pacific: the United Nations-sponsored
peacekeeping operation in Bougainville, which has
been successfully concluded, and the Regional
Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
While full United Nations support is still forthcoming
for RAMSI, we ask that modalities be found to allow
donor aid to arrive within a consistent and sustainable
manner.

RAMSI is continuing to play a role in the
peacebuilding process in the Solomon Islands. Its
mission now is to build long-lasting peace and to
prevent further outbreaks or the escalation of violence.
We would like to know how long a mandate a mission
would require for long-lasting peace to be achieved and
guaranteed. We cannot provide an answer for the
moment. Perhaps when the United Nations and the
South Pacific finally come to work together, we will
find that RAMSI, although small, may contain the
prescription that can provide the answers.

