Mr. Chergui: I would first like to express my
gratitude for the opportunity to address the Council on
the situation in Libya.
The current security situation in Libya is of great
concern, as it has gravely deteriorated in the past
few weeks. On 4 April, the Libyan National Army
launched a military campaign to take over Tripoli and
the Government of National Accord mobilized forces
to defend the capital. The ensuing fighting led to the
death of over 400 civilians, more than 2,000 injured and
65,000 displaced persons. The ongoing fighting in and
around Tripoli has led to the emergence of a range of
alliances between the Government of National Accord
and several armed groups, and the Libyan National
Army with other militias. The situation is further
complicated by the fact that Libya has essentially
become a proxy battleground for a number of external
actors that are pursuing their national interests through
local proxies.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Libya in 2011,
the African Union (AU) has consistently called on
all the parties and their external backers to pursue a
political solution to the crisis in the country. The AU
remains convinced that there is no military solution to
the crisis and therefore reiterates its call for dialogue
and consensus among Libyans as the only lasting
solution for a stable and united Libya.

The African Union's engagement at all levels
has consistently focused on helping the Libyan
stakeholders to address the loopholes and shortcomings
of the Libyan Political Agreement in order to promote
a durable solution. However, persistent disagreements
between the Presidency Council and the House of
Representatives on the scope and modalities of the
implementation has stalled any meaningful progress.

It is tragic to see the war resume on the same day
that the Secretary-General arrives in Tripoli and two
days after the Chairperson of the African Commission
visited the airport in Benghazi to consolidate a much-
expected political agreement. In relation to the foregoing,
the African Union and the United Nations are leading
efforts to organize an all-inclusive dialogue to promote
reconciliation through the Libyan National Peace and
Reconciliation Forum, scheduled to take place in Addis
Ababa at the headquarters of the African Union.

More recently, in early March Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo and I visited Libya, where, among
other things, we agreed on the need to closely coordinate
the activities of the United Nations and the African
Union in managing the political and security situation
in Libya. In addition to such contentious issues as the
composition of the Presidency Council, the formation
of the Government, the issue of Commander-in-Chief
of the Army and the equitable distribution of oil
revenues, we continue to be highly concerned about the
fate of African migrants in Libya and the dangerous
impact of the crisis not only on Libya's neighbours but
on the entire Sahel space. The latest terrorist attack in
the Niger proved once again that new skills and greater
capabilities have been exported from Libya.

I would like to highlight the following four
messages on the way forward.

First, there is an imperative to recognize that the
situation in Libya is deteriorating at an alarming rate.
This underscores the need for an immediate ceasefire
agreement and secure safe corridors for the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Secondly, the current situation has had devastating
effects on the African migrants, especially those in
detention centres in Tripoli, where it has been reported
that some of them have been used as human shields
or otherwise forced to join the fighting. Beyond our
coordination with the International Organization
for Migration and the European Union on the issue,
additional efforts are urgently needed.

Thirdly, there is a need to acknowledge that there
has been unprecedented, toxic external interference in
Libya. Such interference has flooded the country with
weapons, which has created an environment conducive
to terrorist groups thriving. This interference is
exacerbating the already volatile situation on the
ground. In this regard, we call on all actors to work in
the genuine interest of the Libyan people and respect
the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Libya.

Fourthly, all stakeholders need to concentrate their
efforts on the continuation of the peace process and
prepare for the convening of the national conference
and the African Union-led all-inclusive conference for
reconciliation. We look forward to working closely with
local, regional and international stakeholders to ensure
the success of these two meetings and pave the way for
a final and permanent settlement of the Libyan conflict.

In the face of the prolonged suffering and despair of
the Libyan people, the full-scale war imposed on them
and the bitter lessons of the past seven years, I count on
my colleagues around this table to go above and beyond
a review of the political and security situation to focus
on a common approach, based on a single African
Union-United Nations road map in the spirit of sincere
cooperation for a comprehensive solution to the crisis
in Libya.
