Mr. AlMutawa (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We would
also like to express our thanks to Ms. DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her briefing this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Uganda on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The issues of the Middle East are, without a
doubt, of utmost importance to the Council. We have
heard briefings by United Nations officials about the
gravity of the situation in the region and the need to
take decisive measures as new crises and challenges
have emerged. This situation requires the international
community to take action to reduce tensions, ensure
the maintenance of regional security and stability and
reach political solutions to the long-standing crises in
the region, particularly the Palestinian issue.

The United Arab Emirates calls on the international
community to assume its responsibilities to end the
suffering of the brotherly Palestinian people and to
establish an independent Palestinian State along the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We emphasize the need
for Israel to cease its illegal practices of Judaization,
creating new facts on the ground, expanding settlements
and demolishing Palestinian property, the latest
incidence of which was the demolition of 70 houses
in East Jerusalem yesterday. We emphasize the need
for the international community to take all measures
necessary to end these grave violations, given their
grave implications for the security and stability of the
region as a whole.

In our quest for a just and comprehensive solution,
we must not lose sight of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories or
of the importance of continuing and intensifying
humanitarian assistance.

Based on my country's long-standing support for
the Palestinian people, in 2017 and 2018 the United
Arab Emirates provided more than $364 million to
our Palestinian brothers and to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.

We renew our commitment to supporting regional
and international efforts to advance the Middle East
peace process. The United Arab Emirates also renews
its commitment, within the coalition, to supporting
the legitimate efforts to reach a political solution in
Yemen, based on the relevant Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015) and 2451 (2018). In
that connection, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen to
implement the Stockholm Agreement and relaunch
the political process. We emphasize that there is no
military solution to the conflict and a political solution
is the only way forward.

The United Arab Emirates condemns in the
strongest terms the attacks by Houthi militias on the
territory of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the
use of ballistic missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles,
as well as the ongoing threat posed to navigation in
the Red Sea. The situation calls for the Council to take
more decisive measures to end these Violations and
prevent the flow of Iranian weapons to Yemen, which
is a flagrant Violation of resolutions 2216 (2015) and
2231 (2015).

The Houthi attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia undermine the prospects for progress in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah at a time when the United
Arab Emirates and the Arab coalition are providing
an opportunity for peace by redeploying forces in
Yemen and promoting political efforts aimed at a
comprehensive solution.

On the humanitarian front, my country strongly
condemns the practices of the Houthi militias, which
have exacerbated the humanitarian crisis through the
looting of humanitarian aid and the denial of access to
its intended beneficiaries. The United Arab Emirates
will continue to work with the United Nations and key
partners to improve the humanitarian situation and meet
the needs of the brotherly Yemeni people. The United
Arab Emirates has provided a total of $5.5 billion in
assistance to Yemen since 2015.

My country is following with great concern the
latest development in Syria and Libya. We stress that
a political solution is the only way to end these crises.
We call on all parties concerned to sit at the negotiating
table and find a solution to the protracted crises within
the framework of the relevant Council resolutions.
In that context, we express our concern about the
exploitation by terrorist groups of the security vacuum
in Libya and the growing migrant tragedy in the
Mediterranean, which makes it more difficult to reach
a peaceful solution to the crisis. We call for concerted
efforts to end the crisis and restore stability in Libya.

As the international community, we share a
collective responsibility to avoid conflict and tension
in the region and to prevent any party from attempting
to undermine the security and safety of maritime
navigation and global energy supplies. Sabotaging and
threatening commercial ships and the lives of their
crew is a serious development that threatens not only
maritime trade, but broader regional stability. The
United Arab Emirates emphasizes the importance of
ensuring freedom of navigation and the integrity of
energy supply lines and of safeguarding the security of
sea lanes and straits, particularly the Straits of Hormuz
and Bab Al-Mandab. My country also stresses the need
for patience, wisdom and good judgment, and calls
on all parties to prioritize diplomacy and to restore
stability in the regional.

In conclusion, we affirm that the gravity of the
situation in the Middle East requires the international
community to pay serious and credible attention and
the Council to assume its responsibilities to end all
destabilizing acts and practices, including violence
by extremist and terrorist groups with the support and
funding of certain States, and to hold accountable the
parties responsible for the outbreak and continuation of
conflicts in the region.
