Mr. Bull (Liberia): I am pleased to see you ably
conducting the affairs of the Council for the month of
May, Mr. President. And my delegation is particularly
heartened by the attention given to the Liberian crisis, as
the international community - the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations -
endeavour to find a peaceful negotiated settlement.

Allow me to extend, on behalf of the Liberian
people, our abiding appreciation and thanks to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
compassion and empathy, which he has demonstrated
towards their suffering wrought by over six years of war.
Indeed, his good judgement is reflected in his thoughtful
recommendations to the Security Council, particularly that
the United Nations should remain engaged in Liberia
through the continuing presence in the country of its
Observer Mission, the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL). The message, in my delegation's
View, is clear. The Security Council and the international
community must remain seized of the Liberian crisis until
a durable solution is found.

In this connection, we welcome, with appreciation,
the seventeenth progress report of the Secretary-General
on UNOMIL, document 8/1996/362 of 21 May 1996,
which gives an account of the eruption of fighting in
Monrovia on 6 April and proposes steps to be taken in
support of the Abuja Agreement, now under serious
strain.

Since the eruption of the Liberian civil war in
December 1989, the Liberian people have traversed a
tortuous path to seek a settlement through political
accommodation and national reconciliation. It is to be
recalled that prior to the intervention of the Economic
Community of West African States the United Nations
was requested to undertake mediation of the crisis. At that
time the response was that the United Nations was
prohibited by its Charter from intervening in matters that
were basically within the domestic jurisdiction of a
Member State. As the war degenerated into wanton
destruction of life and property and forced the mass
exodus of helpless civilians to sanctuary in neighbouring
countries, ECOWAS created the Standing Mediation
Committee, which was mandated to mediate the conflict.

The ECOWAS peace plan which ensued called for
an immediate cease-fire, the establishment of the
cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), the formation
of an Interim Government of National Unity to include

 
the warring factions, political parties and various interest
groups and the holding of free and fair elections within one
year. In August 1990, ECOMOG was dispatched to Liberia
to effect the cease-fire and provide a security blanket for
Monrovia, Where the Interim Government was subsequently
based to administer the affairs of the country and organize
plans for elections and the return to civilian democratic
rule. Nevertheless, these interim political arrangements did
not seem to some of the warring parties to sufficiently
address their concerns. Consequently, the military stand-off
between the warring factions resulted in a stalemate in the
peace process. Numerous efforts were made subsequently
to revive the peace process.

Through joint diplomatic initiatives of the United
Nations, the OAU and ECOWAS, an agreement between
the warring factions and the Interim Government was
signed at Geneva in July 1993 it called, inter alia, for a
collective executive leadership or a Council of State
composed of representatives from the three warring factions
and two from civilian society. Other supportive mechanisms
- an expanded ECOMOG, with additional troops drawn
from non-ECOWAS States, and a United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia established by the Security Council -
were designed to further advance the peace process. The
agreement was signed by all of the parties at Cotonou,
Benin, on 25 July 1993.

The Cotonou Agreement produced the first Council of
State of the Liberian National Transitional Government,
which was installed in 1994. Delays in promised assistance
to an expanded ECOMOG, coupled with the unwillingness
of the warring parties to honour the understanding reached,
hampered the full implementation of the Cotonou
Agreement.

As the peace process suffered further setbacks,
negotiations were undertaken by the Chairman of
ECOWAS, President Jerry J. Rawlings of the Republic of
Ghana. His efforts led to the signing of the Akosombo
Agreement. At issue was the fact that the Agreement did
not adequately address the key question of disarmament,
but, rather, called for the reconfiguration of the Council of
State. The restructured Council of State, by including more
military and factional leaders, had the effect of sidelining
the civilian members. This caused an outcry among
Liberians at home and abroad that the Akosombo
Agreement was an attempt to appease the factional leaders.

The Accra Agreement, signed on 21 December 1994,
sought to clarify the Akosombo Agreement, but it failed to
settle the issue of the composition of the Council of State.

It was due to this stalemate that the Abuja meeting
was convened. The Abuja Agreement finally addressed the
 

composition of the Council of State, which was now to
include a civilian Chairman, the heads of the three main
warring factions and two other civilians, thus balancing
the representation. The installation of the Council of State
on 1 September 1995 raised the hopes of the Liberian
people and the international community that the peace
process had a better chance of succeeding, after several
years of fratricidal war which had resulted in the injury or
death of over 300,000 people, the devastation of the
economy and the fragile infrastructure, the forced
departure from the country of nearly a million Liberians
and the internal displacement of the remaining population.

I have revisited the early beginnings of the quest for
peace in Liberia principally to draw attention to the fact
that Liberians have made strenuous, painstaking efforts to
achieve peace and rid the country of the siege mentality.
Regrettably, the events which preceded the eruption of the
present hostilities have proved that the reverse has
happened. Today, Liberia appears to be no closer to peace
than it was when the war commenced in December 1989.
The Abuja Agreement, which called for the disarmament
and demobilization of combatants and their reintegration
into civil society, the repatriation of Liberian refugees and
the holding of free and fair elections in August 1996
under international supervision, remains largely
unimplemented.

The resumption of hostilities on 6 April, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General, is, unfortunately,
continuing. The cease-fire and other measures called for
by the ECOWAS ministerial meeting of the Committee of
Nine held in Accra on 7 and 8 May 1996 have not been
honoured. As a result, there is a breakdown of law and
order, and the Council of State is unable to function,
since some of its members have left the country and have
not returned home because their safety cannot be
guaranteed. The same is true for most of the personnel of
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations.

The plight of the Liberian people remains even more
precarious, for they continue to be the innocent victims of
the war, under siege at home and, regrettably, scorned
abroad. The recent report of Liberians fleeing the country,
which received widespread international media attention,
is a sad commentary on the country's present state of
affairs.

Liberia - a country which for over 130 years
enjoyed peace and stability as a free, sovereign and
independent State and, in the words of one African leader,
served as

"a beacon of hope to the rest of colonized Africa
that Africans are capable of self-governance" -
 

appears as a pariah nation whose citizens, fleeing a war in
chartered vessels, had to travel from port to port while
appeals were made that countries should honour their
international legal obligation to grant asylum to Liberians
seeking refuge from war, as was their unfortunate plight.

Permit me to register the heartfelt appreciation of the
Liberian people to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and his collaborators, to the Secretary-General of
the OAU and to those Governments, particularly those of
the European Community and the United States, and
governmental and non-governmental organizations which
appealed for and urged the acceptance of the refugees and
provided assistance for their immediate resettlement. We
also thank the Governments which agreed to host the recent
refugees.

Liberians bemoan the fact that their compatriots
entrusted to lead the country out of the fratricidal conflict
appear to have become numb to the misery and suffering,
the humiliation and mockery before the global audience. In
spite of the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council,
guns and other weapons of destruction continue to enter the
country, thus maintaining the war machine of the warring
factions.

In this respect, we urge the Security Council to
demand strict compliance with the embargo, and to put in
place penalties against all known Violators. Moreover, we
propose that a sanctions regime be considered against those
who aid and abet the war effort of the various warring
factions. Here, particular reference is made to those
multinational corporations whose untamed propensity for
acquiring from the warring factions Liberia's rich mineral
deposits and timber far below fair market value without
benefit to the Liberian people has helped to prolong the
war. No doubt, this unconscionable quest has defined the
duplicity and ambivalence in certain quarters regarding the
Liberian crisis. Hence, there is the need for a potent,
coordinated and harmonized response from the key actors
involved in finding an end to the war.

Along with the rest of the international community,
Liberians are appealing to the Council of State to end the
hostilities in the shortest time. It is recalled that, since the
outbreak of the fighting, diplomatic efforts by ECOWAS,
the United Nations, the OAU and friendly Governments
have sought to nudge the Council of State to move in the
direction of cessation of hostilities, the institution of a
lasting cease-fire, the withdrawal of the fighting forces from
Monrovia and the deployment of ECOMOG in the city,
among other goals. The Council of State has given
indications that it will abide by the recommendations
adopted by the ECOWAS ministerial Committee of Nine.
 

It is important to observe that a crucial element in
this exercise is the strengthening of ECOMOG in order
that its mandate under the Abuja Agreement can be
carried out. Again, we wish to appeal to the international
community for logistical and other support for ECOMOG.
While some may have reservations about its viability as
a peace-keeping force, it must not be forgotten that
ECOMOG took on a responsibility that should have been
shouldered by the United Nations. As the United Nations
has relied on ECOMOG to provide security to UNOMIL,
their respective functions are complementary. UNOMiL
and ECOMOG are engaged in a collaborative effort,
which will bear fruit only when the requisite support is
given.

If the pioneering effort by ECOWAS is to bring to
fruition the Charter provision encouraging subregional
initiatives in the pacific settlement of disputes, the
principal flaw in this provision, in our View, needs to be
corrected. The Charter must be amended to ensure that a
mechanism is put in place whereby any subregional
peace-keeping operation sanctioned by the Security
Council is financed by the United Nations.

Regrettably, the ECOWAS countries have threatened
that, because of the apparent lack of political will on the
part of the leaders of the warring factions and the lack of
support from the international community, they may be
forced to withdraw from Liberia. As the Secretary-
General notes in his report, a decision will be taken by
the ECOWAS leaders during their summit, scheduled to
be held in early August. In this connection, as the
situation in Liberia remains grave in View of the
continuation of the fighting, we appeal to the Chairman
of ECOWAS, President Jerry Rawlings, again to consider
convening the summit by next month.

It is also imperative in View of the growing
uncertainty regarding the continuing role of ECOMOG in
Liberia that the country not be abandoned. Indeed, it is
necessary to take a fresh look at earlier proposals
regarding an enhanced role for the United Nations in the
peace process. We therefore commend to the Security
Council, and endorse, the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's ninth progress report on
UNOMIL, particularly his proposal that consideration be
given to the deployment of a United Nations
peace-keeping force in Liberia. As envisaged by the
Secretary General, ECOMOG could be incorporated into
the larger force. This arrangement would eliminate the
logistical and financial deficiencies which have continued
to prevent ECOMOG from carrying out its mandate.
Furthermore, it would ensure the active engagement of
the United Nations in the resolution of the Liberian
conflict.
 

Since the outbreak of fighting on 6 April, Liberians
throughout the United States have held public
demonstrations and have joined in support of the sentiments
expressed by the overwhelming majority of Liberians at
home and abroad by presenting petitions to the United
Nations and to the United States and other friendly
Governments. They have demanded an immediate end to
the present hostilities and have expressed the View that, in
a gun-free environment, Liberians have the political will
and the capability to determine their own destiny without
fear or intimidation. The Liberian people have called for
enabling conditions wherein combatants are disarmed,
demobilized and reintegrated into civil society and wherein
their compatriots residing abroad as refugees can be
repatriated and free and fair elections under international
supervision can be organized so that everyone, including
military leaders, can freely participate in the election of the
country's leaders.

Furthermore, they ardently believe that only a
democratically elected leadership can ensure their freedom
and protection so that they may be able to enjoy their God-
given rights to liberty and the pursuit of happiness, as
provided for in the Liberian Constitution.

On behalf of the Liberian people, I wish to register
our heartfelt thanks to all friendly Governments, donor
agencies and humanitarian organizations that continued to
render assistance to our people in their hour of need. We
also express our regrets for the suffering and losses which
they have sustained as a result of the recent resumption of
fighting in Liberia.

What has unfolded in Liberia is a human tragedy.
When approximately half of a country's population have
fled conditions of terror and utter deprivation, in which they
fear for their lives, and those remaining in the country are
subjected to a continuing military offensive on a nearly
daily basis, it is a moral imperative that men of goodwill
act to bring relief. It was the same moral imperative that
led to the birth of the United Nations and today forms the
raison d'etre of this Organization. As the United Nations
has taken decisive actions in other conflict situations which
are not dissimilar to that of Liberia, we appeal to the prime
movers of the United Nations to employ their finer human
instincts to rescue Liberia.

