Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): The Security Council
meets today to consider a humanitarian problem that, for
a long time, has been in the hearts and minds of the
international community. In his report to the Security
Council in 1991 (5/23006, Annex I), Prince
Sadruddin Aga Khan, then Executive Delegate of the
Secretary-General for the United Nations inter-agency
humanitarian mission, painted a gloomy picture of the
serious nutritional and health situation of the Iraqi people.
Given the day-to-day deterioration in economic
conditions, the situation has undoubtedly become worse
since the submission of that report: the reports of the
humanitarian relief agencies operating in Iraq attest to this
fact.

In the light of the historical ties between Iraq and
the Omani people, the Sultanate of Oman has been
following, and continues to follow, at the highest level
and with deep concern the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian conditions of the brotherly people of Iraq.
The Sultanate of Oman, through its various interventions
in the Security Council and during meetings of relevant
organizations and agencies, has emphasized the need to
address as soon as possible the question of alleviating the
suffering of the brotherly people of Iraq.

The draft resolution before us today takes into
account the concerns and preoccupations of many Council
members. We are convinced that the text before us
addresses many of the international community' s concerns
vis-a-vis the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people. In
this vein, the Sultanate of Oman has joined others in
co-sponsoring the draft resolution, which, in our opinion,
aims principally, at alleviating the suffering of the
brotherly people of Iraq at this point in time and until the
Security Council is convinced that Iraq has fulfilled all its

 

obligations, after which the Council will consider
favourably all resolutions pertaining to the sanctions
imposed on Iraq.

We attach extreme importance to Iraq's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as is reaffirmed in the fifth
preambular paragraph of this draft resolution and, what is
more, reaffirmed very explicitly and without any shadow of
a doubt in operative paragraph 18. We should also like to
emphasize that our understanding is based on the fact that
the draft resolution does not compromise Iraq's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and, as I have already mentioned, is
aimed mainly at addressing the humanitarian situation of
the brotherly people of Iraq.

We have studied the report which was submitted by
Ambassador Ekeus to the Security Council on 10 April and
which points out that Iraq has gone a long way in its
cooperation with the Special Commission on Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction. It also strongly emphasizes
the particular importance of the need to encourage Iraq to
be more forthcoming with the Special Commission in order
to enable it to account for all aspects relating to the
programmes of prohibited Iraqi weapons in a more
comprehensive manner.

We look forward to seeing Iraq respond to and comply
fully with the remaining relevant Security Council
resolutions. Meanwhile, we believe that the draft resolution
before us provides the necessary financial resources for the
exceptionally urgent humanitarian needs and has no linkage
whatsoever with any other questions, including the
implementation of paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991),
on the total lifting of the sanctions imposed on Iraq.

While we respect the views of the Iraqi Government
vis-a-vis the draft resolution, we urge that Government to
consider it positively, for it provides in the meantime the
most appropriate mechanism for alleviating the suffering of
the Iraqi people and, furthermore, it will pave the way to
building confidence between the Security Council and the
Government of Iraq.

We hope that Iraq will soon be in a position to fulfil
its obligations in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, so that there will be no need for this
mechanism and so that Iraq may resume its regional and
international role in the peaceful and positive manner that
would enable the brotherly people of Iraq to overcome the
years of hardship and to make up for their losses in the
domain of economic and social development.

The Council's adoption of this draft resolution
reflects the concern of the international community
vis-c'i-vis the general situation in Iraq. Therefore, we look
forward to seeing it expeditiously implemented by all
concerned.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
convey my Government's sincere thanks to the other
sponsors of the draft resolution and also to the other
Council members for their cooperation and the relentless
efforts they have exerted to come up with the draft
resolution as it now stands. From such cooperation we
have proved today the earnest commitment of the
members of the Council and the international community
to the effort to alleviate the suffering and pain of the
brotherly people of Iraq.

