The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/239, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan; and document
S/ZOl 1/244, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf the Council:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the continued negotiations between the parties
to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
including under the auspices of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) and
its Chair, President Thabo Mbeki.

"Noting that the conclusion of the CPA
interim period on 9 July is soon approaching, the
Council urges the parties, meeting at the highest
level, as necessary, to reach agreement on
outstanding CPA issues and post-CPA
arrangements. The Council also encourages the
parties to engage with the United Nations on the
future of the United Nations presence in the
Sudan.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern over increased tensions, Violence and
displacement in the Abyei Area. The Council
calls on both parties to implement and adhere to
recent security agreements by withdrawing from
the Abyei Area all forces other than the Joint
Integrated Units and Joint Integrated Police Units
allowed under those agreements, and to urgently
reach an agreement on Abyei's post-CPA status.
The Council affirms that it is the responsibility of
the CPA parties, including during their
negotiations under the auspices of AUHIP and its
Chair, President Thabo Mbeki, to reach
agreement on the status of Abyei. In this regard,
the Council acknowledges the July 2009 ruling
by The Hague's Permanent Court of Arbitration,
which defines the borders of Abyei.

"The Security Council welcomes the start of
the popular consultation process in Blue Nile
State and the rescheduled 2 to 4 May
gubernatorial and state assembly elections in
Southern Kordofan state. The Council expresses
its concern about recent violence in Southern
Kordofan and underscores the responsibility of
all parties to avoid inflammatory rhetoric and to
ensure peaceful and credible elections. The
Council also stresses the importance of inclusive,
timely and credible popular consultation
processes, in accordance with the CPA. The
Council urges both parties to reach a security
agreement regarding the future of the tens of
thousands of troops from the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) from Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The Council also
urges the parties to reach agreement on security
arrangements and to determine the future status
of Southerners currently serving in the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF).

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about recent Violence between the SPLA and
local militias, specifically in Jonglei, Upper Nile
and Unity states. The Council calls on the leaders
of the Government of Southern Sudan and the
SPLA to find peaceful solutions to the violence,
prevent further clashes and restore calm.

"The Council underlines the need for the
CPA parties to promote calm, including by
providing immediate and ongoing reassurance to
people of all nationalities in the Sudan, including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will
be respected. The Council urges the CPA parties
to respect their obligations in this regard.

"The Council reiterates in the strongest
terms that any obstruction to freedom of
movement of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) is unacceptable and that UNMIS
requires full and unfettered access throughout the
mission area.
11-30848
"The Security Council will not tolerate any
support to proxy militias by either party to the
CPA.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern over the serious increase in violence and
insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire
violations, restrictions on access to vulnerable
populations throughout Darfur by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the humanitarian
community, attacks by rebel groups, aerial
bombardment by the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the ongoing displacement of civilians. The
Council expresses its deep condolences to the
family of the peacekeeper killed on 5 April and
urges UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan to conduct a full and thorough
investigation into the incident.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for UNAMID, including the increasingly full
implementation of its Chapter VII mandate to
deliver its core tasks of protecting civilians and
assuring humanitarian access, as defined in
resolution 1769 (2007), and recalls the priority
given to its efforts in support of the African
Union-United Nations-led political process for
Darfur. The Council demands that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed
movements cease hostilities and ensure full and
unhindered access, by land and by air, for
UNAMID throughout the mission area, and allow
humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all
populations in need. The Council notes the
statement made by the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan to the United Nations Security
Council on 20 April that his Government would
issue all outstanding l,ll7 visas for UNAMID
personnel, and urgently calls on the Government
of Sudan to do so.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar,
and the work of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril
Bassole. The Council further reaffirms its support
for the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council strongly urges all other rebel movements
to join the peace process without further delay or
preconditions. The Council urges the parties in
Doha to make the necessary concessions to
quickly reach a ceasefire and political agreement,
11-30848
and looks forward to the outcome of the
upcoming All-Darfur Stakeholders' Conference in
Doha. The Council believes that this Conference
should be fully representative of all of Darfur's
populations and interest groups. The Council
reiterates the importance of the increased
participation of women in the Sudanese peace
processes.

"The Security Council recognizes the
potential complementary role that a Darfur-based
Political Process (DPP) could play in ensuring the
participation and support of the people of Darfur
and better enabling them to be involved in the
implementation of the outcome of the Doha peace
process. The Council is nonetheless concerned
that important aspects of the enabling
environment necessary for a DPP are not in place,
including, first, the civil and political rights of
participants such that they can exercise their
views without fear of retribution; secondly,
freedom of speech and assembly to permit open
consultations; thirdly, freedom of movement of
participants and UNAMID; fourthly, proportional
participation among Darfurians; fifthly, freedom
from harassment, arbitrary arrest and
intimidation; and, sixthly, freedom from
interference by the Government or armed
movements. The Council calls on the
Government of the Sudan and the armed
movements to contribute to the creation of such
an enabling environment for a DPP, working
closely with UNAMID as appropriate, and in
particular calls on the Government of the Sudan
to fulfil its stated commitment to lift the state of
emergency in Darfur.

"The Council also calls on the Government
of the Sudan to release all political detainees, to
allow free expression and to undertake effective
efforts to ensure accountability for serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by whomsoever perpetrated."

(spoke in Spanish)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l 1/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.
