Mr. Kaberuka: It is an honour and a privilege
for me to be here for this important debate. I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency and the entire
membership of the Security Council for inviting me
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security to make a contribution to the update by
the African Union to the Security Council on resolution
2320 (2016), with a special focus on the African Union's
Peace Fund.

Over the years, and as the nature of international
peace and security threats has evolved, various
high-level reports and recommendations have made
three key points consistently: first, that the crises
the world faces today are often so complex that no
one single organization is able to provide the needed
response; secondly, that regional organizations bring
a comparative advantage to the table; and, thirdly,
that there is a need for financing mechanisms that are
predictable rather than voluntary or ad hoc. A well-
funded African Peace and Security Architecture is not
simply an African priority, it is a global public good.

A significant amount of work has been undertaken
since the adoption of resolution 2320 (2016), on
18 November 2016, as members heard from the
Commissioner. I would particularly like to commend
the work undertaken by the United Nations Secretariat
and by the Commission to follow up on the relevant
provisions of the resolution, in particular the consultative
process carried out between March and April. I am
pleased to note that the process was conducted in the
spirit of true partnership and collaboration. I look
forward to seeing more processes of that nature between
our two organizations.

One of the key issues on which the Council asked
to be updated under in resolution 2320 (2016) was
progress on the operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund, including the overall benchmarks and timelines.
Over the past few months, the detailed governance
arrangements for the Peace Fund were developed. They
were presented to the AU Peace and Security Council
on 30 May, and I am pleased to confirm that the Council
fully endorsed the proposals. Let me briefly recap the
proposed governance arrangements.

As High Representative for the Peace Fund, I was
requested to put forward ideas on how the Peace Fund
could be financed, structured and governed for the peace
and security challenges the continent faces, in a much
more predictable way and while avoiding overreliance
on multiple unpredictable funding channels. The
July 2016 session of the AU Assembly adopted the
proposal that the Peace Fund be structured around
three windows: mediation and preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity and peace support operations. In
addition, a crisis reserve facility - a revolving trust
fund provided for under article 21, paragraph 4, of the
Peace and Security Council Protocol on Peace and
Security - would be established within the Peace Fund
to enable rapid responses to unforeseen crises, from
any unutilized balances.

The AU policy organs, in particular the Peace and
Security Council, have the political authority to guide
the activities ofthe Peace Fund. The Chairperson of the
Commission, supported by an executive management
committee, will oversee the Fund's day-to-day
operations. A board of trustees will be put in place
to ensure strategic coherence, enhanced governance
and the financial and administrative oversight of the
Fund. External partners to the Fund will be invited to
nominate two representatives to the board of trustees.
An independent evaluation group will provide periodic
evaluation on the use and impact of the Fund. A dedicated
Peace Fund secretariat will be established within the
Commission to manage day-to-day operations and
will report to the executive management committee.
Finally, an independent Fund manager will be recruited
to ensure the highest standards of accountability and
compliance with fiduciary rules and procedures in the
management of the Fund.

I believe that structure reflects international best
practice in terms of fund governance arrangements
and will reassure both African member countries
and partners to the fund. Of course, it has been
adapted to reflect the fact that the African Union is an
intergovernmental organization, and not a corporate
body. It is for that reason that the Fund will finance only
activities that emanate from a decision by a competent
AU organ, in this case the Assembly of Heads of State,
the Peace and Security Council or the Chairperson, in
line with the powers set out in the Protocol.

With respect to the timelines of their
implementation, the Chairperson of the Commission
aims to expedite the operationalization of the Peace
Fund governance arrangements in 2017. The adoption
of the Peace Fund instruments and the the governance
structures that I have referred to will be implemented
before the end of the year. With those new Governance
arrangements, the AU Peace Fund will provide a more
effective instrument through which the AU and its
partners in the international community will be able
to work together to promote the cause of peace and
stability in Africa and the world.

I am pleased to say that, as of May - as the
Commissioner for Peace and Security has already
told the Council - 14 AU member States had made
their contribution to the Peace Fund, even before the
establishment of the new governance arrangements.
Those contributions represent just over 12 per cent
of the of the target set for 2017. As part of my new
expanded mandate, which is focused on the Peace
Fund as well as the overall financing of the African
Union, I will be focusing most of my time assisting the
Chairperson in implementing the various mechanisms
and ensuring that AU member States respect their
financial commitments to the African Union. I am
confident that the 2017 Peace Fund target can be met.

While AU member States are primarily responsible
for financing the Peace Fund, partnerships will
continue to play a vital role in supporting the peace and
security activities on the African continent. Therefore,
deepening cooperation with partners, both traditional
and emerging, is imperative.

The current international peace and security
architecture is under significant pressure, given the
complexity of the challenges that the world faces today.
Therefore, forging an effective partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is of the greatest
strategic importance for our collective security. In that
respect, the financing partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations is critical in that it offers
a pathway to more predictable funding of AU peace
support operations. That enhanced form of partnership
must necessarily be based on the two organizations'
respective authorities, competencies and capacities.
It must also observe the principles of burden-sharing,
consultative decision-making, comparative advantage,
division of labour and mutual accountability.

There should be no illusions with respect to the
political complexity of such an undertaking. However,
to the extent that there is accord regarding the urgency
of improving the international peace and security
architecture in order to address today's security
challenges, arriving at a shared solution for new
financing arrangement and authorized peace support
will be a great achievement for both the African Union
and the United Nations.

