Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, allow me to commend the Government of Viet Nam for convening today's open debate on upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security, which is indeed a very important and timely event given the various complex processes currently taking place across the globe. This year we will commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. It is an important milestone where we can look back to critically assess accomplishments, identify shortcomings and address new challenges in order to effectively uphold our Organization's Charter. Such a thorough analysis takes on special significance today, as we witness an unprecedented process of the formation of a new alignment of power at the global and regional levels. The world is becoming less predictable and more unstable. The strength and effectiveness of the multilateral institutions and mechanisms designed to ensure international security have been put to the test. In that regard, it is now critical to strengthen the central role of the United Nations in international relations, especially by supporting the core pillars of the Organization. One of the imperatives to that end is upholding the Charter in the maintenance of international peace and security, which is the first purpose inscribed in the Charter ahead of other priorities. Article 1 of the Charter states that the purposes of the United Nations are to maintain international peace and security and to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace. Therefore, Article 1 not only emphasizes the importance of ensuring international peace and security, but also clearly calls for undertaking collective measures in order to achieve that goal. In other words, it underlines the importance of multilateralism as an essential prerequisite for safeguarding international peace and stability. The aggravation of terrorist threats in the world poses serious challenges for international peace and security. Uzbekistan believes that, along with other factors, ignorance and intolerance are at the heart of international terrorism and extremism. Given those circumstances, our most important task nowadays is to fight for the hearts and minds of people - especially young people, who now constitute the largest generation in the history of humankind, totalling 2 billion people upon whom the planet's future and well-being will depend. Our urgent task should therefore be to provide the conditions for young people's self-realization, creating a barrier against the spread of the virus that is the ideology of violence. In that regard, I would like once again to highlight the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan to develop a United Nations convention on the rights of youth, aimed at stepping up efforts at the global, regional and national levels to meet the needs of our youth, build capacity, expand rights and freedoms and serve the best interests of young people in all their diversity around the world. That initiative fully complies with the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and also echoes the Secretary-General's recent New Year's message, in which he named young people as our greatest source of hope and reaffirmed his support for their aspiration to play a greater role in shaping the future. We believe that now is the perfect time to define the rights and role of young people in our contemporary world. In conclusion, I would like to underline that Uzbekistan remains firmly committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and an international order based on the rule of law, which are indispensable foundations for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.
