Mr. Garofalo (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Community
of Sant'Egidio, for the second invitation to address the
Security Council regarding the situation in the Central
African Republic.

The Secretary-General's visit to Bangui and
Bangassou has certainly had a positive impact on the
peace and reconciliation process. Through its presence
at the highest level, the United Nations is reiterating
its full commitment to finding a way out of the crisis
in the Central African Republic, despite unanimous
agreement that the situation in the country remains
very precarious.

The affection with which the Secretary-General
was welcomed by the population - which I witnessed
first hand - clearly demonstrates that, in spite of
difficulties, there is a real need for positive signals to
counter the exclusively pessimistic narrative to which
I fear we have become too accustomed. We should
never lose sight of the fact that the country's chronic
instability did not start in 2013, but dates back more
than 20 years. In that respect, the deficiencies of the
process that are noted by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2017/865) are also the toxic consequences of a
long-standing lack of trust, to which we all must react.

In that difficult context, Sant'Egidio has taken the
political initiative of holding a meeting in Rome on
19 June, with the specific goal of moving forward and
demonstrating that something concrete could be done.
With its own means, Sant'Egidio is helping to rebuild
the social fabric of the country, improve relations among
groups and communities, and strengthen institutions.
We believe that direct political dialogue and listening
to people on the ground are effective measures. In that
regard, I also underscore the positive steps taken by
President Touadra towards greater inclusiveness, by
expanding the Government.

Following the agreement, we also launched a
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) pilot project, in collaboration with
the State and with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). By the end
of the year, we hope to demobilize 600 men in armed
groups and to reintegrate them into the Central African
Republic armed forces and other civilian programmes.

Following on from the Rome agreement, confidence-
building measures were taken with the leadership
of political and military movements. We are also
committed to providing food to the fighters who will
be reintegrated into civil society in the three months
between the disarmament process and the start of the
reintegration programme. The first concrete results
are that some 200 fighters have been disarmed, in
accordance with the rules of the DDRR programme,
and have been provided with assistance. We now enjoy
have greater security and practicability, for example
regarding commercial access to the Bouar-Cameroon
corridor, the country's main lifeline.

Not all armed groups have reacted in the same
way, obviously. Some of them, including the Front
democratique du peuple centrafricain, the renewed
Se'le'ka and the Union des forces de'mocratiques pour le
rassemblement, have reacted more quickly than others.
However, the implementation of the pilot project in the
eight sites envisioned with all 14 groups is essential
to verify the capacity of the movements to respect
their commitments.

That initial success should contribute to fostering
a new climate of trust throughout the whole country.
Hope must become contagious and act as an incentive.
We hope to quickly go beyond the initial figures
agreed - to disarm 1,000 men. Such a step will
demonstrate the feasibility of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process
and reassert the progressive expansion of the authority
of the State on broad swaths of territory. Indeed it is a
positive step, although lacking an efficient solution in
an atmosphere polluted by hatred.

There are others, as underscored in the report of
the Secretary-General, in terms of political dialogue,
training and rehabilitation of the national armed
forces and socioeconomic steps. We are also providing
assistance in that regard through sanitation programmes.
I believe that the initial success of the disarmament
process will determine the credibility of the entire
process. We need to demonstrate that it can work. It is
important to prove that disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration is possible, and not just
wishful thinking.

At the same time, we need to remain steadfast in
protecting civilians, international justice, territorial
integrity and the legitimacy of the authority of the
State. That is the aim of the road map of the African
Union. I would like to thank Special Envoy Moussa
Nebie for having demonstrated leadership and a very
inclusive approach. The Community of Sant'Egidio is
committed to the full success of that initiative. I would
also like to thank Economic Community of Central
African States - whose member States obviously
suffer the main impact of the crisis in the Central
African Republic.

Allow me, by way of conclusion, to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Onanga-
Anyanga for his devotion and, by extension, thank
all of the MINUSCA personnel. Their presence and
tireless daily efforts are the major bulwark against
chaos and violence.

