I thank the President of the Security Council for this opportunity to update the Council. As Council members are well aware, I have been mediating the text of a joint declaration for many months. I have been carrying out discussions virtually and, when practical, shuttling between the parties. It has been a painstaking process, which has faced many challenges along the way. The parties have remained engaged throughout. But it is immensely frustrating to the Yemeni people that they have not yet been able to agree on a final text. I thank the Security Council again for its steadfast support for the achievement of an urgent agreement on the joint declaration, most recently through its press statement of 16 October (SC/14329). There is an often-repeated maxim in conflicts around the world that the parties involved must take ownership of the solution for it to be workable and for peace to be sustained. Yemen is no exception to this maxim. The conflict is between the Yemeni parties. Only serious and deliberate commitments by their leaders can bring this conflict to a close. It is now time for them to take the final decisions required to bring the negotiations on the joint declaration to fruition. I have been moving back and forth between the parties in search of finality on the joint declaration for several weeks. The same challenges have been coming up repeatedly, particularly with regard to economic and humanitarian measures. I have been working with each party to find solutions. But in the end, I am the mediator and not the negotiator. The parties negotiate with each other, and not with me. I am struck by the example of the meeting recently held in Switzerland on the release of prisoners and detainees. In that case, with all due care for coronavirus- disease protocols, we were able to bring the two parties to meet and successfully produce a result that gave hope to many Yemenis. I am becoming convinced that perhaps this is what is needed in the joint declaration: an opportunity for the parties to explain their positions to each other and together reach the compromises needed. I shall be discussing this and other options with the parties. No doubt the issues in the joint declaration are among the most challenging and fundamental to the politics of this conflict and the situation on the ground. This cannot be underestimated. But the parties know the issues well. They have been over this ground many times. With determination I believe that they can reach an agreed path towards an end to this conflict. Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.8770), the violence on the front lines has not been as intense as in previous months. This is positive, but by no means a source of great comfort. I am deeply concerned by the periodic spikes in violence between the parties in Ma'rib and Taiz, and the recent escalation in attacks on Saudi territory. I hope that these spikes do not herald a return to the widespread violence of earlier this year. Several locations have experienced shootings and shelling that destroyed homes, schools, hospitals and places of worship. Once again, I call on the parties to uphold their obligations under international law to protect civilian lives and infrastructure. My colleague Lieutenant General Guha has told me that the situation in Al-Hudaydah has become calmer, but the tensions between the parties persist. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement has continued its efforts to reactivate the Redeployment Coordination Committee and other joint mechanisms to further cooperation between the parties in accordance with the Al-Hudaydah agreement. Overall, I must underline that there is no better option than a ceasefire, combined with a return to the political process, for the parties to create stability on the front lines. That is what they can bring to the Yemeni people through the joint declaration. I turn now to the vexed issue of the FSO SAFER tanker, whose solution is long overdue. Discussions with Ansar Allah have been far slower than an issue of this urgency and magnitude requires. The United Nations has been trying to negotiate access for months for the expert mission to conduct an assessment of the condition of the vessel, apply essential repairs and formulate recommendations on what is required to avoid a spill. Although discussions have been constructive, we have yet to receive the approvals needed for the mission. Given what is at stake, it is of the utmost importance that Ansar Allah give the United Nations the green light to proceed. As the conflict in Yemen has become prolonged, broader stability has become an ever-more pressing concern, not least in the southern governorates. One year ago, the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council signed the Riyadh agreement under the auspices of Saudi Arabia. This gave us all hope of greater stability in the southern governorates, improved functioning of State institutions and the prospect of genuine political cooperation between the signatories. I call on the parties to swiftly implement the agreement, as Yemen needs the agreement to work, and so does the peace process. The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) has rightly intensified the attention to women's participation in Yemen. I am continually amazed by women's courage and their determination to end the war and build peace in Yemen. To mark the anniversary, my Office and UN-Women convened a meeting of 30 Yemeni women leaders, along with international partners. The Yemeni women emphasized the importance of resuming negotiations, ending the war and enhancing women's political participation and representation and protection from political and gender- based violence. These ideas are not just good for Yemeni women; they are good ideas for all Yemenis. To ensure that these ideas become central to the negotiations, we need to see women represented in their delegations. All of us in our different ways can help to make this happen. And so, Yemen is at a point of decision, not for the first time and certainly not for the last time. As we will be hearing from Mark Lowcock and David Beasley, the plight of its people demands nothing less than a firm bet on peace, ending the shooting war, opening up the country and resuming the search for an inclusive political solution. It is that simple and that important.
