Mr. Negroponte (United States): Mr. President,
thank you for convening this session and giving us the
opportunity to address the pressing and rapidly
changing situation in Afghanistan. We all support the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Brahimi in their
efforts to promote peace, freedom and stability in that
suffering country, and we thank Mr. Brahimi for his
excellent report this morning.

We meet here at a crucial time. Events are
unfolding quickly, even as we speak. On Saturday,
President Bush said it clearly: the Al Qaeda terrorists
and the Taliban, who harbour them, are virtually
indistinguishable. In his words, the Taliban's days of
harbouring terrorists are drawing to a close. Now, just
72 hours later, we are watching the collapse of the
Taliban in much of Afghanistan.

Several things need to be done now by the United
Nations, by the international community and by
humanitarian assistance agencies. We all must support
the United Nations and Ambassador Brahimi in urgent
efforts to bring together, as soon as possible, Afghans
to form an interim authority in the liberated areas. That
authority must be representative of and acceptable to
Afghans, and it must be supported by all of us,
especially the countries of the region, or it will not
succeed. An international presence must be re-
established as soon as possible. We also must call for
restraint on the part of the Afghan liberation forces as
they take up their new positions and continue their
offensive. Afghanistan does not need another cycle of
revenge and retribution as the Taliban collapse.

We must act immediately to increase the flow of
humanitarian assistance as the country is liberated. The
United States applauds the courage and determination
of the international assistance community and urges it
to accelerate the already-begun re-entry of assistance
personnel and supplies into Afghanistan. My country is
eager to continue doing its part.

The United States also urges those in a position to
do so to support efforts to ensure the safety and
security of the liberated areas, especially to protect
Afghan civilians and international personnel.

We are at a historic moment. As terrorism is set
to flight, Afghans must know that we will help them
rebuild, and support their efforts to achieve the peace
which has been so long denied them.

