Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Nestor Osorio of Colombia, for his 90-day
report on the activities of the Committee, and we
pledge our full support. We also welcome the recent
extension of the mandate, through resolution 1984
(2011), of the Panel of Experts of the Committee. The
work of the Committee is an important part of the
wider disarmament and non-proliferation goals that
South Africa adheres to.

We have often stated our concern that the
existence of weapons of mass destruction, particularly
nuclear weapons, continues to pose a threat to the
future of humanity. In that regard, we have also often
stated that disarmament and non-proliferation are
interlinked and must be pursued in conjunction with
one another. South Africa continues to closely follow
developments concerning Iran's nuclear programme,
and attaches great importance to the important role
played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) with regard to Iran's implementation of its
safeguards agreement, and the Agency's continuous
verification of Iran's declared nuclear material. South
Africa believes that the IAEA needs to be continuously
equipped with the appropriate tools to, first, provide
international confidence that declared nuclear material
is fully accounted for; secondly, that the IAEA is able
to verify that nuclear capabilities are being used for
peaceful purposes only and; thirdly, to provide
assurances regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear
materials and activities.

We remain concerned about the lack of progress
with regard to Iran's compliance with the relevant
IAEA and Security Council decisions - which are
mandatory decisions - and we will continue to
encourage Iran to continue its cooperation with the
Agency and clarify the outstanding issues in order to
restore confidence in Iran's peaceful nuclear
programme. We believe that it is important that Iran
take the steps required to build confidence in the nature
of its nuclear programme. Once the IAEA verification
activities in Iran have placed the international
community on the right path to finally resolve the
outstanding issues, it is important that this process
should be fully supported.

South Africa encourages the peaceful resolution
of the matter surrounding Iran's nuclear programme.
We encourage further discussions, through cooperation,
in order to promote mutual confidence in a sustainable
long-term solution, with a view to facilitating the work
of the IAEA on Iran's nuclear programme. We
therefore encourage all parties concerned to avoid any
actions that could derail progress towards finding a
sustainable solution to the matter. We also support the
View that continued dialogue will and can contribute to
a peaceful resolution to the issues at hand.

South Africa strongly calls on all parties to
resume constructive dialogue in that regard.

