Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing. We also welcome the presence of the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

At present, many people are still in need of
humanitarian assistance in Syria. China commends the
fact that the United Nations and various humanitarian
agencies have made unremitting efforts to effectively
improve the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation in Syria is
closely related to the political, security and counter-
terrorism backdrop. To resolve the humanitarian issue,
we must adopt a holistic approach with comprehensive
measures. In that regard, I would like to make the
following observations.

First, it is essential to effectively respect and
safeguard Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. A political settlement is the
fundamental means of improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria. China welcomes the progress made
in the work of Syria's Constitutional Committee and
supports the United Nations, particularly Special Envoy
Pedersen, in its continuous mediation efforts, in line with
the principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process,
with a view to promoting a political solution that takes
into account the concerns of all parties. It is essential
to maintain the independence of the Constitutional
Committee without external interference.

Secondly, it is necessary to redouble humanitarian
relief efforts, lift the economic sanctions against Syria,
promote the return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes and support the Syrian Government in
its post-war reconstruction efforts to fundamentally
improve the living conditions of the Syrian people.
Efforts must be made to improve Syria's economic
situation, assist with the safe and voluntary return of
Syrian refugees and support the Syrian Government in
repairing and rebuilding housing, people's livelihoods
and medical and educational facilities. China has
provided food, medicine, public transportation and
human-resource training to Syria and stands ready to
continue to play an active role in Syria's economic and
social reconstruction.

Thirdly, efforts must continue to unify standards
and combat all forms of terrorism in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international law. Eliminating terrorist forces is a
necessary security guarantee for the Syrian people to
resume a peaceful, orderly life. At present, terrorist
forces still occupy a large part of Idlib, threatening
the safety of civilians, destroying infrastructure and
worsening the humanitarian situation. We hope that at
the next meeting the Secretariat will provide detailed
information and analyses in that regard. The issue of
foreign terrorist fighters is a common challenge to
peace and security in the Middle East and the world
over. The Secretariat should remain seized of the issue
and gather information. The international community
should work together to bring all terrorists to justice.
Members of the Security Council have held many
discussions on the extension of the mandate of cross-
border humanitarian mechanisms in Syria. On the
whole, China has reservations about the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism. We believe
that this mechanism is a special relief method under
specific circumstances and should be evaluated and
adjusted in line with developments on the ground. The
Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility
for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. Any
humanitarian relief operation in the country should fully
respect Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity and
heed the views of and strengthen coordination with the
Syrian Government.

