Mr. Zerihoun: I have the pleasure to brief
the Security Council on the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/510) on the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi (MENUB). The report
provides an overview of the electoral process and the
political and security situations up to the holding of the
legislative and communal elections on 29 June. It also
highlights the activities of MENUB and other United
Nations entities working on Burundi.

As the Security Council is well aware, on
2 July MENUB issued a preliminary statement on
the pre-electoral environment and the holding of
the legislative and communal elections on 29 June.
MENUB assessed that the legislative and communal
electoral processes took place against the background of
a political crisis and in a climate ofwidespread fear and
intimidation in parts of the country. The fundamental
freedoms ofparticipation, assembly, expression, opinion
and information suffered increasing restrictions during
the campaign period and as election day grew nearer.
MENUB observers were present in all 18 provinces,
covering 50 of the 119 municipalities, and carried out
observations in 145 polling stations.

While MENUB assessed that the Independent
National Electoral Commission adequately handled
the voter registration and the nomination of
candidates, opposition parties repeatedly accused the
electoral management body of lacking credibility and
independence. Preparations and arrangements made by
the Electoral Commission for election day was largely
sufficient, and polling activities took place regularly
in the observed polling stations. Nationwide, many
Burundians went to the polls to cast their votes for
the candidates of their choice. However, instances of
violence and explosions preceded and in some cases
took place alongside election activities, mostly in
Bujumbura.

In view of its findings, MENUB concluded that
the environment was not conducive to free, credible
and inclusive elections. The African Union, the East
African Community (EAC) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region expressed
similar concerns. On 2 July, the Government of
Burundi issued a statement in which it emphasized that
the communal and legislative elections were conducted
in a peaceful, calm and secure environment with a
"massive" turnout of voters, and that the participation
was free, despite planned efforts by some to undermine
the voting process. The following day, the President
of the Electoral Commission accused MENUB of
observing the elections with "remote-controlled
glasses". Some opposition political parties and civil
society organizations, notably those opposed to a third
term for President Nkurunziza, called the elections a
sham and declared that they would not recognize the
results.

Following the 29 June election, MENUB has
closely monitored the poll counting and announcement
of results in various provinces. According to the
Electoral Commission, the preliminary results of
the election showed that the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratie-Forces pour la defense de la
de'mocratie (CNDD-FDD) received 60.2 per cent, which
corresponds to 77 parliamentary seats, and a coalition
of independents led by Agathon Rwasa and Charles
Nditije received 11.16 per cent of the votes, which
account for 21 seats. The official wing of the Union
pour le progres national (UPRONA), which is affiliated
with the Government, received 2.49 per cent of the
votes, which corresponds to two seats in Parliament.
The Electoral Commission Chairperson reported on
overall voter turnout as 74.3 per cent, with a much
smaller turnout of 28 per cent in Bujumbura Mairie.
In line with the power-sharing arrangements enshrined
in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi and the Constitution of Burundi, the Electoral
Commission intends to assign 21 more seats to meet the
requirements of 30 per cent women representation and
to balance Hutu, Tutsi and Batwa seats. The results, as I
mentioned, have been rejected by the opposition.

Preparations for the presidential election are
ongoing. Ballot papers have been printed with all eight
candidates approved by the Electoral Commission,
including those who have announced they would
boycott the election. The distribution of material
to different parts of the country has started. Four
presidential candidates have launched their campaigns,
namely, CNDD-FDD, the Coalition for Peace in Africa,
UPRONA and the Forces nationales de liberation. The
remaining four candidates have not launched their
campaigns and belong to political parties and coalitions
that have announced their intentions to boycott the
polls.

The political and security situations in Burundi
have remained tense and volatile since the holding of
the legislative and communal elections. The killing
of a police officer on 1 July by unidentified armed
men sparked a new wave of violence and clashes
between the police and residents of the neighbourhood
of Cibitoke and Mutakura in Bujumbura. Police
raided the area to carry out house-to-house searches,
reportedly to disarm the population, which resulted in
the killing of five civilians. The police operation took
place while Burundi was commemorating its fifty-
third anniversary of independence. In a further sign
of potential escalation, one of the leaders of the failed
coup recently claimed on a Kenyan television channel
that his group was responsible for the wave of grenade
attacks and security incidents in Burundi, and vowed to
continue to use violence to overthrow the Government.

Since the suspension of the political dialogue led
by the joint international facilitation team on 26 June,
there has not been any formal forum for dialogue
among Burundian stakeholders. However, some
States members of the East African Community have
continued to consult the parties following the decision
of the Community on the proposal of its Summit on the
formation of a Government of national unity.

The East African Community held its third
Emergency Summit on 6 July in Dar es Salaam. In
its communique, the Summit implicitly recognizes
the shortcomings identified by the two previous EAC
summits and adopted, among others, the following
decisions: first, the postponement of the presidential
elections to 30 July; secondly, the appointment of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda as facilitator
of the dialogue among the parties in Burundi; thirdly,
the formation of a Government of national unity,
involving both those who participated in the elections
and those who did not; fourthly, the deployment of an
East African Community election observer mission
to observe the presidential elections; fifthly, the
disarmament of the Imbonerakure and other armed
groups and youth groups allied with political parties;
and lastly, the deployment of military observers to
oversee the disarmament process. So far, the reaction
in Burundi has been relatively muted. The Government
of Burundi has indicated that it would consider the
recommendations, while some opposition members
have expressed disappointment that the communique
did not go far enough.

The Security Council has followed the situation
in Burundi for many years through different
reincarnations of the United Nations presence that have
been dispatched to help implement the 2000 Arusha
Agreement and to help consolidate peace and security
in Burundi.

It is regrettable that the hard-won progress achieved
by Burundians is in serious danger of slipping away. As
the Secretary-General indicates in the report before the
Council, Burundi is once again on the brink. The grave
danger the country faces should not be underestimated,
given the increasing polarization and the apparent
choice of Burundian leaders to put personal interests
before those of the country.

The East African Community summit communique
provides a clear path forward. The United Nations
remains ready to provide whatever support is needed.
Burundian actors must accept that political dialogue
and compromise is the only way out of the impending
downward spiral. They must act responsibly. The
Government, first and foremost, has the responsibility
to protect all Burundian citizens and their fundamental
rights. The opposition, for its part, also needs to disavow
the use of violence and agree to enter into political
dialogue with the Government. Time is running out,
and the Burundian leaders should do all they can to
safeguard the hard-won peace and the letter and spirit
of the Arusha Agreement.

