Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing
and express once again our profound gratitude to the
humanitarian workers and organizations that continue
to provide life-saving assistance in the Syrian Arab
Republic despite the many obstacles.

At the outset, we wish to reiterate our commitment
to the provision of humanitarian assistance based on
the principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence - principles that take on paramount
importance in a situation as complex as this one, not
only on the ground but also in the context ofa polarized
Security Council.

As Ms. Muller reiterated, humanitarian needs in
Syria are vast and continue to grow with each escalation
in violence. In the north-east, the situation following the
Turkish incursion of October remains fragile: 75,000
people remain displaced, and hundreds of thousands
are enduring critical shortages of water, shelter and
health care. These conditions also affect the Al Hol
camp, populated mainly by women and children, whose
situation requires an urgent humanitarian response,
including the repatriation of non-Syrian nationals to
their countries of origin.

However, in the north-west, despite the most recent
ceasefire, we continue to observe the occurrence of
attacks and crossfire that have already claimed the lives
of more than 1,000 people and displaced hundreds of
thousands more, including women and children.

Without a doubt, the situation in Syria remains
critical, fragile and volatile. It is at times like this
that it is more crucial than ever to place humanitarian
imperatives at the centre of the decisions of the Security
Council. Restoring a spirit of humanity to our political
decisions is a task in which we at times fall short. Today,

the responsibility to safeguard humanitarian assistance
for 4 million people in northern Syria through the cross-
border mechanism has been placed on our shoulders.
This is an exclusive responsibility of the Security
Council - a non-transferable, moral responsibility that
we cannot delegate. That is to say that each ofus has the
chance to allow or halt the passage of 41 per cent of the
humanitarian assistance provided in Syria. Hungry, in
acute need and in mortal danger, these people deserve
from us courage, political will and determined action.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its support
for the extension of the cross-border humanitarian
assistance mechanism in the Syrian Arab Republic
because it is the only means of survival for millions
of people. Today, and whenever necessary, we must be
on the side of Syrian men, women, young people and
children who expect us to meet their needs and to live
up to their legitimate aspirations.

Our collective obligation is to provide the help
they deserve, prevent further suffering and lay the
groundwork for a peaceful future, including a credible
and inclusive political process that sets the stage for
broad-based renewal by and for Syrian women and
men of goodwill. We therefore call once again on the
Security Council to show unity and focus its attention
on the lives and the survival of the civilian population,
which has paid the highest price in this human tragedy.

This afternoon, we will return to this Chamber
with the conviction that, despite our differences, we
have managed to build the bridges needed to reach
an agreement and, as I said before, restore a spirit
of humanity to the crucially important decisions we
must take.

