Ms. Kobia (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation to the United Nations, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate on
the role of youth in the prevention and resolution of
conflict, as well as in the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security.

Additionally, I would like to commend Mr. Graeme
Simpson on his leadership in producing the progress
study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86),
which engaged Kenyan youth as part of the
consultative process. We appreciate the substantive
recommendations presented to Member States for
adoption and implementation in our respective national
capacities. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for
her comprehensive remarks and the other briefers for
their insightful comments.

Kenya has a very young population, with roughly
78 per cent of Kenyans below the age of 35. At a time
when the global youth population is at its highest,
the empowerment and meaningful participation of
the youth in all aspects of society is of fundamental
importance and has become a top priority for the
Government of Kenya.
Despite growing recognition of the crucial role of
young people in conflict resolution and prevention, they
still face difficulties not only in accessing the negotiation
table but also in influencing discussions and decisions
once they are part of the mediation process. That is
largely due to the negative or indifferent attitudes of
conflict parties towards inclusive processes and young
people's limited political experience and clout.

In order to reduce barriers and fully realize
the potential of youth in the promotion of peace and
stability, the Government of Kenya has undertaken
concrete steps to create spaces for young people to
gain awareness and engage in the prevention of conflict
and maintenance of peace. In that regard, Kenya has
already begun the process of developing a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 2250
(2015). Consultations will begin to take place at the
county, national and regional levels to raise awareness
and gain insight from the relevant stakeholders prior
to the development of the draft action plan. Youth
organizations, civil society, international organizations,
academia and the private sector, among other relevant
stakeholders, will be key partners in that initial stage,
as well as upcoming stages.

In addition, Government bodies dealing with
peace and security matters are already taking steps to
be more inclusive. The National Steering Committee
on Peacebuilding and Conflict Management has
implemented guidelines for peace structures, which
stipulate that for every 15 of its members there should
be male and female youth representation. .

Moreover, through capacity-building training
on peace, national cohesion, conflict resolution and
mediation, the National Cohesion and Integration
Commission has been able to reach 24,964 young
people across the country in its aim to create a pool of
young cohesion agents.

At the local level, a number of structures have been
created within educational institutions to facilitate
a greater contribution from the youth to the peace
and security agenda. Amani clubs - which translate
as "peace clubs" - have been established from the
primary to university education levels. Supplementary
to Amani clubs, each public and private university has
a group of peace ambassadors. Youth groups have also
been established in informal settlements and rural
areas, thus leaving no one behind.

I must recall that radicalization and violent
extremism continue to be a challenge for Kenya, and
more specifically Kenyan young people. We urge
the Council to unite more powerfully and go beyond
condemning violent extremism by also acting against
religious and ethnic-based hatred and exclusivity,
which undermine the potential of our youth. In that
regard, there is a need to collaborate with the private
sector, especially social media companies, to deny
terrorist groups access to those platforms as a means
of radicalization.

Let me end by reiterating Kenya's commitment to
the full implementation of resolution 2250 (2015). We
welcome the recommendations made in the progress
study on youth and peace and security, and we look
forward to working with all relevant partners in the
adoption of those actionable steps at the national and
local levels.

