Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very grateful for the report of the multidisciplinary
assessment mission to the Central African subregion,
headed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Kalomoh, and we are also grateful for his
briefing today.

Briefly, it seems to us that, in the light of the
report, which we have studied, it would be appropriate
to introduce holistic solutions taking account of the
regional dimension, especially in areas that are clearly

affected by similar cross-border problems. Trafficking
in small arms, the proliferation of mercenaries who
cross borders to offer their services to the highest
bidder, the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
systematic violations of human rights, HIV/AIDS and
extreme poverty - none of these phenomena can be
resolved by countries acting alone, especially without
the cooperation of the international community or the
United Nations. That is why it seems to us entirely
logical to pursue proposals aimed at the more active
presence of the United Nations, supporting the
implementation of subregional measures aimed at the
resolution of general problems, including the
promotion of good governance; joint and coordinated
disarmament programmes; demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
programmes; and measures to combat the illegal
movement of small arms, drugs and militias - ideas
that, as we know, are under discussion in the context of
other African conflicts.

Of the recommendations made by the mission, we
would like to emphasize those that relate to the need to
establish a mechanism to alleviate the suffering of the
Victims of human rights violations, including through
reparation and compensation, as part of efforts aimed at
post-conflict reconciliation - an area to which Chile
attaches fundamental importance. Given our recent
history, we know how important it is to have a process
of democratic recovery, stability and peace, to prevent
impunity and to address the suffering of the victims of
human rights violations.

We believe that the recommendations relating to
governability contained in the report of the
multidisciplinary mission are important. Thus the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
must coordinate their action in order to ensure a
coherent approach to the integrated and
multidimensional aspects of the problems of the region.
Progress has been made in that area, but we have not
yet come up with an operational formula facilitating
the joint work of the two organs.

At the same time, it seems to us reasonable to
heed the concern of the Secretary-General regarding
the proliferation of United Nations offices in the
region - a theme taken up by a number of speakers in
the recent debate dealing with the conference on the
Great Lakes region. We must set clear and achievable
goals, draw up a specific timetable and avoid any
duplication of functions.

