Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank you and the other members
of the Council for providing my delegation with this
opportunity to address the Council at this meeting. I
thank His Excellency Ambassador Gasana, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya for his detailed report. I
also thank him for his efforts, along with those of his
team, in leading the work ofthe Committee over the past
two years. I would like to express my great appreciation
for his stewardship of the Committee, under which it
has conducted fruitful official consultations with Libya
and a number of other States. We hope the comments
made during those consultations will be taken into
consideration and that the suggestions proposed will
meet the Committee's approval and be implemented,
as Ambassador Gasana indicated in the fifteenth
paragraph of his report.

In addressing the activities of the Committee, I
note that there is a need for transparency in dealings
between it and the Libyan delegation, especially where
the exchange of information is concerned. The sanctions
on Libya are not sanctions against the legitimate
authorities; in fact, the authorities are partners with
the Security Council in the efforts to ensure that the
embargo is not violated by non-State parties or terrorist
organizations, and I hope the Committee will take
that into consideration. Given that the Libyan army
is waging an open war against terrorist organizations
in Libya, facilitating measures enabling it to obtain
the necessary weapons is in the interests of peace and
security in the country and the region. Yesterday I
informed the Sanctions Committee of new measures
adopted by the provisional Libyan Government aimed
at ensuring that weapons exempt from the sanctions do
not reach anyone except the Libyan army.

What is needed is for the Security Council to
lay out a clear and open position that leaves no room
for misinterpretation or false hopes on the part of
those fighting the legitimate authorities and trying
to impose their will on the Libyan people by force of
arms. There are no parties disputing Government and
power. On one side, there is one legitimate authority
represented in the elected House of Representatives and
a legitimate Government that emerged from that House
of Representatives; on the other, there is a coalition of
armed groups committing terrorist acts and attempting
to defeat and remove the legitimate authorities, rule the
Libyan people by force of arms, and maintain control
over the country's resources and wealth in order to
finance terrorism inside and outside Libya. Political
powers are hiding behind those groups, trying to make
up for what they lost in the elections to the House of
Representatives.

The Council will not be able to effectively halt
the fighting in Libya or encourage dialogue if it does
not avoid dealing with the armed groups on an equal
footing with the legitimate Government and if it does
not frankly and clearly invite the armed groups to stop
fighting the Army, surrender their weapons, leave the
cities and give up control of State institutions. The
Council should call on all States to assist the Libyan
army in its fight against terrorism. Council members,
however well intentioned, must forswear their attempts
to evaluate the resolutions and decisions of the House
of Representatives and the Government based on it,
including those concerning the Libyan army and its
leadership and the identity of the armed groups in
Libya that can be termed terrorist.

It is now time for the Security Council to switch
from reaction to action, and to pre-empt events with
practical measures that can help Libya to restore the
State's authority over its entire territory and re-establish
security and stability for its citizens and residents
throughout the country. That is not a difficult matter,
but it must be based on support for the legitimate
authorities and with an eye to the future, rather than
remaining trapped in current circumstances. It must
be based on the principles of democracy and the
rule of law, which should be interpreted in a climate
of freedom and integrity, free of threats to the lives
and property of judges. I mention that because the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino Leon, has made great efforts to bring
the Libyan parties together to agree on a cessation of
hostilities and to put together a united vision for the
future that respects the path of democracy and takes the
aspirations of the people into consideration.

So far, however, those efforts have been fruitless
because the armed groups that have taken over the
capital, Tripoli, and the city of Derna, and that were
expelled from Benghazi by the army believe they have
enough weapons and enough support from certain
States to impose their will on the Libyan people.
Unfortunately, they have found support from a political
organization that lost in the elections to the House of
Representatives and that wants to exploit the criminal
activities of armed groups and the takeover of State
institutions in order to achieve political gains that can
compensate for its election losses.

So what steps do we need the Security Council
to take now and in the future? In the absence of clear
support for the legitimate authorities, buttressed by all
available means, no attempt to reprise the Council's
earlier approach of focusing on national dialogue and
reconciliation will bear fruit. The Council should
therefore consider the new facts on the ground, which are
that the Libyan people are determined to rid themselves
of the armed groups, whatever they are called, and that
the Libyan army has been established and its numbers
are increasing daily. Its combat capabilities continue
to be strengthened and its feet are set more firmly on
the ground thanks to its victories against rebels and
terrorists in both the East and West of the country.
What it has achieved in Benghazi, with the support of
the city's population and with very modest resources,

is a source of pride for all Libyans and an important
lesson for other armies in their fight against terrorism.

I am sorry to say that Libya today is close to
the situation that prevailed in mid-2011, when the
international community felt that there was no military
solution to the crisis there. It later became apparent,
however, that a military solution was in fact the only
answer, owing to the intransigence of the former
dictatorial regime. Today, the House of Representatives
is extending its hand to the rebels in order to find a
solution that can put an end to the bloodshed and keep
to the path of democracy.

But the Dawn of Libya militias, which include
in their ranks supporters of ISIL and Al-Qaida in
Benghazi, Derna, Sirte and Al Zawiya, continue to
insist on occupying State institutions, conspiring with
foreign countries to destroy the Council of Deputies
and precipitate its failure, and seeking to take control
of oil exportation ports in order to finance terrorism
internationally. No honest Libyan can accept this,
and the international community should not either. I
therefore emphatically state that Libyans are capable
of dealing with armed groups, be they terrorists by
ideology or terrorists in action as representatives of the
greater international terrorist system.

The Libyans are asking two things of the Security
Council at this point. First, we ask that the Council
facilitate the Libyan army obtaining weapons and
equipment so that it can achieve full victory over
terrorism and the rebellion and restore State institutions
to the legitimate authorities. Secondly, we ask that the
Council charge the Secretariat with preparing a special
assistance plan to help Libya rebuild institutions and
restore stability. The plan should be implemented
as soon as the army has returned control of State
institutions to the authorities in the capital, Tripoli. The
plan, as set forth in the annex to our letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council 26 August
2014 (S/2014/632), should focus on building security
sector institutions, including the army, security entities
and the judicial system, in addition to creating local
Government institutions and training the staff thereof.

Nevertheless, the principal element in restoring
security and stability in Libya is completing the drafting
and adoption of the new Constitution and holding a
referendum as soon as possible. In this way, the rule
of law can return to Libya, while the conspiratorial
intrigue of the losers and the aggressive ambition of
certain armed persons, including some members of
the military, may be blocked. Indeed, some members
of military institutions may be seeking to divert
those institutions from their legitimate task, thereby
threatening democracy, especially in the absence of
clear constitutional rules that govern those institutions'
operation.

Therefore, if the Security Council wants to help
Libya emerge from its current crisis and attendant
suffering once and for all, then it must bring its weight
to bear on helping the draft constitution to be completed,
support the holding of the referendum on the draft
constitution as soon as possible, and facilitating the end
of the current provisional phase through presidential
and legislative elections whose results would be legal
and accepted by all.

