Ms. Jahjaga: It is a distinct pleasure to be with
the Council here today to share the developments in
the Republic of Kosovo over the last three months, a
period during which we have achieved much progress
in consolidating our State, extending the rule of law
into all corners of our territory and contributing to
the peace and stability of the whole region of South-
Eastern Europe.

On behalf of the institutions of Kosovo and its
citizens, I would like to express our appreciation to
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his contribution to peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region, and to the member countries of the Security
Council for their interest in and support to the overall
progress of Kosovo and the region.

I would also like to use this opportunity to express
our sincere condolences to the President of Serbia and
its citizens for the loss of lives and property as they have
battled terrible floods in the past few weeks. President
Nikolic', our thoughts and prayers are with your citizens
affected by that tragic natural disaster.

Over the past several months, the Republic of
Kosovo has shown political maturity, courage and
leadership, and we have reaped tangible results, inching
us closer to our overall goal of creating a multi-ethnic
and multicultural State of equal citizens living in peace
and prosperity regardless of their ethnicity, gender,
religious affiliation or race. Beyond our daily efforts to
reach out, protect and integrate all of Kosovo's ethnic
communities in the country's institutional and social
life, we have constructively engaged with the Republic
of Serbia in a thorough dialogue to normalize the
relations between our States and to better the lives of
our citizens.

Today Kosovo is a very different place from the
destroyed country we inherited 15 years ago, with
thousands of civilian deaths, many victims of torture
and rape used as a tool of war, physical destruction and
a legacy of hostilities and ethnic cleansing conducted
by the Serbian forces. Recovery has not been easy. It
took the generosity of the international community and
the will of our citizens to get to where we stand today. It
also took political will and courage to move on.

I take note of the support that Serbia's President,
Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, has givento the process of dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia in the normalization of
the relations between our countries. While we have
our differences over Kosovo, it is important that we
recognize the reality of Kosovo's independence and its
irreversibility.

In conjunction with the political progress, we have
focused much of our attention on further consolidating
our sovereignty, extending and strengthening the rule of
law, building a sound basis for economic development
and attracting much-needed foreign investment,
solidifying credible institutions and showing political
will and maturity to press ahead and come closer to
realizing our aspiration to join the European Union
(EU) and other international bodies.

The Republic of Kosovo remains committed to
the dialogue process with the Republic of Serbia. In
that process - which began in 2011 and culminated
in the comprehensive First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013, facilitated by the EU High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, and supported by the international
community - we have reached political and societal
inclusion and consensus. We have gone beyond
ideological boundaries and the daily political agendas.
We are determined to move on and to move forward.
The process of the dialogue with Serbia has been one
of our major efforts, and its implications reach far
beyond the consolidation of Kosovo's sovereignty and
territorial integrity and its membership in international
organizations.

Agreements reached in Brussels are facilitating the
full integration of the Serbian community in Kosovo.
They have ended the operation of the illegal security
structures supported by Serbia in parts of Kosovo,
bringing the much-needed rule of law to the citizens
of the northern part, who lived in an atmosphere of
intimidation and lawlessness for far too long. Those
agreements will bring daily services closer to the
citizens of the northern municipalities. They have
enhanced their freedom of movement as they have
eased the movement of goods and increased the well-
being of citizens on both sides of the border through
proper revenue collection. While much of the focus
has been on the north, we see those developments as
positive for our entire society and beneficial to citizens
across the country.

Agreements negotiated and signed in Brussels
have boosted European perspectives for Kosovo and
Serbia based on cooperation and good neighbourly
relations, while setting them on distinctive paths to the
European Union. The success of the dialogue process
has confirmed once again the transformational power
that the European Union project holds, paving the way
to this Union and to us, to advance the momentum of
the region's integration in its midst.

In that vein, I encourage the remaining five EU
member States to recognize Kosovo's independence
and further this perspective, which remains crucial to
peace and stability in the Western Balkans and beyond.
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to more than 100 countries around the world for
recognizing Kosovo's statehood and endorsing its
vision for a democratic and multi-ethnic country. And I

urge the remaining United Nations Members that have
yet to recognize Kosovo to do so.

As we marked the first anniversary of the bilateral
normalization agreement reached in Brussels through
the EU mediation of April 2013 between the Prime
Ministers of both countries, Kosovo institutions have
focused on the successful implementation of its 15
points. We are convinced that its full implementation
in a consistent and effective manner will further
transform our future relations and bring stability to the
region. We thank our partners - the European Union,
for its role as facilitator and guarantor of the dialogue
process, and the United States, a strong supporter of
this process - and encourage them to continue to stand
by us as we move forward.

Considerable progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the agreements, and we expect it
to gain momentum again once the electoral processes
in both countries are completed. In particular I would
like to again highlight the successful completion of the
local elections organized throughout Kosovo, including
the official inauguration and adoption of municipal
statutes in accordance with Kosovo law, as called for
in the Brussels Agreement. I am pleased to note that
participation by the Serbian community and other
ethnic communities in Kosovo has been satisfactory.

With the completion of the statutes of the four
northern municipalities, the association of the Serb
majority municipalities can be created in accordance
with Kosovo's Constitution, laws and the European
Charter of Local Self-Government to ensure the
integration of the Serbian community in the country.
The association will be an integral part of the Kosovo
institutions.

Similarly, good progress has been made on
the customs revenue collection at the northern
border crossings, as well as the establishment of the
development fund and its management board, the
closure of the offices of the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior operating in those municipalities and the
integration of their personnel in the Kosovo police
force, as stipulated in the Brussels Agreement. We look
forward to concluding the agreement on dismantling
the parallel courts at the next meeting in Brussels, and
we expect Serbia to meet its responsibilities in ceasing
the work of those courts and paving the way to the
integration of Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors into
Kosovo's justice system.

More remains to be done in the area of security
in the four northern municipalities, including the
disbandment of the remaining parallel structures. In
this period, I note with concern instances of resistance
to the establishment of rule of law in the four northern
municipalities by paramilitary and criminal groups who
have kept hostage the progress of the Serbiancommunity
in Kosovo over the last 15 years. These structures
also continue to endanger the staff of domestic and
international law enforcement agencies, as witnessed
recently with the attack on vehicles belonging to the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), as well as with the erection of barricades
that continue to prevent the freedom of movement. We
expect the new Government in Serbia to keep its end of
the Agreement and continue to engage constructively
to ensure that Kosovo Serbs accept and endorse the
agreements reached in Brussels in our joint efforts to
bring stability and peace to our citizens, the region and
beyond.

As we approach the early general elections in
Kosovo, I have called on all mechanisms and all
parties in Kosovo to ensure the stable environment and
democratic and fair conditions that would allow for a
free and inclusive vote. I reiterate my call on all Kosovo's
ethnic communities to exercise their constitutional
right through their full participation in the elections to
choose their own representatives, who will give voice
to their interests and demands, and to work jointly with
us in strengthening democracy in Kosovo.
Kosovo's institutions remain committed to the
return of all refugees and those displaced by the war.
To make these returns sustainable, we have taken a
comprehensive approach by investing in the housing
sector, health and security, access to education and
economic development. I am particularly encouraged
that some of the recent returns have taken place in the
urban centres, as well as by the cooperation of countries
of the region in working with Kosovo's Government in
facilitating these returns.

The Republic of Kosovo is committed to a
comprehensive reform process that will enhance its
future prospects for membership of the European
Union (EU), the main priority that unifies the citizens
of Kosovo and the option that enjoys institutional and
societal consensus. Building on this tangible progress, I
am pleased to inform the Council that earlier this month,
Kosovo completed the negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement with the European Union as
the first key step in our path to future membership. I
look forward to the swift formalization of the results
of the negotiations following the general elections
in Kosovo, as we work to ensure a safe and sound
environment for our citizens and a better quality of life
as we pursue this European perspective. We have made
significant progress in meeting the conditions to join
the visa-free regime with the European Union, and we
expect this process to be concluded soon.

During this period we have also completed a
strategic review of our security sector. This whole-of-
government process, conducted for the first time,
was executed in an organic and transparent manner,
studied the current and future security environment,
and assessed the security needs of all our citizens
and Kosovo's strategic security goals. Among the
recommendations stemming from this process is the
creation of the Kosovo armed forces, designed as a
lightly armed defence force that we believe will meet the
security challenges of Kosovo in the long term and be
the vehicle through which we contribute to the Balkan
region's collective security. The creation of the Kosovo
armed forces will be a gradual, phased, decade-long
and inclusive process that will seek not only the
support of all the ethnic communities, but their active
participation. Both security organizations in Kosovo
have a good record of inclusiveness. Some 15 per cent
of Kosovo's police force consists ofofficers from ethnic
minorities, and about 9 per cent of the Kosovo Security
Force are members of ethnic minorities.

On the creation of Kosovo armed forces, we
have reached out to ethnic communities in Kosovo,
the countries of the region and our international
stakeholders in NATO to explain the outcomes of the
review process, and we shall continue this important
dialogue. In our effort to become security providers,
Kosovo's institutions have and shall continue to act
in partnership with the international community, and
especially with NATO, in this process.

In our clear commitment to a European future
for Kosovo, we have partnered with EULEX to
strengthen the rule of law throughout the country.
As we translate this strong commitment against
corruption and organized crime into concrete actions,
I have asked the European Union for an extension of
the EULEX mandate until 2016. While EULEX will
transition from an executive mandate into a mentoring
role, its continued contribution to strengthening the
independence of our multi-ethnic justice system will
be invaluable. Under the new mandate, EULEX will
complete the pending cases and take up new ones upon
the request of Kosovo's institutions. The new EULEX
mandate, which was endorsed by Kosovo's Parliament,
will continue to assist in the implementation, where
agreed, of the EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia.

In our efforts to stay true to the commitment to
build a democratic Kosovo, at peace with itself and its
neighbours, and the values and ideals enshrined in our
Constitution, Kosovo's Parliament has endorsed the
creation of a special court, with internal and external
seats, to address war crime allegations arising from a
report of the Council of Europe in 2010. The creation
of the special court reflects Kosovo's determination
to engage in an independent and impartial process to
credibly address these allegations, as we believe that
a commitment to justice for all is the only way to true
reconciliation in the region.

As we speak here today, working-level teams from
Kosovo and Serbia are digging out a mass grave in the
Serbian town of Rudnica, unearthing the remains of
some of the 1,712 missing from the Kosovo war. These
are bodies of Kosovo Albanian civilians abducted and
executed by Serbian forces during the war. Closing
this chapter goes beyond politics. As leaders of our
countries, it is our obligation to help bring closure to
thousands of shattered families by empowering the
Commissions working on the issue of the missing to
investigate their fates and showing political will and
courage to bring to justice those that perpetrated these
horrendous crimes.

We have worked intensively to open a new chapter
in Kosovo, where each and every citizen shall enjoy
equality and live in freedom and peace. A lot has been
achieved and much remains to be accomplished. I am
encouraged by the change we have seen in the region
and the endorsement that we have received from the
international community, which stood by our side to
offer clear and distinct perspectives to Kosovo and
Serbia on their paths to the European Union.

Kosovo will stay committed to building good
relations with its neighbours that promote cooperation
and mutual trust- aparadigm shift for a region engulfed
in war less than two decades ago. On this path, we were
guided by the deep conviction that we must not allow
a repetition of the painful past and the immeasurable
suffering inflicted upon the lives of Kosovo's citizens.
There will continue to be contradictions and tensions
as we move forward, yet I believe that the progress
achieved thus far should and will be maintained as we
stand determined to secure a prosperous future for the
young generations.

We want to continue to cement the gains we
have made in strengthening Kosovo internally and
consolidating it internationally, as the two processes
are tightly linked. As we move forward, we seek the
Council's help and guidance, as the success in Kosovo
and the advancement of this momentum will be our
joint legacy, just as today's Kosovo, living in peace and
prosperity, is ourjoint success.

I would also like to add that there can be no more
credible testimony to who did what during the 1990s
than the verdicts of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which was established by the
United Nations. Also, there can be no more authoritative
indication of the legality of Kosovo's independence
than the opinion of the International Court of Justice,
a United Nations organ. I thank Council members for
their attention and support for progress in Kosovo.

