I would like to thank the presidency of the Russian Federation for organizing the Security Council meeting to mark the landmark anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We also thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and other speakers for their comprehensive remarks outlining the importance of the meaningful participation of women in promoting peace and security. We commend the personal contribution and leadership of Secretary-General Guterres in promoting equal opportunities for women across the United Nations system. Resolution 1325 (2000) has been instrumental in consolidating the efforts of the international community to promote the role of women in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacemaking. It also set a normative framework for ensuring the protection of women and girls in conflict situations. The anniversary of the adoption of the resolution creates significant momentum to scale up practical measures for countering all forms of violence against women and girls in conflicts and addressing their particular protection needs. Armenia prioritizes advancing the women and peace and security agenda in the framework of its national policies and programmes aimed at promoting gender equality, the political and public participation of women and their economic empowerment. The adoption of the national action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has made national policies more coherent and coordinated to this end. The national action plan attaches great importance to the inclusive engagement of all women affected by the Nagorno Karabakh conflict in peace and security efforts. Among its focus areas are the protection of the rights of women and girls affected by the conflict, providing special protection for displaced women and girls and upholding their socioeconomic rights. Twenty years after adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), despite significant progress in advancing the participation of women in peace processes, upholding their rights in conflict situations and engaging women in the security sector, women continue to be disproportionately affected by conflicts and complex humanitarian emergencies, including in our region. This discussion comes against the backdrop of the ongoing pre-planned large- scale offensive against the people of Artsakh unleashed by Azerbaijan with the direct military support of Turkey and involvement of the foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries. The military aggression was accompanied by indiscriminate bombardment, artillery and missile strikes of the capital city Stepanakert, other settlements and critical infrastructure of Nagorno Karabakh, resulting in the killing of dozens of civilians, with hundreds of wounded, including many women and children. The actions of the Azerbaijani army have led to massive violations of human rights law and international humanitarian law. Targeted attacks on residential buildings, hospitals, schools and other objects of critical infrastructure have caused a humanitarian crisis, which has affected women and girls as the most vulnerable. On 28 October, the armed forces of Azerbaijan launched targeted strikes on the residential areas of Stepanakert and Shushi, causing causalities among the civilian population and completely destroying the maternity hospital of Stepanakert, in gross violation of international humanitarian law and customary law. Perpetrated amid the coronavirus disease pandemic, Azerbaijan's heinous actions are aimed at denying people access to essential services and at erasing decades-long efforts to fight disease, reduce child mortality and improve maternal health - and, as such, reveal the criminal purpose of the leadership of Azerbaijan, namely, to make life in Artsakh impossible. Moreover, the decision of the political- military leadership of Azerbaijan to target a maternity ward whose location was well known to the military clearly demonstrates the genocidal intention "to destroy, in part or in whole, a racial, ethnic, religious, or other group" by preventing births of a particular ethnic group in Artsakh. The international community should resolutely and unequivocally condemn the ongoing aggression by Azerbaijan - with the involvement of Turkey and foreign terrorist fighters - and extend its support to the efforts of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group co-Chairs to achieve a verifiable ceasefire, which is crucial to ensure the protection of civilians, including women and girls, from violence and restore their inalienable rights. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia's firm commitment to further streamlining the empowerment of women in its reform agenda and promoting their active participation in political and public life as important prerequisites for promoting peace and stability.
