Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the Security Council's unanimous
agreement on the technical rollover of United Nations
Libya sanctions. In particular, we welcome the fact
that the Council has decided has decided to extend the
measures against illicit oil exports to include other types
of petroleum, to help address a significant problem.
Libya's Attorney General has said that the smuggling
of fuel has cost Libya LDSOO million Libyan dinars,
which is nearly $370 million. It is absolutely right that
the Council has acted to address that issue.

We have also heard a legitimate concern on the part
of the Government of National Accord regarding the
risk that assets frozen under sanctions can depreciate
in value. We agree that further work needs to be done
on that issue. But the United Kingdom continues to
think that Libya's resources must be preserved and
protected for the benefit of the Libyan people, in line
with paragraph 12 of resolution 2362 (2017), which we
adopted today. Sanctions remain an important tool for
the Council in our work to support the Government of
National Accord and to stabilize Libya. However, they
can ever be only one part of the solution, which requires
full political reconciliation.

We reiterate our support to the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord, headed by
Prime Minister Serraj, as the legitimate executive
authorities under the Libyan Political Agreement, in
line with resolution 2259 (2015). We therefore welcome
the briefing provided to the Sanctions Committee on
the security forces under the control of the Government
of National Accord. We continue to encourage the
Council to take a supportive approach to arms embargo
exemption requests in order to provide essential
assistance to the humanitarian and stabilization efforts.

It is important that all Member States cease
supporting parallel institutions and groups that are
acting outside of the authority of the internationally
recognized Government. The Council needs to be
ready to take swift action against spoilers who continue
to obstruct the peace, stability and security in Libya,
including parallel institutions. We condemn those
responsible for the attack yesterday on a convoy of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

We continue to support all efforts to reach a more
inclusive political settlement within the framework
of the Libyan Political Agreement. We welcome the
appointment of new Special Representative Ghassan
Salame, which is an opportunity to build real momentum
towards that goal. We will continue to work with the
Presidency Council and the Government of National
Accord to support their efforts to deliver for the people
of Libya.

