Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation would like at the outset to express
its condolences to the representative of Italy on the death of
Italian citizens who became victims in Zaire of people they
had gone to help and their hosts. My delegation has always
denounced the mixing of refugees with armed groups; it has
always denounced the policy of a host country that supports
armed groups that hide in the midst of refugees to
manipulate and use them.

We would ask the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and particularly its office in
Zaire, to carry out its responsibility to facilitate the return
of the refugees and to condemn dealings between the camps
under its control and the camps of the former Rwandan
forces.
We would also ask the partners of the Governments of
the area of the Great Lakes that are interested in the
situation in Rwanda to help reduce tensions in the region.
The question of the Rwandan refugees has been exploited
in various ways which are in the interests of neither
Rwanda nor the refugees. There are those who would like
to use the refugees to enhance their image with the
international community and play a key role in the
subregion.

We recall the fact that Belgium and France have a
major, historic responsibility in the current situation in
Rwanda. This responsibility is entirely shared with the
United Nations in general and with the Security Council
in particular. It necessitates cooperation with the Rwandan
Government to put the country back on track, to rebuild
it and Rwandan society. But my delegation emphasizes
that the historic responsibility I have referred to does not
give any country the right to set itself up as the
spokesman for Rwanda.

I should like, through you, Mr. President, to thank
the Secretary-General wholeheartedly for his visit to
Rwanda. It was high time it took place, and it was
necessary not only for Rwanda but for the United
Nations. But above all I thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which describes the real developments in
Rwanda one year after the assumption of power by a
Government that has fought genocide and is attempting to
put the country back on its feet. Without much in the way
of human resources, without materiel, Rwanda is on the
right track: after the genocide of an eighth of its
population, Rwanda has succeeded in bringing together
6 million Rwandese and has made it possible for people
traumatized by cruel torture and brainwashed by State and
Church propaganda to live together. Rwanda has
succeeded in establishing a government of national unity,
a parliament representing all political parties in the
country and has restored electricity and telephones and
other means of communication.

The Government has made an exceptional effort to
put the country back on its feet. By way of example, I
would note that after the Second World War one
European country had 60,000 people executed: Rwanda
has killed no one. And those who engaged in vengeance
or personal justice in Rwanda were executed.

That is why my delegation asks those countries that
are sheltering the criminals who have engaged in
genocide to take appropriate measures to arrest them,
since those countries have signed the Convention on
genocide.
The fear in the Great Lakes region has not been
created by weapons: but it has been created by the
impunity that prevails there. The Government of Rwanda

 

wishes to establish in the country a state of law which is
based not on fear or force but on justice.

As I have stated on more than one occasion, there is
no proliferation of arms in Rwanda. In Rwanda, the priority
is not the purchase of weapons. The priority is national
reconstruction, the return of the refugees and the rebuilding
of Rwandese society.

Rwanda's main objective in submitting this resolution
was based on the principle of the sovereignty of the country
and its right and duty to defend its population and its
territory.

Rwanda has no intention whatsoever of provoking a
war against its neighbours. Rwanda shares many interests
with all the bordering countries. But the current
Government does not want to inherit an embargo which
was imposed upon the genocide Government. Instead of
being arrested and brought to trial, the members of that
genocide Government have been fed, taken care of, housed,
trained and armed. The "brains" of that former
Government, its soldiers and the members of its militias
have never expressed regret for their acts. On the contrary,
they are arming in order to commit the same crimes again.
The real danger for the region is the impunity that the
international community seems to be encouraging; it is a
much greater danger than the weapons that are being
acquired.

My delegation would like, in conclusion, sincerely to
thank those countries that are giving their support to
Rwanda so that it can pursue its development.

As to the countries neighbouring Rwanda, in Central
and Eastern Africa, and the European countries that are
still hesitating, on behalf of my Government my delegation
invites them to visit Rwanda, to see with their own eyes
what the country has achieved, and to establish with the
representatives of the Rwandese people a better form of
cooperation, based on mutual respect.

