Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Madam President, we
welcome you to the Security Council and thank you
for having convened today's meeting. We also want
to thank Under-Secretary General O'Brien, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura for their soul-stirring briefings. We express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his latest
monthly report on the subject (S/2015/862).

We also want to join other delegations in expressing
our very deep condolences to the people of France and
Lebanon on the horrific, despicable attacks on their
population by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham.

The briefings we have heard today and the report
of the Secretary-General clearly indicate that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire. The
conflict continues to take a heavy toll on the civilian
population. Non-combatants, especially women
and children, face grave hardship, with hundreds
of thousands trapped in besieged areas. It is deeply
troubling that international humanitarian law continues
to be violated with impunity by the parties to the
conflict. Over the past month, hundreds of civilians
have been killed, injured or maimed in direct or
indiscriminate attacks on populated areas. The warring
parties must refrain from actions that jeopardize the
safety and security of civilians.

We must emphasize that the deliberate targeting
of civilians constitutes a war crime and that those
responsible for such acts are war criminals who
must be brought to justice. We take positive note of
the commitments made by the Government of Syria
to refrain from the indiscriminate use of weapons.
We condemn the deliberate targeting of civilian
infrastructure, which is causing cuts to electricity
and water supplies. This is compounding the already
difficult humanitarian situation in Syria. We also
condemn attacks on health-care facilities and medical
personnel, as well as the denial of care to those in need.
These are clear violations of international humanitarian
law.

It is regrettable that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance remains extremely challenging owing
to active conflict, insecurity and administrative
bottlenecks. There is a need for humanitarian actors to
be allowed to perform their duties without hindrance.
The parties must facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to affected people throughout the
country.

We want to pay tribute to the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners for their
unrelenting efforts to reach millions of people in
need of aid, despite the challenges in the operating
environment. We recognize that the United Nations
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism is fulfilling
its mandate by ensuring the strictly humanitarian
nature of United Nations humanitarian shipments. We
commend the Governments of Jordan and Turkey for
their sustained cooperation with the Mechanism.

As clearly indicated this afternoon by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
in her briefing, the plight of children affected by the
Syrian conflict is deeply disturbing. The recruitment
and use of children in combat has become commonplace
in Syria. We are particularly concerned about the cases
of abduction, killing and maiming of children, as well
as attacks on schools. We underscore the need for the
international community to act in concert in order to
shield Syrian children from the disastrous consequences
of war.

Sexual Violence in the Syrian conflict is also a
matter of great concern. As succinctly stated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura,
displaced women and girls are at risk of various forms
of sexual exploitation, including sexual enslavement,
mass rape and forced marriage. We condemn these
heinous acts in the strongest terms. This state of affairs
underscores the urgent need for more to be done to
protect women and girls, and Ms. Bangura's seven-
point strategy of what can be done is worth exploring.

We must all admit that the cause-and-effect
relationship between the humanitarian situation and
the conflict in Syria is what we must explore further.
The sustainable solution to the humanitarian crisis in
Syria lies in ending the conflict, and the path to ending
the conflict is that of dialogue and negotiation. After
five years of fighting, it should be clear to the parties
that there can be no military solution. We encourage the
warring parties to sheathe their swords, lay down their
arms and pursue a negotiated solution.

The recent meetings in Vienna involving an
expanded group of international stakeholders have
provided a much needed impetus to decide for peace in
Syria. We believe that the sustenance of that initiative
will provide an opportunity to develop a framework
for peace along the key principles of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). We support without
reservation those efforts, and we hope that they will
lead to lasting peace and the restoration of stability in
Syria.

