Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): First of all,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized today's
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Jean-
Paul Laborde and the other briefers for their briefings
on the theme of asymmetrical threats to peacekeeping
operations.

(spoke in English)

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
fully supports the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in
the light of our cooperation related to the upcoming
split mandate in the Security Council. In the Security
Council from 2017 to 2018, Italy and the Netherlands
will continue their sustained efforts to promote more
effective peacekeeping operations, and we encourage
other countries to join us in those efforts.

In presenting my condolences for the victims
of yesterday's attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), allow me to pay tribute to all those
who lost their lives serving under the United Nations
flag in peace operations. Fifty of them were Italians.

As the first Blue-Helmet contributor among
Western countries, and the eighth overall contributor
to the regular budget and the peacekeeping budget,
Italy considers its peacekeeping partnership with the
United Nations to be a strategic one. Thanks also to
the experience gained in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, Italy believes that it has powerful
tools at its disposal to pursue the goal of adapting our
peacekeeping operations to new and evolving threats.
The recommendations in the report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
and the work carried out in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations can guide us as well.

First, I believe that a truly integrated approach
is necessary, both at the United Nations and on the
ground, in order to ensure that our complex efforts are
holistic yet focused, thereby strengthening the whole
spectrum of United Nations activities in a country. In
that respect, we appreciate the establishment of a unit
to handle police planning in the Secretariat. While
partnerships within the United Nations system and with
contributing countries are critical, we believe that the
most crucial partnerships are with local authorities and
communities, which must be fully supported.

Secondly, predeployment training is crucial and
provides the main means for ensuring the thorough and
holistic implementation of mission mandates, thereby
promoting the effective protection of civilians and
ensuring the highest moral and operational standards.
Through programmes offered by the Italian Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Units, Italian Carabinieri
units have to date trained approximately 10,000 units
from nearly 100 countries and 16 international and
regional organizations, using both the English and the
French languages.

Thirdly, more must be done to support regional
organizations, especially in Africa, through training
and assistance, including by pursuing synergies
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Our common capacity-building efforts must expand
beyond traditional peacekeeping goals and be enhanced
so as to be able to provide for essential skills in sectors
such as disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
techniques to counter Violent extremism, national
reconciliation and the reform of the security sector. One
valid example of that approach is Italy's contribution to
the European Gendarmerie Force's role in MINUSMA's
Security and Organized Crime Support Unit. That is a
very important effort, given that the Mission in Mali
epitomizes the complexity of the asymmetrical threats
that peacekeeping operations must face and their
consequent response.

Fourthly, as asymmetrical tactics often seek to
deny cultural identities, Italy is on the front line in
ensuring the protection of cultural heritage in crisis
situations. We believe that that is a crucial component
of our peacekeeping commitment, not only with the
necessary goal of protecting human rights but also as
a substantial contribution to conflict-prevention and
reconciliation efforts, and preserving the rights and the
identity of minorities.

Lastly, Italy strongly believes in the need for flexible
mandates and adequate equipment, especially with a
view to ensuring the most appropriate technological
solutions to the specific evolving contexts and threats.
From basic protective gear to the use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, which have proved key to saving civilian
lives * as was the case in the deployment of drones in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - assets and
capabilities need to be integrated in a targeted strategy.
In conclusion, I remind everyone that Italy believes
that our primary focus must continue to be political
solutions to crises. Avoiding conflict is the only
smart and humane choice. We need to engage more in
mediation and prevention, if we are to defeat the causes
underlying the very emergence of asymmetrical threats.
United Nations capabilities in those sectors should
be strengthened, and I confirm Italy's long-standing
commitment in that respect.

