Mr. Cardi(Italy): Italyaligns itselfwiththe statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, we fully support the statement to be made by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
in the light of our cooperation that will unfold over the
next two years in the Security Council.

We welcome, of course, the adoption of the report
on the comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as resolution 2325
(2016), adopted today, of which we were a co-sponsor.
As the only universally binding instruments covering
all types of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
those resolutions are among the pillars of the global
non-proliferation architecture and provide essential
tools for countering the growing threat of terrorism.

The increase in the number of national reports and
voluntary national implementation action plans, as well
as the inclusion of resolution 1540 (2004) elements
into the daily work of international and regional
organizations, are very good news. Accurate and timely
reporting is a crucial instrument for achieving concrete
long-term results. As such, we recognize that capacity-
building aimed at improving reporting is essential.

We are concerned by the proliferation risks posed
by non-State actors that are increasingly making
use of new technologies, scientific developments
and international trade networks. In that regard, the
outcome of the recent Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention is
disappointing. At the Security Council last August, the
Secretary-General recommended that the international
community must invest more in tackling the risk of
the proliferation of biological weapons, which get less
attention than do nuclear and chemical threats.

With regard to non-State actors, the resolution 1540
(2004) architecture is an important tool, in our view,
useful in order to remedy such a shortfall. Similarly,
more attention should be paid to the protection of
critical infrastructure relevant to the non-proliferation
of WMDs from the risk of cyberattacks. In that
regard, resolution 1540 (2004) can also provide a
useful framework.

As a responsible non-proliferation actor, Italy
ratified the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. The increasing number of
ratifications this year provides further opportunities for
international cooperation in the areas of prevention and
criminal investigations. Supporting that momentum,
we recently hosted a meeting in Rome of the Nuclear
Forensics International Technical Working Group of
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

Synergies among the relevant international and
regional bodies are crucial, so as to avoid gaps in the
non-proliferation regime and its architecture. As the
next Chair of the Group of Seven in 2017 and of the
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction, Italy will focus on
improving synergies among the Group of Eight Global
Partnership Working Group and the mechanisms of the
1540 Committee.

Likewise, border control and export controls are
crucial instruments in the fight against the proliferation,
smuggling and trafficking of WMDs. In November, we
organized a table-top exercise on that issue in Rome,
within the framework of the Mediterranean track of the
Proliferation Security Initiative. We also fully applied
the European Union export-control legislation, which
provides a valuable example of a border-control policy
that is aimed at curbing proliferation.

Finally, education, training and institutional
capacity deserve special attention when it comes
to the effective implementation of the resolution.
Every year, Italy organizes the International School
on Nuclear Security at the International Centre for
Theoretical Physics in Trieste, in collaboration with
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Furthermore,
inspectors from the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are often trained at Italian
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear defence
centres, and the Italian chemical industry participates
widely and effectively in the OPCW Associate
Programme, training experts from other countries
in various industrial operations, thereby facilitating
industry-related implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

We thank Spain for its leadership in effectively
steering the comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), and we stand ready to offer our full support to
the incoming Chair, Bolivia. Through our chairmanship
next year of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), we will also work to broaden
cooperation on the issue of non-proliferation.

