Mr. Sareer (Maldives): I would like to thank
the Swedish presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

We are starting the dialogue on this topic this year
at an important juncture - following the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), the first Security Council
resolution on the Palestinian issue in almost a decade.
The Maldives welcomes the resolution, which reaffirms
the illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territory ofPalestine and calls upon States to distinguish,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
We believe that this is a significant step forward in the
Security Council that demonstrates the international
political support in addressing the predicament of the
Palestinian people, which has stretched on for far too
long. It is a clear message to the Israeli Government that
its policies and laws aimed at perpetuating and further
extending its illegal occupation in blatant violation of
international law will not be accepted by the Council or
the rest of the world.

With deep concern, we take note of the punitive
actions that the Israeli Government has taken against
the Security Council members that voted in favour of
the resolution, as well as the harsh political statements
issued from the highest level expressing the lack
of intent to implement the resolution. This flagrant
disregard for the very basic principles of international
law sets a dangerous precedent, for which the Israeli
Government should be held accountable. We believe it
is critical to build on the momentum generated by the
resolution and take further concrete measures to bring
an end to the Israeli occupation and find a peaceful
and sustainable resolution to this conflict, which has
continuously overshadowed peace and security in
the region.

The Maldives also welcomes resolutions 2328
(2016), 2332 (2016) and 2336 (2016), which address
the escalating humanitarian crisis in Syria. Given the
appalling number of innocent lives that have already
been claimed by that conflict, we believe it is crucial
to ensure that unobstructed humanitarian aid is
continuously accessible to those in need in order to
prevent further casualties. We also welcome the efforts
of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey
aimed at initiating the political process to end the
violence in Syria, and call upon all the relevant parties
to enhance and expedite those efforts.

The crisis in Syria is indeed the one of the gravest
tragedies of our time. The Maldives, along with other
Member States, remains committed to taking action to
resolve the crisis and rebuild that war-torn country. We
cannot falter in our duties as Member States in times of
dire need.

All decisions of the Security Council should be
followed by urgent action. The lack of progress in
implementing the resolutions of the Council on issues
relating to the Middle East must be addressed in a
concrete manner in order to maintain the credibility of
not only the Council, but the United Nations as a whole.
We welcome the initiatives by Member States, that help
supplement the implementation of those resolutions,
including the Paris Middle East Peace Conference,
which was held on 15 January.
The Maldives would like to reiterate its call for a
two-State solution that recognizes the sovereign and
independent State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. The
achievement of sustainable peace in the Middle East
can be possible only through political will, international
cooperation and tangible actions. The resolution of those
conflicts is necessary in order to resolve other threats
to international peace and security, such as terrorism
and Violent extremism. Collectively, we need stronger
resolve in order to secure a better, more peaceful future
for those countries and maintain international peace
and order.

