Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus and Malta align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union would like at the outset to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
debate, which is a concrete and dynamic illustration of
the challenges related to the consolidation of peace and
the management of post-conflict situations. We listened
with great interest to the comprehensive and detailed
briefing given by the Vice-Prime Minister, Mr.
Faustino Fudut Imbali, for which we express our deep
appreciation.

With the return of democracy, the people of
Guinea-Bissau had many high expectations: the
restoration of civil peace and good governance,
economic and social reconstruction, secure borders and
the gradual strengthening of civil institutions vis-a-vis
the former military junta. At this stage, however, we
cannot but acknowledge that these objectives have
been only partially achieved. In spite of the successful
holding of legislative and presidential elections at the
beginning of the year, which gave the new institutions
unarguable legitimacy, the multidimensional nature of
the crisis situation affecting Guinea-Bissau has
magnified its complexity and has made it imperative
that it be managed in a coordinated and truly integrated
manner by all the partners concerned.

The return to peace and sustainable development
requires that a solution be found to structural problems.
These problems are not only of a political nature -
such as the relationship between the civil and the
military authorities, which has up to now been
sensitive and complex, and the differences that exist
within the Government; they are also of an institutional
nature - such as issues related to the coordination of
the Government team, the general lack of public
services, and the dubious management of public
finances; and of an international nature.

The European Union acknowledges in this respect
that the support of the donors, be they multilateral or
bilateral, has lacked a consistent and coordinated
strategy. Specifically, the disbursement of the promised
funds was probably too slow to promote the
stabilization of the post-conflict situation and the
success of the democratic experience resulting from the
elections of November 1999 and January 2000. The
security situation in Guinea-Bissau today is facing
serious risks of internal destabilization, as last week's
events showed once again, and possibly even of
regional destabilization.

The appointment of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the establishment of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in June 1999 played a
decisive role in the successful conclusion of the
electoral process, which could not have taken place
without the personal and sustained involvement of Mr.
Nana Sinkam. His work, his courage and his
determination also indisputably helped to achieve a
successful holding last week in dealing with the threats
of the destabilization of democracy.

While it is useful to begin considering right now
the extension of UNOGBIS's mandate beyond March
2001, inter alia to promote the successful conclusion of
the demobilization process, there must also be a
massive and determined commitment on the part of the
donors in order to meet the upcoming deadlines, which
are decisive.

For the European Union, this commitment
cannot- at least provisionally - be based on the
usual financial criteria and on classic ratios.
Conditionalities must take account of the post-conflict
situation. We must not lose sight of the fact that
Guinea-Bissau's gross domestic product fell by 28 per
cent in 1998, and that remunerated public or private
employment has become scarce. The restoration of
democratic sovereignty against a background of
destroyed or pillaged facilities, failing
telecommunications systems, depopulated
administrations and public finances drained by the cost
of maintaining the armed forces is a challenge that is
almost impossible to meet without adequate
international support. We must therefore consider and
provide qualitatively and quantitatively appropriate
assistance as soon as possible, with adjusted
conditionalities.

The European Union believes that this assistance
must include debt forgiveness and budgetary support,
which would enable the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to finance basic social services and ensure that salaries
can be paid for a period of several months. Projects
aimed at relaunching economic activities could also be
implemented. For its part, the Government of Guinea-
Bissau must, as soon as possible, determine what its
requirements are in terms of technical assistance in
order to ensure that this international assistance is
properly managed. The European Union hopes to see a
national effort aimed at remedying dysfunctions such
as excessive per diems, overly numerous administrative
missions and too many non-budgeted expenses.
Changes in leadership and an in-depth reorganization
of current practices must be accompanied at all levels
by this necessary effort at recovery.

The new civil authorities in Guinea-Bissau had to
cope last week with irresponsible behaviour on the part
of some of the military forces. This was not entirely
unforeseeable. The self-proclaimed military junta, led
by General Mane, had not actually completed the
process of its dissolution, in spite of the holding of
legislative and presidential elections. The European
Union welcomes the fact that the great majority of the
military forces have sides with the democratically
elected Government of President Kumba Yala, as well
as the support expressed by the people.

The European Union believes that in this new
context, priority must be given to ensuring that such
events do not recur and that Guinea-Bissau and the
international community relaunch as soon as possible
the process of demobilization, disarmament and, above
all, reintegration of military and paramilitary forces
and of former combatants. Now that a census has been
completed of the former combatants and the
paramilitary forces, a census of the armed forces must
be taken expeditiously and transparently, so as to
include in the 2001 budget a ceiling for troop strength
that is realistic and financially viable. This is a
prerequisite for the early conclusion of the
demobilization programme.

The European Union calls on the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to pursue a policy of open, inclusive
dialogue allowing for the establishment of real national
reconciliation. Guinea-Bissau needs peace. Guinea-
Bissau also needs unity. We hope that this message can
be heard by all. In this respect, the European Union
will be particularly sensitive to priority actions
intended to ensure respect for human rights and public
freedoms. It also stresses the need to accept and
preserve political, cultural and religious diversity.

In conclusion, I wish to return to the regional
dimension of the Guinea-Bissau crisis. The European
Union notes with interest the initiatives taken by the
Senegalese and Guinea-Bissau Governments to limit
the border incidents that occurred between June and
September 2000. The European Union greatly
welcomes the appointment by the Government of
Guinea (Conakry) of a resident ambassador and the
appointment by Senegal of a charge d'affaires. The
European Union hopes to see greater understanding
among all the countries of the region and, in this
context, the implementation of more efficient
monitoring of trafficking in small arms, in keeping
with the spirit and the letter of the Moratorium on the
Import, Export and Manufacturing of Small Arms
adopted by all the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States in Bamako.

