I have the pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We would like to thank and commend the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the situation in the Central Africa region (S/2020/1154) and United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for its work. We join our colleagues in welcoming Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCA, and express to him our appreciation for his important and insightful briefing on the evolving situation in the Central African region. We note with interest that 8 of the 11 Central African countries are moving forward with preparations for elections, which constitute an opportunity for their populations to consolidate democratic processes in their countries and an important factor of political stability and sustainable peace. In the same vein, the A3+1 is encouraged by the efforts undertaken by countries of the region to strengthen their response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), mitigate its impacts and enhance their bilateral relations. With regard to the diplomatic dynamics in the region, we note with satisfaction the holding, on 7 October, of a virtual mini-summit on the Great Lakes region, which brought together the heads of State of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. We also salute the willingness of Burundi and Rwanda to normalize their bilateral relations. We are looking forward to similar high-level meetings and diplomatic activities that could further strengthen bilateral ties and pave the way for increased security, stability and prosperity in the region as a whole. Security remains our primary concern, for without security there is no peace. While we commend the Government of Cameroon for advancing dialogue and decentralization in the North-West and South-West regions, we remain concerned by the outbreak of violence in that part of the country, and call on all parties to put an end to fighting and engage in peace negotiations and dialogue as the sole means for finding solutions to all pending issues. The A3+1 also encourages all parties to accelerate the implementation of the outcomes from the major national dialogue. We are also worried about the volatile security situation in some parts of the region, exacerbated by the violent activities of armed groups such as Boko Haram factions and the Lord's Resistance Army. Acts of piracy and other maritime criminal activities in the Gulf of Guinea are concerning, despite the decrease in maritime criminality during the period under review. Human trafficking is another major concern that needs to be diligently addressed. In that respect, we value the Organization's efforts to protect vulnerable migrants and strengthen the fight against human trafficking. That insecurity, combined with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, has increased the need for humanitarian assistance. The region has witnessed large movements of refugees and asylum seekers, as well as forced displacements, thus exacerbating malnutrition, food insecurity and epidemics. An increase in human rights violations and abuses against civilians, as well as threats against students and teachers, coupled with high rates of sexual and gender-based violence, further illustrate the bleak overall humanitarian situation in the region. In that respect, we commend the ongoing efforts of humanitarian actors to provide aid to the people in need. However, we stress that humanitarian actors must be allowed access to places where they are now denied. We wish to applaud the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for its efforts in the region, which have helped facilitate the return and repatriation of refugees, in close coordination with affected countries of the region. In that regard, we are pleased about the voluntary return of several Burundian refugees from neighbouring countries. That development serves to confirm the Council's assertion that the situation in Burundi no longer constitutes a threat to international peace and security. Last but not least, we are concerned about the severe effects of climate change and environmental degradation on livelihoods, social and communal tensions and development efforts in the Central Africa region. The A3+1 takes note of the Secretary-General's report on the human rights and socioeconomic trends in the region. These have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and by the activities of non-State armed actors. While we recognize the drastic limitations that entails, we encourage the countries of the region to increase efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and curb the activities of negative forces. We value the contribution of regional financial institutions and groups to alleviating the dire socioeconomic situations in certain countries of the Central Africa region. We seize this opportunity to express our appreciation for the valuable work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCA, and that of his able team. We appreciate their unwavering commitment to the region and fully support their efforts to promote peace and security in the Central Africa region through good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation. We underline the importance of continued cooperation between UNOCA and the Governments of the region, as well as between UNOCA and regional and subregional organizations such as the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and other relevant actors. The continued engagement between UNOCA and ECCAS towards the effective implementation of the Lome Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and the Fight Against Terrorism and Violent Extremism is crucial to regional stability. So too are their coordinated efforts on transhumance-related activities to address farmer-herder conflicts. We also reaffirm the importance of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region and the African Union's Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army. We encourage further international support of those initiatives. We also commend the fruitful cooperation and coordination between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, which increase synergies across their respective mandated activities in the region and contribute to further enhanced coherence and coordination across the region. In conclusion, the A3+1 shares the Secretary-General's observation that the COVID-19 pandemic has challenged the political, security, economic and social stability of the subregion. Such a challenging context urgently requires further concerted efforts of all affected countries through regional solidarity, as well as support from the international community and all partners on the ground.
