Mr. Rodriguez Arnillas (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation very much welcomes this
debate, for which we thank the presidency. This is an
opportunity to consider a timely and important issue.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission and as
an active participant in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, Peru is committed to lending
its support in connection with this topic. I should also
like to express our gratitude for the concept paper
(S/2011/50), which provides us with the basis for our
discussion today.

Peru associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

On repeated occasions, Peru has highlighted the
importance of complementarity and synergy between
security, development, human rights and humanitarian
assistance efforts. That entails interlinked and
inseparable elements that should serve to guide the
development of comprehensive peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies. They should also necessarily
be reflected on the ground, if indeed our goal is
international peace and security - which is the
primary responsibility of this main organ of the United
Nations.

Just a few days ago in Munich, the Secretary-
General, in referring to the events in the Middle East,
also spoke of the indispensable link between peace and
security, two concepts that cannot exist one without the
other. There is much experience to attest to this,
including many current cases that pose a challenge to
the Council and the Organization. I should also point
out that our experience throughout history also shows
that in such cases there is also the opposing link
between violence, institutional fragility, insecurity and
the re-emergence of conflict.

As the experience of the United Nations has
shown, there is an increasingly urgent need for a
comprehensive approach to security, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. That requires an analysis of the
underlying causes of violence and the socio-economic
situation on the ground. It also requires parting with
hermetic and compartmentalized approaches and
strategies to conflict and post-conflict situations. That
is to say, we need a synergistic and complementary
approach to efforts at preventive diplomacy, the
emergence and re-emergence of conflicts and support
for conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts.

Given that peacekeeping operations constitute
one of the Organization's most important tools in
preserving peace and security, we must ask the
question of whether such operations can or should be
involved in development efforts, and up to what point.
In his report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/64/573), the Secretary-
General points out that peacekeeping operations
typically play three functions.

The first is to coordinate and provide support for
consensus among national actors and the international
community; the second is to act as facilitator with
other actors in carrying out peacebuilding activities
while providing security and supporting socio-

economic reconstruction; and the third, which pertains
to peacebuilding functions, entails laying the
groundwork for stability and establishing the capacities
for the development of institutions. As we discussed
here in the Council last month, the latter is essential in
moving towards development and sustainable peace.
Those functions, which are evident in current
peacekeeping efforts, illustrate that peacekeeping
missions can indeed integrate the security and
development dimensions, whether through activities
aimed at peacekeeping, early peacebuilding or
peacebuilding itself.

In developing an integrated strategy, we should
underscore the role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission as an advisory and catalyzing body for an
approach focused on the interdependence between
security and development that is formulated to address
the specific needs of each situation and the national
priorities that serve to establish and strengthen national
capacity. It is essential to strengthen the capacities of
the Peacebuilding Commission, thereby contributing to
the swift and effective implementation of the
recommendations made in connection with its review.
The Commission is one of the principal and most
appropriate bodies for reaffirming the participation of
the United Nations in peace processes in order to
generate the necessary atmosphere of security and trust
for a process of inclusive national ownership.

In conclusion, I should like to return to the theme
of our debate today. It is undoubtedly clear that the
security and development components should guide the
mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. The strategies and actions of every United
Nations agency should also come directly into play in
the implementation of development efforts. There is
therefore a need for close and effective coordination
with all those agencies, including the involvement of
the entire membership to ensure that coordination. In
other words, this is a shared responsibility. Peru is fully
aware of it and we are committed to meeting it.

