An opportunity has emerged to bring peace to Yemen. That opportunity has come as the country faces some of its toughest days. Military escalations have continued on several fronts for three months. The arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to Yemen threatens to bring deeper and more widespread suffering to the people. There cannot be a more timely moment for the two parties to commit to silencing the guns and ending the conflict through a peaceful political solution. The threat of COVID-19 has galvanized the effort towards peace among Yemenis and the international community. On 25 March, the Secretary-General made an urgent appeal for an immediate end to hostilities in Yemen and for the parties to focus on reaching a negotiated political settlement and to doing everything possible to counter COVID-19. The Government of Yemen immediately welcomed the call of the Secretary-General, as did the leadership of Ansar Allah. In addition, there was an outpouring of support from other Yemeni political leaders, as well as from civil society, including women and youth. I have been struck by how consistent and clear the message has come through over the past several weeks from people across Yemen. They want this war to end and their leaders to agree to resolve their differences through dialogue. To take but one example, I recently met virtually with the Yemeni women's Technical Advisory Group. They were insistent that the war must stop now. They highlighted the importance of agreeing on humanitarian measures, particularly on improving freedom of movement and on releasing those detained in the war. The international community has also been vocal in its support. On 8 April, the Saudi-led coalition announced a unilateral ceasefire for an initial period of two weeks. The explicit aim of the ceasefire is to create a conducive environment for the success of United Nations-led efforts for peace. I want to express my gratitude to the coalition and to the leadership of His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed Bin Salman for this positive initiative. It is a clear sign of commitment to a peaceful political solution to the conflict and to supporting the efforts of the United Nations in Yemen. I am also grateful to the Security Council for its press statement of 10 April (see SC/14159), which endorsed the Secretary-General's call and welcomed the unilateral ceasefire announced by the coalition. All eyes are now on the parties to the conflict. This is the time for hard decisions. None of us should underestimate the demands that are upon the leadership of both parties. The decisions needed to be taken by the two parties are of existential importance for the future of the country. Following the call of the Secretary-General, I presented proposals to the two parties. The first concerned a nation-wide ceasefire agreement. The second was on key humanitarian and economic measures, which may include releasing prisoners and detainees, opening Sana'a international airport, paying civil servant salaries, opening access roads and ensuring the entry of ships carrying essential commodities into Al-Hudaydah ports, all of which will help in the fight against COVID-19. The third proposal provides for the urgent resumption of the political process. Over the past two weeks, we have been in constant negotiations with the parties on the texts of those agreements, which we expect them to agree on and formally adopt in the immediate future. The pace of the negotiations has not been impeded by the need to conduct them virtually. The conversations we have had with the two parties and our consultations with the Saudi-led coalition, among other international actors, are continuous, detailed and constructive. I can report that we are making very good progress in terms of reaching consensus over the proposals, particularly on the principle of a nation-wide ceasefire. And we are redoubling our efforts to bridge the outstanding differences between the parties before we convene them at a meeting where agreements will be tabled, confirmed and published. I am grateful to both parties for the way in which they have conducted their negotiations with the United Nations. I have no doubt that both the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah want to end this conflict. There is no doubt that the diplomatic consensus, ably catalysed and guided by the interventions of the Secretary-General, is playing a crucial and indeed central role in pushing us towards a successful conclusion. Lamentably, military activities continue on a number of fronts despite many calls from Yemenis and the international community for them to stop. I fear it will continue until we get an agreement on the United Nations' proposals, including on a nationwide ceasefire. Ma'rib remains the centre of gravity of this war but not the only theatre. The sooner we can stop the fighting, the better. The heavy fighting has continued to take the lives of more innocent Yemeni civilians. I would like to call the Council's attention to the senseless attack on the women's section of the central prison in Taiz city on 5 April, which killed and injured many women and children. I, along with many Yemenis and United Nations officials, condemned that horrific attack and underlined once again that all civilians and civilian objects, including prisons, must be protected under international humanitarian law. In Al-Hudaydah, ceasefire violations continue on a daily basis at the same level as during my last briefing. Following the regrettable shooting and serious injury of a Government of Yemen liaison officer by a sniper, the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the joint mechanisms to implement the Al-Hudaydah Agreement have ceased to function. As we are all striving to maintain stability in Al-Hudaydah and achieve a nationwide ceasefire, it is important that the parties resume the work of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the joint mechanisms. My colleague, the Head of the United Nations Mission to support the Al-Hudaydah agreement Mr. Abhijit Guha, is continuing his efforts to engage with the parties to prevent a deterioration of the situation or a spillover of the escalation from other areas. The threat of COVID-19 in Yemen requires all our attention and resources. Yemen cannot face war and a pandemic. The new battle that it faces with the virus may be all-consuming. We can do no less than stop this war and turn all our attention to this new threat. We have heard the calls from Yemenis across the country, asking all of us to make the virus our priority. I know that the leaders of both parties, as well as those in the region, understand this as well as anyone. I hope that next time we meet, I can report success. I will then be calling on the Council to support the parties on the implementation of their decisions. We hope this will happen sooner than later to allow the real focus in Yemen to be countering the threat of the virus.
