The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. I also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Minister of Nigeria, His
Excellency Mr. Henry Odein Ajumogobia.

This is an important opportunity to follow up on
last year's discussions on how to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), and in particular to enhance the
AU's peacekeeping capacity. The work of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter is
indispensable. The development of the African peace
and security architecture is critical to an effective
long-term approach to conflict prevention and
resolution. It requires the sustained support of the
international community.

The African Union and Africa's subregional
organizations have made great efforts to prevent,
mediate and resolve conflicts on the continent. Often,
its personnel have paid the highest price. This year
alone, the AU has lost 15 peacekeepers in Somalia. In
addition, 44 peacekeepers from African troop
contributors have given their lives this year to
peacekeeping around the globe.

Last year's debate (see S/PV.6254) and the report
of the AU-United Nations panel chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi of Italy (8/2008/813)
detailed the challenges the African Union faces in
undertaking peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. The report before the Council today
(S/2010/514) provides an update on the work of the
United Nations to support the African Union in
overcoming these obstacles.

In the past few years, the United Nations and the
African Union have entered into a broad range of
partnerships, from early warning and conflict
prevention to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. These
partnerships have deepened cooperation between this
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, and between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Commission.
3

In this regard, I would like to express my deep
appreciation to the President of the African Union,
President Mutharika of Malawi, and the leaders of
African States for their commitment to peace and
security and to working closely with the United
Nations. I thank, too, the Chairperson of the AU
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, and the AU Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for
contributing so much to developing close cooperation
between our organizations. As we all know, these
relationships have yet to reach their full potential.

In July, the United Nations established its Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa. Assistant
Secretary-General Muburi-Muita, who is with us today,
took up his post there last month. We hope that the
Office will facilitate a consistent, coherent and
strategic approach to the United Nations work with the
African Union. In September, I inaugurated the first
meeting of the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security. The Task Force is meant to engage
our organizations at the highest levels in exploring
ways to enhance our responsiveness so that we can
prevent conflicts rather than simply respond to crises.

We are also conducting a comprehensive review
of the first triennium of the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union. I will be
reporting to the current session of the General Assembly
with recommendations for further strengthening the
programme's management, cooperation, coordination
and monitoring.

Building capacity is only part of the picture. The
African Union continues to face difficulties in securing
the necessary resources to support its peacekeeping
undertakings. Darfur and Somalia illustrate that clearly.
We need to find a solution that will provide
predictable, sustainable and flexible resources to the
African Union when it undertakes peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Council under Chapter VIII
of the Charter.

AU peacekeeping operations should receive the
same support as all United Nations peacekeepers,
including reimbursement. By the same token, AU
peacekeepers should uphold the same professional
standards as United Nations personnel. That is why, for
example, the Secretariat has been working with the AU
to define guidelines and strengthen capacity on
protecting civilians and minimizing civilian casualties.
Let me stress again the great importance I attach
to the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations. In the months ahead, I will submit a
report that will help to define a strategic vision for
United Nations-AU cooperation on peace and security.
Our partnership has achieved much to date and has
great potential for the future. Let us all work together
towards effective mechanisms for a long-term approach
to conflict prevention and resolution and a reliable
system for peacekeeping under the Charter. Let us find
our way towards a model that works for Africa and that
can, in turn, bring lessons and applications for our
cooperation with other regional organizations.

