Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe and Ambassador Viotti
of Brazil for their briefings.

As the Secretary-General has stressed in his
report (8/2008/628), the political situation in Guinea-
Bissau is still fragile, and it is important that the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau work to facilitate a good political
climate, in particular in view of the elections. In that
regard, special attention should be given to the role of
the media. The legislative elections that should be held
on 16 November are doubtless a very critical stage. It
is important that those elections be held on that date in
a transparent and democratic manner. It is also
important for the Council to follow the process very
closely and take a stand on this question when the time
comes.

Guinea-Bissau still has many challenges to meet.
The main one is the fight against drug trafficking. We
need to stress the regional element in that struggle. In
that regard, France welcomes the organization, by the
Economic Community of West African States of a
regional conference on that issue to be held at the end
of the month in Praia. Many recent events have shown
the clear need to strengthen Guinea-Bissau's
operational capacity in combating that scourge. We
would like to receive further information from the
Secretariat on the proposed panel of experts and the
role that it would play in strengthening institutional
capacity for the relevant entities in Guinea-Bissau.

Security sector reform is the second challenge,
and the European Union actively supports the
Government through its advisory mission, which is
now fully operational, and the European Commission
programmes in the various reform areas, in particular
justice sector reform. We would ask the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to hold the course.

The third challenge relates to socio-economic
recovery. The recent cholera epidemic shows the great
difficulties facing the country, and in that respect we
welcome the progress highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report with regard to relations with
multilateral donors.

To conclude, my delegation is pleased at the now-
regular dialogue with the Peacebuilding Commission.
France welcomes in that regard the adoption of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-
Bissau and would invite the Commission to keep the
Council informed of progress achieved in its
implementation.

