Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate at a very
important moment, as today marks the eve of the
anniversary of the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the introduction of the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).

The recent terrorist attacks around the world,
including in Brussels, remind us of the urgency to join
forces in the fight against terrorism and radicalization
leading to terrorism and violent extremism. Terrorism
cannot be vanquished solely through security
measures. The response to radicalization and terrorist
recruitment must be comprehensive. We recall here that
violent extremism must not and cannot be associated
with any given religion, nationality, civilization or
specific ethnicity.

Today's topic, "Countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism", is of particular importance
to us in our battle against Da'esh and other terrorist
groups and our efforts to strengthen the resilience of
societies to violent extremism. In that context, it is
important to collaborate more closely with civil society,
including women, young people and religious leaders.
In that regard, I welcome the presence here today of the
Secretary-General of the Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy, whose briefing this morning was particularly
relevant. Women, young people, religious leaders and
civil society organizations are often better placed than
institutional actors to develop messages capable of
discrediting Da'esh propaganda.

Within the European Union (EU), we have
developed a clear vision of the battle that must be led
against terrorism and radicalization. It is reflected in
the new European security programme for 2015-2020
and the conclusions on counter-terrorism adopted by
the Council of the European Union in February 2015.
Allow me to present a brief outline of the EU's counter-
terrorism functions, particularly the use of strategic
communications to combat terrorist propaganda, the
monitoring and suppression of terrorist content, and,
more globally, cooperation with the private sector in
developing counter-terrorism narratives.

In December 2015, European Commissioner
Avramopoulos launched the European Union Internet
Forum. On that occasion, Ministers of EU member
States, Internet service providers and civil society
gathered to discuss two goals: first, how to rapidly delete
terrorist content; and secondly, how to spread alternative
messages capable of countering terrorist propaganda.

With respect to the first objective, the European
Police Office Internet Referral Unit assists in
identifying terrorist content and reporting it to Internet
service providers so they may delete it. Initial results
are encouraging. However, as the representative of the
online industry mentioned this morning, new websites
appear almost instantaneously. As to the second goal,
the European Radicalisation Awareness Network brings
together representatives of civil society organizations
and industry to work on counter-narratives aimed at
strengthening critical thinking, civic values and a sense
of involvement.

(spoke in English)

Beyond our own backyard, we are also active
in developing strategic communications for people
outside the EU. A task force is working in the Arab
world to identify shared values and develop concrete
communication actions. The EU supports the Strategic
Communication Advisory Team project giving
technical expertise to EU member State authorities
to more effectively tackle terrorist propaganda, with
a particular focus on Da'esh propaganda. The EU is
also actively participating in the Global Coalition to
Counter ISIL Strategic Communications Working
Group and is very closely following the early work of
the anti-ISIL strategic communications cell set up by
the United Kingdom.

Communication is not the only answer, however.
We also need to address root causes, which means
also eradicating the inequalities that lead to exclusion,
marginalization and radicalization. Our commitment
to providing material support to developing
countries is well known. In that context, poverty
reduction, ensuring sustainable economic, social and
environmental development, democracy, the rule of
law, good governance and human rights are obviously
critical pieces of the anti-radicalization puzzle.

Moreover,wealsoneedtopreventviolentextremism,
our other key priority. Our approach is based on local
knowledge. Criminal justice, information exchange,
education and youth participation, intercultural
dialogue, employment and initiatives for social
inclusion can all play a crucial role. In that context, the
EU has set up the Radicalization Awareness Network
Centre of Excellence, which now involves over 2,000
European practitioners, such as teachers, health-care
workers, social and youth workers, prison officers
and non-governmental organizations to exchange best
practices on prevention. That is key. The approach is
founded on understanding and addressing the root causes
of radicalization while strengthening resilience, and its
goal is to propose practical tools and recommendations
to practitioners and decision-makers alike.

We need to counter the narratives and ideologies
of terrorist groups if we are to be successful in the
global fight against terrorism. Terrorism and violent
extremism are global challenges, and the United Nations
has a central role in supporting Member States in that
endeavour. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We remain engaged in considering it, including in terms
of strategic communications and building alternative
narratives on the occasion of the upcoming review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and in other
relevant forums.

We also welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6, which was just adopted by the Security
Council, as a good basis for further work in this
area. Together, we can pool enormous resources and
expertise to face this immense challenge. We will be
successful against the terrorist narrative and ideology
only by responding with clear and concrete preventive
measures. Ajoint approach, based on our shared values,
is sine qua non.

