Mr. Lacroix: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General's
30-day report as well as on the situation in South Sudan.

Let me begin by saying that we welcome the signing
of the 21 December Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access between the South Sudanese parties. This
represents a significant achievement on the part of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), with the full support of the region and the
international community.

Nevertheless, the signing of the Agreement, While
a great stride forward, is only a first step. The security
situation in the country remains of concern, and there
continue to be numerous violations of the Agreement,
with clashes between pro-Taban Deng Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) in Opposition and pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition forces in Koch, Unity, and between
the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces
in Mundri and other areas of Western Equatoria, as
well as in different parts of the country. The Security
Council will have the opportunity to hear from the
Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, former President His Excellency Festus
Mogae, on the violations reported by the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism on 16 January.

These violations by the parties and the continuing
hostile propaganda they have undertaken against one
another are worrisome, as they illustrate a lack of
genuine commitment to honour their words and de facto
undermineregionalandinternationalefforts to revitalize
the peace process. At this point, I can only reiterate
the 12 January joint statement of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, and the Secretary-General, who strongly
condemned those violations and underscored their
clear intent to support the imposition of consequences,
consistent with the African Union Peace and Security
Council communique' of 20 September 2017, should the
parties continue to violate their own agreement.

The South Sudanese parties must realize that
the international community and the region will not
continue to tolerate agreements being signed and
violated in total impunity. I urge the Council to speak
out very clearly against those violations and to take the
decisive actions necessary to impose real consequences
for the violators.

Regarding the security situation in Juba, the attacks
by unknown armed elements on Government security
installations in Gurei sector in the city, and Kapuri,
west of Juba on 4 January, are of concern. On 5 January,
the SPLA Spokesperson attributed those attacks
to forces associated with Lieutenant Colonel Chan
Garang, a commander reportedly close to the former
Chief of General Staff, Paul Malong, who defected
from the SPLA to pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition in
October 2016. The objectives and motivations behind
these attacks are not clear. The United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) continues to closely monitor
the security situation in Juba and the consequences the
tensions between the Government and the former Chief
of General Staff may have in Northern Bahr E1 Ghazal
and other parts of the country where forces loyal to him
remain deployed.

Meanwhile, on 4 January, there were also shooting
incidents between security forces and criminal
elements in the vicinity of the protection-of-civilians
sites adjacent to the UNMISS headquarters in Juba.
UNMISS immediately reinforced such sites with
additional uniformed personnel to prevent any entry.
The volatility of the security environment in and
around sites remains a source of concern. During
the reporting period, intercommunal violence also
escalated in the Jonglei, Lakes and Warrap areas,
causing approximately 160 fatalities, including at least
24 women. UNMISS reacted swiftly to those incidents
by mobilizing community leaders and peace actors
to de-escalate intercommunal tensions and promote
dialogue and reconciliation.

Under the Mission's efforts to extend its presence,
I am encouraged to report that tomorrow Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer
will travel to Yei, in Central Equatoria, to formally
inaugurate a new UNMISS base. The base will allow
the UNMISS force to project its presence, build
confidence and restore stability to an area that has
witnessed massive depopulation to Uganda as a result
of recent conflict. UNMISS has also intensified
actions to establish an increased presence in Akobo,
in northern Jonglei, in order to support humanitarian
efforts and to gain a presence in areas held by the SPLA
in Opposition. At the moment, UNMISS long-duration
patrols allow a semi-permanent presence, which the
Mission plans to build upon in order to build confidence
with the local community.

The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF) continues, with ongoing discussions with the
Permanent Missions to the United Nations ofthe Federal
Republic of Ethiopia and of Rwanda to expedite the
deployment of the main contingents of their respective
infantry battalions. The number of RPF troops deployed
in South Sudan currently stands at 759.

With respect to human rights, I deeply concerned
about the high level of grave abuses and violations
perpetrated against civilians, mainly women and
children. The gravity of conflict-related sexual violence
is deplorable and constitutes an emergency in its own
right. From January to December 2017, UNMISS
documented lll incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence, which is a very conservative figure given
that the Mission's ability to perform its monitoring and
reporting tasks to verify violations suffered by victims
has been restricted by interference by Government
institutions and access restrictions. There were 2,670
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence in 2017,
including conflict-related incidents perpetrated by both
State and non-State actors. For example, on 16 January,
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism report on sexual and gender
based violence in Central Equatoria indicated that there
was clear evidence that sexual violence, mutilation and
sexual assaults by uniformed SPLA soldiers and other
Government security services continued to prevail in
Central Equatoria.

Unfortunately, such human rights violations are
compounded by impunity, as perpetrators are not held
to account. For instance, on 20 December, a South
Sudan National Police Service officer who had been
sentenced to three years imprisonment for raping
a minor was released the same day, allegedly on the
order of the High Court Judge. That contributes to
the perception of impunity across the country. I call
on President Kiir to put to an end to such impunity.
South Sudanese women and girls cannot continue to be
victimized and brutalized and no justice done.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, on which
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller will brief the
Council, I remain concerned about the constraints on
the operating environment for humanitarian operations.
Humanitarian convoys continue to encounter
checkpoints, extortion, harassment and acts of violence.
While much of that can be attributed to criminality, I
call on the Transitional Government of National Unity
to work towards compliance with President Kiir's
directive of unfettered humanitarian access, and call
on all other parties to allow humanitarians to carry out
their life-saving tasks across the country.

On the national pialogue process, subnational
consultations were held in Western Bahr El Ghazal
and Western Equatoria in December, while they are
ongoing in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Warrap and the
Administrative Area of Pibor. The consultations were
carried out largely in Government-controlled areas,
although efforts to reach opposition constituencies were
made in Raja, Western Bahr El Ghazal. Participants
in the consultations were mostly able to express their
grievances and views, and the open dialogue often
exceeded the expectations of local communities.

Unfortunately, there were instances when security
personnel prevented consultations from being held. For
example, on 2 December, in Torit, Eastern Equatoria,
security officials prevented a pre-dialogue meeting
from taking place, and even threatened to arrest the
Chair of the women's association who was attempting
to convene the meeting. I must emphasize that it
is imperative that the national dialogue process be
conducted in an inclusive, transparent and credible
manner, as well as be supportive of the efforts to
revitalize the peace agreement and restore sustainable
peace to South Sudan.

With respect to the IGAD High-Level
Revitalization Forum, the second phase is expected to
resume on 5 February in Addis Ababa, and to focus on
governance, transitional security arrangements and the
permanent ceasefire.

In conclusion, as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General stated
on 12 January, it will be crucial for the South Sudanese
parties to participate in the Forum in good faith and with
a view to making the necessary compromises required
for South Sudan to return to the path to sustainable
peace. That will be the critical moment for the parties
to demonstrate their political will to negotiate a
permanent ceasefire and update the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

