Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (Spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the useful briefing by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, to whom
we reiterate our support for her efforts to bring about
lasting peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the outset, we welcome the progress achieved
in the political arena in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, under the leadership of President Felix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, which includes the formation
of a coalition Government, the appointment of
Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba as Prime Minister and
the approval of the Government programme. As such,
the necessary foundations that will lead to stabilization
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are being laid.

We also welcome the resumption of political and
diplomatic relations between the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and the countries of the subregion, such as
Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi and Angola. Nevertheless,
we continue to be concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation owing to the activities of both
Congolese and foreign armed groups in the eastern part
of the country and about pockets of intercommunal
violence, which have continued to cause fatalities and
forced displacement.

In that regard, we approve of the initiative by
President Tshisekedi launched at the thirty-ninth
summit of the Heads of State and Government of the
Southern African Development Community, held
in Dar es Salaam, to establish a regional coalition to
eradicate armed groups from the eastern provinces in
reaction to the acts of extremism and terrorism in the
Beni area.

Accordingly, we believe that it extremely important
to intensify synergies between the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Congolese
security forces in order to neutralize the activities of
those groups, which include the forced recruitment of
child soldiers. That should be complemented by effective
steps relative to the disarmament, demobilization and
social reintegration of former combatants.
We believe that the current environment makes the
civilian component of MONUSCO's operations even
more relevant, especially with regard to promoting
dialogue, preventing cases of sexual violence among
community members, building trust among the
various actors in the country and coordinating support
from international partners. We also encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to work together with the various political forces to
facilitate reform of the justice system focused on
transforming it into a cornerstone of the fight against
impunity and corruption in the country and combating
the continuing alarming situation regarding human
rights violations.

The focus on ending the violence should not in
any way overlook the urgency of dealing immediately
and simultaneously with the worrying humanitarian
situation that is threatening the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and that appears to be worsening on the
ground. About 10 per cent of the population is living
with food insecurity. In addition, the population has
been dealing with severe problems in the form of
outbreaks of diseases such as cholera, measles and
Ebola, of which the last has been declared a public
health emergency of international concern by the World
Health Organization. We particularly commend the
Government's commitment to addressing the scourge
of Ebola by setting up a multisectoral expert committee
to oversee the various national, regional and local
outbreaks. We also welcome international support, such
as that of the United Nations and MONUSCO, which
is providing security to response teams, including in
mining areas.

In conclusion, we reiterate the commitment we have
made to the Mission to continue contributing decisively
to the efforts aimed at overcoming the humanitarian
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
furthering its inclusive economic development and,
especially, combating sexual violence and promoting
the participation of women in peace processes.

