Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by welcoming Mr. Nikola Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina and European
Union Special Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As the High Representative has said, his
report (S/2008/300, annex, enclosure) sets out elements
that reflect progress. Specifically, the 16 April adoption
of the two police reform laws was the principal
advance. Even though it took place after the period
covered in the report of the High Representative before
us today, the adoption of those two laws - which was
necessary for ensuring the rule of law - was a most
welcome development.

The forthcoming signing, on 16 June, of a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union is another very important indication of
progress. That achievement, however, required
enormous effort and intense negotiations. The
Agreement is of great importance both because of its
content and symbolically: it is tangible evidence that,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, parties of differing ethnic
groups and political views have been learning to give
up something in order to reach the a higher goal. In
some societies, such conduct is a given, but in others,
unfortunately, that is not the case. That is why this
achievement is doubly important. We congratulate the
parties and urge them to continue along the same path.

According to the report of the High
Representative, this tortuous political procedure for
reaching agreements has frustrated the majority of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If that is the case,
and if the parties do not learn to move more quickly,
there is a danger that the parties will become
irrelevant. Costa Rica calls upon all citizens and
political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make a
sustained effort to implement the principles of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, an agreement which should
be reflected in constitutional reform, legislation and
the building of institutions.

By achieving such agreements and meeting the
goals set in the work plan of the Office of the High
Representative, the parties can move forward with
greater speed and security on the road to economic and
social development.

Costa Rica has always been committed to respect
for human rights, which is the very foundation of the
United Nations, and we call upon the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate fully in bringing
to justice those accused by judicial authorities of
having perpetrated atrocities. Turning the page on a sad
history of abuses and violations requires legal action -
solely against those who bear responsibility, with no
stereotyping or generalizations of any kind.

My country supports the High Representative and
his Office in their difficult and delicate work. We
encourage them to continue working towards resolving
the political problems that are the core of today's
difficulties, with a view to averting serious
consequences in the future. Costa Rica reaffirms its
commitment to the High Representative and his team
and to the agreements that set out their legal powers
and obligations and those of the other actors.

We also echo the view of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council that the transition is
the primary responsibility of those directly involved:
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The primary
goal of the presence on the ground of the High
Representative is to ensure compliance with the
objectives and conditions set by his Office; once those
objectives and conditions have been met, the Office
can be closed and full control for public affairs can be
transferred to the legitimate representative authorities.
Progress in the political sphere will mean that the
threat of violence can recede. We therefore call upon
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their
representatives to look forward, not backwards.

