Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank John Kerry
for his initiative to convene the third meeting of the
International Syria Support Group today in New York,
which has brought us together here in this Chamber.

This meeting of the International Syria Support
Group undescores the commitment of all its participants
to the Vienna process. Resolution 2254 (2015), which
we have just adopted, approves the Group's statements
of 30 October and 14 November on the way forward
to implement the Geneva communique' (S/2012/522, annex) of 30 June 2012.

It also clearly establishes, first, that those three
documents constitute the sole platform for resolving the
bloody crisis in Syria, and, secondly, that the Vienna
format is the only one that unites all of the influential
external actors and is therefore capable of providing
the external conditions needed for a sustainable and
just settlement through negotiations between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the entire
spectrum of the opposition. Today's resolution puts the
international legal authority for the collective work
of preparing those negotiations under the auspices of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. It emphasizes that only through
an inclusive dialogue organized with the consent of the
Syrians themselves can an end be brought to the terrible
suffering endured by the Syrian people.

At the same time, the resolution affirms the
fundamental principles of political settlements,
which are that Syria must remain a united, secular,
multi-confessional and multi-ethnic State, a place of
welcome and safety for every sector of the population,
and that the Syrian people alone have the right to
determine their own future. That is a clear response
to external attempts to impose on Syrians solutions
to issues of various kinds, including the fate of
their President. It is precisely that approach that is
enshrined in the Geneva communique, the documents
of the International Syria Support Group and today's
resolution.

However, we are all united in our agreement that
there is no place for terrorists, whatever their affiliation,
at the negotiating table, or for those who admit the
possibility of a military solution to the conflict. The
Council's unanimous vote today should open up a
pathway to creating a broad anti-terrorism front on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations, with the
support of everyone on the planet who opposes terror,
including the Syrian army, the Kurdish volunteers
and the armed patriotic Syrian opposition, Elements
of the Russian air forces contributed to the efforts to
accomplish this task in response to the invitation from
the legitimate Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We expect that a major role in this effort will be played
by yesterday's resolution 2253 (2015), proposed by
Russia and the United States, aimed at toughening
controls on the financing of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and other terrorists by cutting off their
financing channels, mainly by preventing them from
conducting illicit trading in oil. The fight against
terrorism must be consistent and constant, whether in
Syria or anywhere else. Attempts to divide terrorists
into good and bad groups are unacceptable.

Today's resolution also emphasizes the necessity
of providing the Syrian people with humanitarian
aid, carried out in strict compliance with the guiding
principles of the United Nations established in the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, including the principle of the consent of
the Government of the host country. It is important that
today the Security Council once again affirmed the
necessity of respecting the sovereignty of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

The resolution adopted today strengthens the
Security Council's control over the implementation
of the Vienna agreements, with the assistance of the
International Syria Support Group. The Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, Mr. de Mistura, will
play a leading role in organizing and supporting the
negotiating process, based on the results ofthe meetings
with the Syrian opposition, including those being held
in Moscow, Cairo, Riyadh, Damascus, Al-Hasakah and
other places. We are relying on the Council secretariat's
balanced recommendations on the essential steps to be
taken regarding all the provisions agreed in Vienna.
We firmly believe that our colleagues on Staffan de
Mistura's team will approach that task responsibly and
impartially, without yielding to possible attempts by one
side or another to put pressure on them, and that they
will be guided exclusively by the task of assisting in the
process of arriving at a mutually acceptable agreement
between the Government and the opposition, as today's
resolution requires.

As those recommendations are completed, we
will be ready, as co-Chairs of the International Syria

Support Group with the United States and the United
Nations, to convene another meeting to formulate a
consensus based on the next steps to be take to promote
a settlement in Syria. As we undertake the work ahead
of us, we urge all our colleagues not to be carried away
by ideological rhetoric, to avoid the incitements of
pernicious sectarian strife and to work pragmatically,
with the aim above all of combating violent terrorism
and ending the conflict through a political settlement.
There is no alternative to that approach if we genuinely
wish to put the interests of the Syrian people and the
Syrian Government ahead of geopolitical ambitions.

