Mr. Al-Saidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We are confident of your wisdom and
experience. Allow me to extend our congratulations to
Ambassador Wehbe for the competent manner in which
he conducted the work of the Council during the
previous month.

Allow me also to express our appreciation for
your prompt response, Sir, to our request to hold this
meeting, which reflects the understanding and the
appreciation of the Council regarding the horror of the
Israeli attack on the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli attack was a flagrant violation of
international law because it targeted a residential
building. The Israeli Government was undoubtedly
aware that attacking a residential building at midnight,
when innocent children, women and elderly are
sleeping, would lead to massive human casualties.
Sharon has made a habit of adopting harsh and heavy-
handed responses to abort all peaceful initiatives at a
time when Palestinian factions have expressed
willingness to put an end to all their suicidal operations
in return for Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian cities
and an end to the assassination of Palestinian leaders
by the Israeli army. Sharon carried out the Gaza
massacre to suppress any peace initiative or any
glimpse of hope for peace with the Palestinians.

This was nothing new to us, because Sharon is
accustomed to carrying out such atrocities whenever
there are signs of agreement or understanding to
strengthen the peace process. Sharon and his bloody
history are proof of the fact that he has never wanted a
peaceful settlement of the dispute because a peaceful
settlement means Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories and the establishment of the
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital. The
horror of Sharon's policy became clear when he
declared that the horrible crime committed in Gaza
was, in his view, one of the most successful operations
that Israel has achieved. We just ask ourselves if killing
innocent children and destroying residential areas
constitute success by any means.

The Republic of Yemen is a peace-loving country
that strongly supports any peace process based on
justice and respect for all international laws. Thus, we
call on the Council to compel Israel to commit to
withdrawing its forces immediately from the occupied
territories and to putting an end to building settlements.
We also call on the Council to send an international
force to protect the Palestinian people from the
brutality of Israeli forces. We emphasize the
importance of implementing previous Council
resolutions and call on Israel to respect the will of the
international community by putting an end to all the
horrors its forces are perpetrating against unarmed
Palestinians and to respect human rights conventions,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Peace cannot come to the Middle East through
brutality and violence by the Israeli forces against
unarmed Palestinian citizens. However, peace can be
achieved through respect for the agreements concluded
between the two sides, Israeli and Palestinian,
implementation or the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and options based on the values ofjustice,
negotiation and respect for the rights or others. Peace
and security for Israel cannot be achieved without the

establishment of the Palestinian State on its national
land, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital, which is now
an international position that we should all seek to
accomplish so that comprehensive peace and justice
will be achieved for all countries of the region.

