Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are honoured to
see a brother Latin American country presiding over
the Security Council. We take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which
your country has been conducting the affairs of the
Council during the month of January and for having
convened today's important debate. We welcome
the briefings made by Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, Ms. Eveline Rooijmans, Senior Humanitarian
Policy Advisor of Oxfam, and Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We acknowledge and congratulate the
briefers on the outstanding relief work they carry out
worldwide.

In accordance with the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, civilians
and people who do not take part in combat cannot,
under any circumstances, be victims of attacks
or violence. Particular attention should be paid to
children, women, the elderly, people with disabilities
and displaced persons. Unfortunately, in many of
today's armed conflicts, the loss of life among civilians
far exceeds that among combatants. Civilians who
are in the midst of armed conflict require protection,
in particular when those involved in the conflict are
terrorist groups that operate outside the agreed norms
and conventions of international law. The level of
brutality and pure disregard for human life and dignity
that we see today in many conflicts in which terrorist
groups are involved - especially in the Middle East
and in Africa - is alarming. Groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Boko Haram and
the Al-Nusrah Front indiscriminately target civilians.
They torture, kidnap, disappear and recruit civilians
by force, driving them from their homes, separating
them from their families and denying them access to
the most basic human rights. The human cost of such
actions is devastating over time.

Venezuela condemns the siege against civilians
in the armed conflict in Syria, regardless of who the
perpetrators might be. We call attention in particular
to the situations in Madaya, Kafraya and Fu'ah,
which constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. However, the conflict in Syria is
brutal and the main enemy is terrorism, which continues
to show contempt for human life. One example of such
contempt was the attack perpetrated in August last year
in Palmyra, when ISIS forces entered the city, killed
all of the prisoners, murdered eminent archeologist
and 81-year-old Khaled al-Asaad, and destroyed world
heritage sites. Another example was the attack in Deyr
ez-Zour last Saturday, when ISIS forces entered the
city and murdered 300 people, most of them women,
children and the elderly, simply because they were
relatives of Syrian combatants.

Those examples serve to highlight the complete
lack of humanity with which that terrorist organization
operates and the threat to people under their siege. No
one, no civilian, is safe from the demented violence
perpetrated by ISIS and other terrorist groups. We must
therefore work together and act decisively to eliminate
the scourge. This new phenomenon means that the
Security Council must adjust the mechanisms it uses to
protect civilians.

The number ofpersons who have been displaced as a
result of conflict is at its highest since the Second World
War. It is estimated that 38 million people are displaced
within their own countries, and 19.5 million people live
as refugees abroad. In the case of Afghanistan, there
were more civilian casualties in 2014 than in any other
year since 2009. In Iraq, the number ofpeople requiring
humanitarian assistance stands at 8.2 million. In Libya,
violent confrontations between armed groups and
militias has had a disproportionate impact on children.
More than 400,000 people have been displaced from
their homes and hundreds of thousands do not have
access to humanitarian aid.

Israeli attacks against the Palestinian population in
Gaza in 2014 left more than 1,500 Palestinians dead,
500 of them children, and more than 1,100 injured. Five
hundred thousand Palestinians were displaced from
their homes and tens of thousands had their homes and
livelihoods deliberately destroyed. The case of Palestine
continues to weigh on the conscience of the Security
Council because it is the most irrefutable situation
illustrating the need for civilian protection - this, the
long-standing Israeli occupation of the territories of the
Palestinian people.

In the conflict in Yemen, it is estimated that up to
15.9 million people - 60 per cent ofthe population - are
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.

In Syria, the number of displaced persons stands at
6.6 million, while over 4.6 million civilians are living
as refugees.

In the Central African Republic, between 6,000
and 10,000 children have been recruited by armed
militias in the past year, more than a fifth of the
population has been displaced and 430,000 refugees
live in neighbouring countries.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
2.8 million people have been displaced and almost
450,000 are living as refugees.

Wherever we look, we see an alarming and
devastating, crushing reality that requires our attention
and decisive action.

When United Nations peacekeeping operations are
present in conflict areas, they could play a key role in
protecting civilians - all the while acting impartially
to ensure their own safety and complying with their
mandate, and with the consent of the host State.
Strategies that do not involve the use of weapons must
be at the forefront of United Nations efforts to protect
civilians. Peacekeeping operations, as inherently
political tools, can protect civilians more effectively and
help build trust among the parties, ending conflicts and
facilitating peace agreements. The quest for a political
solution must guide the planning, deployment and
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations
on the ground.

In addition, peacekeeping operations are committed
to starting an open and impartial discussion with
all the parties to a conflict in an effort to explore
all other options that can be used as alternatives to
violence, thereby promoting respect among all actors
on the ground, regardless of their political ideology,
ethnicity, religion or military affiliation. Humanitarian
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, play a fundamental role in that regard.
The Organization's success with the strategies that
do not involve the use of weapons in the protection of
civilians depends on, to some extent, on its ability to
forge strong alliances with such actors and work closely
with local communities. Many non-governmental,
national and international organizations that are
committed to using strategies that do not involve the
use of weapons to protect civilians are also working
assiduously on the ground.

In that regard, the United Nations should make
use of such important resources, paying attention to
the practices and capabilities of local communities and
humanitarian organizations on the ground to create
an environment that is conducive to the protection
of civilians. Likewise, the Security Council and the
Secretariat must step up efforts to start inclusive
and substantive consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries, ensuring that they fully
participate in the tasks of planning and implementing
mandates. We stress that such consultations should take
place at the highest level, including with specialized
personnel, experts and senior military officials in
capitals in all operational phases of peacekeeping
missions.

In addition to the actions I have already mentioned,
peacekeeping operations can also make an important
contribution to protecting civilians by acting as
deterrents. A mission's presence on the ground plays an
important role in that regard. Military patrols and the
deployment troops constitute one of the most tangible
guarantees of security that can be offered to local
communities.

All the activities I have just described, as a
whole, can contribute significantly to the protection
of civilians. However, in situations where the civilian
population is under the imminent threat of attack,
peacekeeping troops must always be ready to act
assertively. Accordingly, they must always have the
forces, equipment and necessary training to deal with
those situations.

In conclusion, the reality is that, as long as our
Organization continues to devote insufficient political
attention and resources to prevention and greater
attention and resources to respond to crises - while,
once again, giving little in the way ofpolitical attention
and resources to the reconstruction and recovery phase
of States 4 we will be failing those civilians who
are suffering from the brunt of the violence. We must
move beyond the status quo and focus all our efforts on
preventing conflicts in the first place and ensuring they
do not recur.

The Security Council must focus more on preventing
conflicts rather than on fanning them. It should refrain
from getting involved in them in pursuit of the national
positions of its members. The Council should ensure
the inviolability of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. The conflicts in Iraq,
Libya, Syria and Yemen have become veritable human
tragedies linked to the collapse of States, the use of
terrorism to overthrow Governments and the violation
of the principles of non-interference and respect for
sovereignty. The Security Council must increase its
focus on a political solution to those conflicts as the
most effective way of protecting civilians, who are
caught up in them.

