The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Gerardo Martinez Blanco,
Permanent Representative of Honduras to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of October 1996. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Martinez Blanco for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region

Letters dated 14 and 24 October 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/875 and S/1996/878)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Zaire, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lakaba
Khaboaji N 'Zaji (Zaire) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them documents
S/ 1996/875 and S/ 1996/878, which contain the texts of
letters dated 14 and 24 October 1996, respectively, from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

 
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l996/869, letter dated 23 October 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/l996/876, letter dated 25 October 1996 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the
Secretary-General; and S/ 1996/886, letter dated 25
October 1996 from the Permanent Representative of
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
the deteriorating situation in the Great Lakes region,
in particular eastern Zaire, and at the effect which
the continued fighting is having on the inhabitants of
the region and condemns all acts of violence. It
underlines the urgent need for a comprehensive and
coordinated response by the international community
to prevent any further escalation of the crisis there.

"The Security Council calls for an immediate
ceasefire and a complete cessation of all fighting in
the region. The Council calls on all States to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring States in accordance with their
obligations under the United Nations Charter. In this
connection, it urges all parties to refrain from the
use of force as well as cross-border incursions and
to engage in a process negotiation.

"The Security Council, in the light of the letters
of the Secretary-General to the President of the
Council (S/ 1996/875 and S/ 1996/878), and the
information received from the High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights regarding the situation in eastern
Zaire, is particularly concerned at the humanitarian
situation and the resulting large-scale movements of
refugees and displaced persons. It fully supports the
efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and humanitarian agencies to alleviate the
suffering. It calls on all parties in the region to allow
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those in need and to ensure the safety of all refugees
as well as the security and freedom of movement of
all international humanitarian personnel. It

 
underlines the urgent need for the orderly voluntary
repatriation and resettlement of refugees, and the
return of displaced persons, which are crucial elements
for the stability of the region.

"The Security Council agrees with the
Secretary-General that the situation in eastern Zaire
constitutes a serious threat to the stability of the Great
Lakes region. It is convinced that the complex
problems at issue can only be resolved through early
and substantive dialogue. The Council urges the
Governments of the region to pursue such a dialogue
without further delay in order to defuse the tension.
The Council calls upon all States in the region to
create the conditions necessary for the speedy and
peaceful resolution of the conflict, and to desist from
any acts that may further exacerbate the situation. In
this context, the Council welcomes all regional efforts
aimed at defusing tension in the region, in particular
the announcement of the meeting of regional leaders
scheduled for 5 November 1996 in Nairobi, Kenya.

"The Security Council fully supports the initiative
of the Secretary-General to dispatch to the Great
Lakes region a Special Envoy to consult with all
concerned in order to establish the facts relating to the
present conflict; to develop as a matter of urgency a
plan to defuse tension and establish a ceasefire; to
promote a process of negotiation; and to submit advice
on the mandate to be given to a United Nations
Special Representative including on the size and
structure of a United Nations political presence which,
in consultation with the Governments and parties
concerned, will be established in the Great Lakes
region. The Council also considers that the Special
Envoy should be provided with adequate staff and
logistic resources in order to carry out his mission.

 

The Council also expresses the hope that the
mediation efforts of the Organization of African
Unity and the European Union will complement
those of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
The Council calls upon all Governments and parties
concerned to cooperate fully with the mission of the
Special Envoy, and to contribute to the search for a
comprehensive solution to the problems facing the
people of the Great Lakes region. Given the urgency
of the situation, the Council expresses the hope that
the Special Envoy will travel as soon as possible to
the region and provide early information on the
situation there.

"The Security Council reiterates that the present
situation in eastern Zaire underlines the need to
organize a conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity. To this end, it calls on the
Secretary-General to ask his Special Envoy to
promote the convening and to encourage the
adequate preparation of such a conference on an
urgent basis.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/44.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4 pm.

