Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully supports the statement made on behalf of the
European Union by the Permanent Representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union.

As the Ambassador of Sweden did, I too would
like to congratulate Ambassador Chowdhury and the
Panel of Experts for the excellentjob done.

My country would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its resolve to find a solution to the problem of
conflict diamonds, as well as to say that we fully agree
with the Panel's conclusions. I would like to make
three particular points.

With regard to the need to establish a global
certification scheme for rough diamonds based on the
system adopted in Sierra Leone, I should like to recall
the prominent role played by Belgium, together with
other countries involved in the diamond trade, in the
Kimberly process. One of the goals of this process is
precisely to establish such a system.

Belgium has great experience in the area of
diamonds, and this enabled us to make a decisive
contribution to the establishment of the certification
system adopted by Sierra Leone. We are prepared to
share this experience with the international community
so that the system can be expanded.

Paragraph 162 of the report (S/2000/1195, enclosure) states that "It is essential, and a matter of
urgency" to set up a harmonized system of public
documentation and statistics on diamond imports and
exports. We support this concept, as well as the idea of
transparency in that area. We are convinced that,
whatever kind of global certification scheme is
established, one of the key elements for its success will
be transparency. My country publishes, on a monthly
and annual basis, detailed and complete statistics on all
imports and exports of diamonds.

In conclusion, in paragraph 165, the report
proposes the creation of an "ongoing focal point to
monitor adherence to sanctions". Belgium supports this
idea, because we are aware of the risk of overlap and
duplication caused by the simultaneous existence of
three panels of experts.

