Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I, too, would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk J eremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and to thank him for his
statement. I also thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his briefing and Mrs. Vlora
Citaku for her remarks.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/562)
depicts a scenario of rising ethnic tensions, especially
in the north of Kosovo. Multiple clashes between
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians and attacks on
places of worship and persons from minority
communities are expressions of a situation that requires
the attention of the Security Council. Current tensions
also reveal the depth of the mistrust and prejudice that
communities and individuals still have to overcome.

In such an atmosphere, it is imperative that all
authorities in Kosovo provide for the security of all
persons, regardless of their ethnic origin or religion. All
parties must also refrain from any acts that can create
further instability. Building a truly diverse and tolerant
Kosovo should be a common goal pursued by all.

My delegation deplores the publication by Pristina
authorities of an inaccurate report on the administration
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of Mitrovica, which fuelled a
damaging media campaign against the Mission. UNMIK
was established by the Security Council and challenges
to the Mission's authority are a clear violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

We also remain concerned by the Secretary-
General's assessment that relations between the Mission
and Pristina continue to be at arm's length. We reiterate
our call for both Belgrade and Pristina to cooperate
actively with UNMIK and Special Representative
Zannier, especially in advancing practical arrangements
that may benefit the ordinary citizen.

As resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force, it
continues to be the main parameter for the presence of
the United Nations in Kosovo and all those who
operate there under the overall authority of UNMIK.
The resolution also continues to offer the basis for
settling outstanding disputes through negotiations with
a view to reaching a legitimate solution under the
auspices of the Security Council, consistent with its
primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties to resume negotiations on all
outstanding issues as soon as possible and to cooperate
with each other in good faith. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the willingness of the European
Union to facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, as acknowledged by the General Assembly on
9 September 2010 (General Assembly resolution 64/298). We hope both parties will take full advantage
of this opportunity.

I also welcome the Secretary-General's intention
to keep the Security Council informed of developments
in the dialogue supported by the European Union. A
solution to the dispute in Kosovo is a matter of concern
not only to the parties themselves but to the
international community as a whole.

