Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (Spoke in Spanish): I should
first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Jan Kubis, for the comprehensive report that he
gave us today on the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as to congratulate him for his work and his dedication
during the first year of his activities there. I would also
like to welcome Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and to thank him
for explaining to the Council his perspective on his
country's development over the past few years and
the way in which his Government and his people have
managed to overcome a critical phase and find the path
to peace. I also wish to register to my great pleasure
in acknowledging the contribution of Germany in the
country - physically, economically and by supplying
troops - as well as that of our colleague in the Council,
Ambassador Peter Wittig, in guiding the management
and focus of our actions.

The policies and measures adopted by the
Government of Afghanistan to make headway in
implementing the principles and mutual commitments
in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
including the adoption of action plans to meet the
indicators and the finalization of the aid management
policy, demonstrate its determination to work for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. That
progress constitutes additional steps towards meeting
the commitments taken on by Afghanistan in the Tokyo
Conference in the five identified priority areas. Those
commitments pertain to democracy and fair elections;
governance, the rule of law and human rights; the
integrity of public finances and commercial banking;
budget execution and governance; and inclusive and
sustained growth.

The determination of a timetable for the
simultaneous holding of the presidential and provincial
elections in April 2014 and tackling the plan of
operations presented by the Independent Election
Commission are grounds for optimism on the process.
The holding of inclusive and transparent elections
will be a clear indicator of the progress of the Afghan
State with regard to democratic consolidation. The
Organization must be ready to respond to the requests
made by Afghanistan and provide all the necessary
technical assistance in electoral matters.

On security and the protection of the civilian
population, we must voice our concern at the increase
in the number of civilian victims over the past three
months. Given that the transition process is progressing
according to the agreed timetable, with a View to
Afghans having complete responsibility and leadership
in 2014, it is vital to continue to increase the capacity
and professionalism of the Afghan security and
police forces. That must include institutionalizing the
mechanisms for accountability and combating impunity,
as well as strengthening measures for the protection of
civilians, respect for human rights and ensuring the
command and control structure. In that connection, the
contribution of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO training mission is still essential.
With regard to the political process and the process
of reconciliation, it is important that the parties
show clearly that they are committed to dialogue
and reconciliation so as to avoid instability and
fragmentation. We are aware of the difficulties to be
overcome. But we are also optimistic, given the signs
of interest in dialogue shown by various sectors of the
insurgency. We highlight as well the positive balance
in the implementation of the programme of peace
and reconciliation. The large number of reintegrated
persons and the decreased number of incidents allow
for confidence in the sustainability of the programme.

In that context, we welcome the Council's
adoption on Monday of resolution 2082 (2012), which
strengthens the cooperation and dialogue between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) and the Government of Afghanistan. In addition
to reaffirming the special role of Afghanistan in the
listing and delisting process, the procedure set out in
the resolution to authorize exemptions from the travel
ban on persons on the list, so as to allow them to take
part in meetings as part of the peace process, shows the
Security Council's commitment to Afghan ownership
of the reconciliation dialogue process and facilitates
decisions and actions of the Committee having a direct
and timely beneficial effect on the process.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should continue giving priority to
supporting the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process and lend help with Afghan institutional
capacity-building, to fulfil their responsibilities
in priority areas such as governability, economic
development and regional cooperation. We hope that
the reductions projected for 2013 will not significantly
affect the operational capacity of the Mission and that
it will continue to be able to fulfil the essential tasks of
its mandate.

The United Nations should continue to play a central
role in coordinating international assistance to ensure
that it is in accordance with Afghan priorities and so
as to avoid duplication of effort. As to the worrying
humanitarian situation, it is imperative that all parties
respect humanitarian principles and allow aid to reach
those people most in need. That must be an essential
requirement for participation in the reconciliation
process. Cognizant of the devastating need for aid in the
areas of health, sanitation, education and food security,
we join the call by the humanitarian team in the country
for donors to earmark at least 10 per cent of official
development assistance to funding humanitarian aid
needs.

Achieving stability in Afghanistan is the
fundamental goal. It is therefore essential to foster a
State architecture that guarantees governability and
economic development at the local and national levels
and also provide access to justice, because those are
critical elements for a lasting and definitive transition.
Consensus about deepening and expanding relations
between Afghanistan and the international community
should contribute to building the State and its capacity
to fulfil its primary responsibility to meet the Afghan
people's needs. That relationship should translate into
tangible political, social and development results.

Lastly, I want to state that we agree with the
Secretary-General that the seriousness with which
the Afghan Government has moved ahead in meeting
its commitments made at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan calls out for the international community
to make similar progress in meeting its commitments,
such that Afghanistan stabilizes into a fully functioning
sustainable State that is capable of providing basic
services to its people without depending upon foreign
assistance.

