Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his presence here and for the analysis that he has given
us with regard to the situation in Somalia and the most
recent developments and agreements reached at the
London conference.

I would like to welcome you, Under Secretary
Bellingham, as President of the Council and to
congratulate your country on your assumption of the
presidency this month. I assure you of Colombia's full
cooperation. I would also like to recognize the
magnificent work done by the representative of Togo
and his team last month as they presided over the
Council.

I would like to welcome the United Nations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga. We wish him, every
success in his mission, which we very much need to be
successful.
The London conference was yet another valuable
demonstration of the ongoing commitment of the
international community to bring about stability and
development in Somalia, as it reaffirmed the ownership
and responsibility of the Somali people over decisions
that relate to the future of their country.

While we feel some optimism thanks to the
progress in the implementation of certain tasks set
down in the road map, we understand that the current
political, military and humanitarian situation in Somalia,
although encouraging, is not without risks. The situation
is still fragile. We therefore need to consolidate the
progress made in various areas in order to provide the
basis for re-establishing peace and stability in order to
ensure sustainable economic and social development.

Although the Transitional Federal Government
has the primary responsibility for restoring security,
political stability and the rule of law, it is crucial that
the international community provide its support to
strengthen the institutions of the State. With regard to
security, the situation has improved. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) exercises greater
control over the areas of Mogadishu and is beginning
to extend that control beyond Mogadishu. The work of
AMISOM. is, therefore, fundamental for the stabilization
of Somalia. Colombia supports the incorporation of the
Kenyan forces into the command and control of the
AMISOM. forces.

We note the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012),
extending the mandate of AMISOM. and authorizing an
increase in the number of troops deployed to a total of
17,731. The increased capacity of AMISOM. to meet its
mandate will largely depend on its being provided with
adequate resources, particularly enablers and force
multipliers. It is therefore indispensible to continue to
provide equipment, technical assistance and funding to
the Mission through the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of AMISOM.

It is also important to provide more technical,
financial and training capacities to the forces of the
Transitional Federal Government so that it can carry
out its activities on land and in its coastal waters and to
play a more important role in current operations. The
monitoring and identification of arms embargo
violations must be stepped up, and targeted sanctions
applied when necessary, in order to reduce the potential
devastating effects of that dynamic in the Somali
context. We are particularly concerned by the recent

violations of the arms embargo reported by the
Monitoring Group, including arms maritime arms
smuggling to Al-Shabaab in the north of the country, and
the operations of armed maritime security companies
working in Somali ports and territorial waters.

Political and military forces must be harmonized
and synchronized in order to stabilize the situation. The
military achievements attained to date would be more
sustainable if the Transitional Federal Government
were to strengthen its political management and
legitimacy and work to hold on to the recently liberated
areas by meeting the aspirations of the Somali people
through a transparent and inclusive process.

We stress the importance of the outcome of the
second Somali National Consultative Constitutional
Conference, held in Garowe, as a decisive step towards
finalizing the transition period by August 2012 and the
establishment of constitutional order. Although we
appreciate the advances that have been made towards
establishing a Somali-owned Government, it will be
important to ensure the territorial unity of Somalia in
that process.

We are convinced that a stable and lasting solution
to the problem of piracy will be very important to
resolving the Somali crisis and strengthening the rule
of law in the country. Therefore, all viable options will
require a comprehensive approach aimed at developing
national institutional capacities for addressing economic,
security, legal and penitentiary matters simultaneously.
In particular, the development of such activities as
fishing and port industries could arise as viable
economic alternatives for the population and reduce
dependency on organized crime linked to piracy. We
should therefore address the legal issue of maritime
borders as soon as possible so that they can be brought
in line with international law, enabling the definition of
an exclusive maritime zone and maritime borders to be
established with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen.

Finally, I would like to encourage the Somali
authorities and all other relevant actors to continue to
engage constructively and to meet their obligations in
the implementation of the road map, so that the
deadlines established therein for the transition by
August 2012 can be met. With regard to ending the
transition period, and given the fragility of the situation,
the United Nations should provide a comprehensive,
international response that makes the stabilization of
the Somali State a central and long-term objective.

