Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): I am pleased and
honoured to address the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir. Allow me to begin by congratulating
you and your delegation on assuming the presidency
of the Council during the month of July and for your
sound management of the Council this month. I would
like to assure you of the full support and cooperation of
my delegation in your endeavours for the few days left
of your presidency.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and former
President Festus Mogae, the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, who is joining
us from Juba.

I would like to reiterate the Government of National
Unity's commitment to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. We are happy to report that there
have been positive developments with regard to the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, with some
of the units and contingent's equipment already in Juba.
Moreover, we are happy to inform the Council that on
18 July, just two days ago, the Government of National
Unity made welcome progress on the proposed one-stop
shop by appointing the national staff. The one-stop

shop, as Council members well know, is intended to
resolve impediments to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) operations, including
facilitating equipment and supply clearances. The
Government of National Unity has the political will and
desire to continue to work closely with UNMISS and
the humanitarian actors to address any pending issues.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
humanitarian organizations for their large-scale and
sustained mobilizations since the onset of the crisis,
and for their continued commitment to working with
the South Sudanese people under the challenges they
face. Despite the lifting of the famine alert on South
Sudan, signifying an improvement in food security,
the humanitarian situation continues to be dire. We
continue to urge the friends of South Sudan and the
international community to honour the pledges they
made so as to meet the humanitarian gap being faced
by various humanitarian organizations.

As reported in last month's briefing (see S/PV.7982),
the national dialogue has started its work and is
progressing well. It is imperative to report here that the
co-Chairs of the Steering Committee have begun their
efforts to reach out to the other stakeholders who are
in and out of South Sudan in an effort to bring them
on board to the national dialogue initiative. One of the
co-Chairs of the Steering Committee led the delegation
to South African to meet with the Mr. Riek Machar,
who, unfortunately, declined to give him and his
delegation an audience. That is indeed unfortunate as
the national dialogue is intended to be a forum for the
people of South Sudan to air their views and grievances,
including Mr. Riek Machar's.

The Government therefore urges Mr. Riek Machar
and other armed opposition groups to reconsider their
positions regarding the national dialogue. The national
dialogue can be inclusive only with their participation,
but its success does not depend on their participation.
So it would be prudent if they put aside their personal
bitterness and embraced initiatives that seek to bring
about a lasting peaceful solution to the people of
South Sudan.

In conclusion, the Transitional Government of
National Unity continues to be grateful for the role
being played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the United
Nations and the international community at large in
trying to find lasting peace, stability and prosperity for
South Sudan. The Government ofthe Republic ofSouth
Sudan agrees with the international community that this
can be achieved only through a political process that is
embraced and accepted by the South Sudanese people.
It is in that spirit that the Transitional Government
of National Unity accepted the recent IGAD Summit
resolution to hold a high-level discussion with the aim of
revitalizing the implementation of the peace agreement
in South Sudan. As a result ofthe mentioned resolution,

we are happy to note that the IGAD Ministers ofForeign
Affairs will meet in Juba in the next few days and we
would like to wish them a successful deliberation.

