Ms. Cafias (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation also wants to express its best
wishes to Ambassador Merimee for his future work in
Rome, and to convey to him how much we will miss his
presence among us in the Security Council.
 

We are pleased to observe the political events that
have taken place with respect to the situation in Liberia,
and which have culminated in the signing of the Abuja
Agreement, the entry into force of a cease-fire and the
establishment of the Council of State.

We are aware that this is not the first agreement
signed by the Liberian parties, and we recall the failures of
the past. None the less, we trust that the new circumstances
surrounding this Agreement, that is, the direct participation
of the leaders of the factions in the Council of State, the
new attitude displayed by the factions and the
harmonization of the policies of the neighbouring countries
with respect to Liberia, all establish a clear distinction
between the Abuja Agreement and its predecessors.

We want to express our appreciation to the
Governments of Ghana and Nigeria for their important role
in the successful conclusion of the Abuja Agreement. This
vital first step, which has been taken after so much time
and so much violence must be consolidated and maintained
so that democratic elections can indeed be held next year in
Liberia.

There is no doubt that ultimate responsibility for
success in this new approach lies primarily with the
Liberians themselves, and depends on their conduct.
Nonetheless, we believe that the support of the international
community will contribute to the achievement of success in
the difficult efforts to achieve lasting peace in Liberia.

It is within the framework of that support that we
consider it essential that UNOMIL remain and be steadily
strengthened. For this reason we support the extension of its
mandate for four months, the increase in the number of its
military observers and the review of its concept of
operations in order to adapt it to new circumstances and
include in it aspects relating to disarmament and
demobilization.

The exercise of UNOMIL's mandate is closely related
to ECOMOG's ability to carry out its own mandate and to
ensure security. We therefore hope that the forthcoming
pledging conference, which the Secretary-General plans to
convene in order to obtain the resources necessary for
ECOMOG and to meet other needs of critical importance
for the peace process, will meet with a prompt and
generous response on the part of the international
community.

We also wish to emphasize the enormous importance
that we attach to strengthening to the utmost coordination
between UNOMIL and ECOMOG. This will yield the
positive experience of cooperation between the United
Nations and a regional organization.

During the coming four months, the Liberian parties
will have to focus on beginning to achieve concrete
results in the difficult process of the separation,
disarmament and demobilization of their forces and their
reintegration into civil life. For this purpose, we believe
that they must be assured of the support of this
Organization. However, the Liberian leaders must be very
much aware that another failure in the fulfilment of their
commitments will inevitably lead to a review of that
support.

The humanitarian situation, which is particularly
difficult, the observance of human rights, which can
neither be renounced nor evaded, and the capacity of the
local police to be effective, impartial and professional, are
all important issues which must be addressed, on a
priority basis, and for which we will also support efforts
to show the commitment and the support of the
international community.

