Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
the delegation of the Sudan wishes to express its
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. Along the same
lines, we would like to commend the Ambassador of
Namibia and the members of his mission for their
outstanding performance while presiding over the Council
last month. We laud his wise and courageous leadership
of the mission to East Timor. We would like also to
express our thanks for holding this open meeting of the
Council to listen to the views of the United Nations
Member States who are not members of the Security
Council, on a matter of interest to the international
community.

Based on Sudan's firm conviction of the need for
settling disputes by peaceful means in conformity with the
United Nations Charter, we wish to hail the popular
consultation of the East Timorese people in the
international referendum conducted in a peaceful
atmosphere. Seizing this opportune moment, we offer our
congratulations to the people of East Timor on the results
of the referendum and praise the steadfast efforts made by
the Government of Indonesia in creating security
conditions necessary for holding the popular ballot, which
commanded the approbation of the international
community in its entirety.

The referendum in East Timor, and the fact that the
Government of Indonesia declared its acceptance of the
outcome - before and after announcing the results -
clearly highlights the commitment of the Government of
Indonesia and its sincere intention to find a peaceful
solution to this conflict. It had previously expressed that
commitment through its numerous initiatives to reach a
peaceful and just settlement acceptable to all parties in
East Timor. Besides, Indonesia's welcoming and receiving
the Security Council mission reveal anew its serious
endeavours to enforce the results of the referendum and
its readiness to cooperate with the international
community to end the acts of violence in East Timor.

The situation in East Timor was on the agenda
addressed by the African leaders at their recent summit
held in Sirte in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. President
Abdul Aziz Bouteflika of Algeria, current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity, expressed on behalf of
the organization Africa's satisfaction with the peaceful

 

manner in which the referendum was conducted in East
Timor. He voiced the concern of Africa's leaders over the
acts of violence there and appealed to the international
community to do its best to contain the situation.

Along with the international community, the Sudan is
following with deep concern the deplorable and grave
situation unfolding in East Timor, as embodied in the acts
of violence in the capital, Dili, and its districts. We are
similarly concerned over the preposterous humanitarian
consequences thereof, especially those perpetrated by the
anti-independence militia. In this context, the Sudan
appreciates the faithful efforts made by the Government of
Indonesia to rectify the situation and put an end to the acts
of violence.
In the heat of these deplorable events, we cannot
forget or pretend to forget the honourable, principled
position of the Government of Indonesia vis-a-vis the
popular consultation itself and its commitment to it and its
results. In the meantime, we recall the important
arrangements adopted by the Government of Indonesia in
the past days, including declaration of martial law to restore
law and order. This arrangement has contributed in the past
few days to improving the situation in the field. I mention
here the deployment of new forces, replacing forces
previously stationed in East Timor, with the aim of
fostering peace and stability; the extension of humanitarian
aid to the disadvantaged refugees and internally displaced
persons; and, finally, agreement with the Red Cross to
improve the humanitarian situation.

Taking into consideration these efforts to restore order
and security in East Timor in the context of the
responsibilities devolving on the Government of Indonesia
pursuant to the 5 May Agreements relating to phase II, the
Sudan is of the view that any resolution to be adopted now
on the deployment of multinational or peacekeeping forces
in East Timor should be studied carefully. The deployment
of such forces should be considered in light of steps to be
agreed in full cooperation and coordination with the
Government of Indonesia, observing the application of
legitimate norms once the Indonesian parliament adopts the
results of the referendum next November.

The Security Council is called upon to discharge the
tasks entrusted to it by the Charter in an objective manner,
free from political considerations. Any hasty action by the
Council will aggravate an already worsening situation and
cause a gross humanitarian situation, the dangers of which
for international peace and security have been proven by
previous experiences.

In conclusion, the international community is called
upon to respect the national sovereignty of Indonesia and
to assist and encourage it to pave the way for the
restoration of security and stability in East Timor. In so
doing, it should base itself on full commitment to
implement the results of the popular consultation in East
Timor in line with the Agreements reached, as soon as
possible.

