Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's important meeting on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process. I would also like to thank the delegation of
Malaysia, which first took the initiative to place this subject
on our agenda.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
introducing his comprehensive and thoughtful report. We
welcome in particular the attention devoted in his report
and in his introductory statement to the problem of child
soldiers, including girl soldiers.

The representative of Portugal will make an exhaustive
statement on today's very important agenda item on behalf
of the European Union and 15 other like-minded European
countries. I fully associate myself with that statement, and
I will therefore limit myself to some brief remarks on
confidence-building and commitment in the framework of
DDR programmes.

First, on the subject of confidence-building,
peacekeeping operations are themselves a major source of
confidence-building. The long-term purpose of DDR
programmes is to enhance political stability, peace and
security. For DDR programmes to succeed, however, there
needs to be at least a degree of political stability and
security to begin with - that is, in the disarmament phase.
It is in that phase that peacekeeping operations in
themselves contribute to confidence-building.

Secondly, for the purpose of confidence-building it is
vital that all parties, including armed civilians, should be
targeted by the disarmament efforts, and that all arms
collected should be destroyed. If the disarmament effort is
limited and fails to target all, the results may well be an
illicit arms trade, violence and crime. Obviously, this would
undermine confidence in the process. Neighbouring
countries may have to be involved in disarmament
processes as well, as that can help curb cross-border arms
trading and crime.

Next, on the subject of commitment, the all-
important condition for DDR programmes to be
successful evidently is the full political commitment of all
warring parties to the peace process. There are three
aspects of commitment that I would like to highlight.
First, ex-combatants should be committed to the planning
and management of DDR programmes, especially
programmes for re-integration and training. There is
evidence that the actual involvement of ex-combatants in
such programmes has a positive impact, both in terms of
cost control and in the reduction of political tension.

Secondly, the commitment of civil society to DDR
programmes creates a sense of ownership in the
implementation of disarmament and reintegration. Full
information on the programme and its purposes will
clearly contribute to this sense of commitment.

Thirdly, the international community needs to be
committed to the implementation of DDR programmes,
usually including generous financial support. Providing
for the effective coordination of the programmes is
another important way the international community can
contribute. My delegation welcomes the emphasis placed
on this aspect of coordination by the Secretary-General in
his report.

Finally, in the presidential statement on small arms
of 24 September 1999 the Council requested the
Secretary-General to develop a reference manual, for use
in the field, on ecologically safe methods of weapons
destruction. The Council also invited Member States to
facilitate the preparation of such a manual. The
Netherlands attaches great importance to post-conflict
ecologically sound weapons destruction. In this context,
I am pleased to inform the Council that the Netherlands
has decided to make a substantial contribution towards the
preparation of such a field manual on weapons
destruction.

