Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand): First of all, Madam, I
wish to congratulate your delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express appreciation, through you, to the United
Kingdom for its initiative to hold this timely open
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding and for the
concept paper for the debate.

Peacebuilding requires the sincerity and genuine
commitment of all parties concerned. The lesson that
we have painfully learnt is that many conflicts settled
through negotiations and peace agreements are, in fact,
unsettled. Within a few days, weeks, months or years,
many areas relapse into conflict. Those who suffer the
most are civilians, especially innocent women and
children. They have to bear the brunt and brutality of
wars, scared for their lives and unable to see what kind
of future, if any, might lay ahead for them. Conflict can
leave life physically and mentally scarred. The relapse
of peace into war may further shatter the people's
spirits and hopes. The fragility of peace is therefore
something we need to watch carefully, and we must
expend our utmost effort to break the vicious circle of
conflict.

In order to secure lasting negotiated peace, there
is an urgent need to implement peace agreements to
maintain the commitments of parties. From a different
perspective, when the relapse occurs we need to look
back and carefully and critically examine what went
wrong, why the conflict broke out again and why peace
did not last. Perhaps the peace was forced; perhaps the
agreement was unfair; perhaps the parties were
pressured into giving in. As a result, the peace was not
real. Despite good intentions, it was filled with
mistrust and lacked the spirit of cooperation. What is
more important is what we should do to address the
error and prevent the future repetition of history.

As I mentioned earlier, peacebuilding needs the
sincerity and commitment of all parties, and they must
be prevalent at all levels, including the local, national,
regional and international levels. The international
community, the United Nations in particular, could
play a vital supporting role in building and sustaining
peace in areas emerging from conflict. It must be
emphasized that international undertakings must be
made with a coherent approach and in a coordinated
manner.

A number of United Nations system agencies are
involved in the peacebuilding processes, including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF. Also pertinent are other international
organizations, the international financial institutions,
regional organizations and civil society.

However, it is imperative that peacebuilding be
nationally owned if it is to last after the end of
international peacebuilding support in that area.
International leadership on the ground is important, but
it is even more important that the international
community promote local and national leadership and
capacity on the ground and thereby reinforce national
ownership.

Peace should be looked at not only from the
military perspective; it should also be considered in the
socio-economic, cultural and development contexts.
Peacebuilding should enhance security, stability, justice
and the rule of law, good governance, socio-economic
development and, ultimately, human security and the
livelihood of the people. My delegation welcomes the
presidential statement on security sector reform, issued
under the symbol S/PRST/2008/14 and adopted last
week, which rightly points out that such reform is a
necessary component of peacebuilding. However, it is
only one among many.

The peacebuilding process must lay the
foundations for both security and sustainable
development. Security sector reform can help improve
the institutional infrastructures of a war-torn country,
but it may not expeditiously yield direct improvement
in the lives of the people in the short and long terms.
My delegation is of the view that it is essential that
peacebuilding incorporate development elements in its
agenda. The scope of peacebuilding may thus have to
be expanded and would be more suitable for discussion
in the frameworks of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the General Assembly. However, the inclusion of
development issues opens more windows for the
international community to contribute more assistance
to the multifaceted peacebuilding process.

The presidential statement also emphasizes the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
ensuring continuous international support for
post-conflict countries. My delegation believes that the
Commission would be the appropriate forum, under the
guidance of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly, for such discussions in detail concerning
international peacebuilding efforts and strategies.

There have been some debates concerning the
transition and gap between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities on the peace continuum. The
United Kingdom's concept paper raises the issues of
rapidly deployable capacity and funding. My
delegation would like to share its initial thought that
peacebuilding activities could and should be prepared
in advance in terms of human and financial resources.
The activities may have to begin, in some cases, even
before the completion of the peacekeeping operations.
A smooth transition must also be ensured. As a member
of the Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation is aware
of the discussion concerning the line drawn between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It may be a necessary
overlap, but the special representative of the
Secretary-General and the resident coordinator may
perhaps have to play dual roles in both activities.

As a troop-contributing country, Thailand has
participated in United Nations and international
peacekeeping operations for many decades. My
delegation always views our troop contributions as an
honour for the opportunity to work side by side with
peacekeepers from other troop-contributing countries
and to help bring peace to the world. My delegation
can assure the Security Council that our commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping remains unwavering.
Furthermore, as members may well be aware, Thai
troops are recognized not only for their bravery, but
also for their congeniality, expertise and development
contributions to local communities.

For us, the concept of peace equalling security
and development is not new at all. Our interest has
never been limited to peacekeeping. My delegation
believes that we could perform even better in
peacebuilding activities. With our experiences and
expertise to share, we could make a tremendous
contribution to the Peacebuilding Commission. It is in
that regard that Thailand has decided to present its
candidature for the Organizational Committee of the
Commission in the General Assembly category for the
term 2008-2010.

The absence of conflict does not mean that there
is peace. Peace itself and peacebuilding are a long

process of reconciliation. Peace can be sustained not by
force, but by nurture. It is mainly the responsibility of
all parties concerned to faithfully adhere to jointly
accepted peace agreements. The international
community must also sincerely assist countries
emerging from conflict, whenever needed and possible,
in building peace in those countries, regions and the
world.

