Ms. Zewde: Thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
the Central African Republic and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country. Since the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/584) was finalized, there have been some
2
developments in the preparations for elections and in
the security situation in the country. I shall now update
the Council on these elements.

The Central African Republic is at a crossroads.
Presidential and legislative elections are due to take
place on 23 January. Those elections constitute another
window of opportunity for the people of the Central
African Republic to participate in the democratic
process and to further consolidate the country's
democratic foundations and mark the start of a new
chapter of stability and greater economic prosperity for
all.

In order to achieve those goals, however, the
elections must be transparent, free and fair. I am
pleased to report that the United Nations and our
international partners have provided considerable
technical and financial support to the Independent
Electoral Commission, which is entrusted with the
implementation of the electoral process. As the
Secretary-General's report indicates, there have been
hitches all along the way, but with a high degree of
commitment from the Government, working together
with the Independent Electoral Commission and the
opposition, solutions have been found and all major
political obstacles have been lifted.

On 15 November 2010, President Bozize
convened a meeting of national stakeholders and
international partners to resolve an issue related to the
amendment of the dates for the nomination of
candidates. As a result of that meeting, the deadlock
was broken and two more opposition candidates were
able to submit their candidatures, so that there are now
six candidates running for the presidency. That positive
development has lent further credence to the integrity
and inclusiveness of the electoral process.

As a result of the decision to allow for additional
candidates after the revised date for submission, the
opposition parties were also able to submit their
nominations for the 105 seats in the National
Assembly. That has contributed to an easing of
tensions. On 5 December, the Independent Electoral
Commission published the names of the 833 candidates
standing for seats in the National Assembly. All
candidates in the elections should now have the
opportunity to campaign freely. I hope that the
electoral process will continue to take place in a calm
and positive atmosphere.
10-68048

I am pleased to add that, with the technical and
financial support of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the code of conduct for the elections will be revised
and signed by the candidates and relevant institutions
in the days ahead, and distributed prior to the start of
electoral campaigning.

On 20 November, a new Minister for Territorial
Administration and Decentralization - a key
Government minister in charge of electoral matters
was appointed, demonstrating the Government's
commitment to the success of the elections. The
appointment of the former President of the 2005
Electoral Commission to that important post is a
welcome development.

 

The United Nations Development Programme has
ably managed the basket fund for the elections. I would
like to reiterate the Secretary-General's gratitude for
the support that has been received so far. I would
encourage donors to make good on outstanding pledges
and to provide the additional funds required to cover
the operational costs of the Electoral Commission at
this critical stage, so that the last elements can be put
in place to ensure that the elections are conducted
successfully.

The verification of ex-combatants in the north-
west of the country has now been completed. In order
to allow the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process to move forward, the
parties to the inclusive political dialogue need to
uphold all of their commitments so that disarmament
can take place. In spite of recent violence, I hope that
conditions in the north-east will improve sufficiently to
allow the verification process to start there. The
development of a national reintegration strategy for ex-
combatants, which is a key element of the DDR
process, will serve as an important incentive for armed
groups to disarm and demobilize. In that regard, we
look forward to working together with the Government
in the development of such a strategy as the next
urgent step in the process.

The challenges in consolidating the current
relative stability and making further progress are
considerable. While security in the capital and the
south-west of the country is satisfactory, thanks to the
presence of the Forces arme'es centrafricaines, the
eastern part of the country remains exposed to
10-68048
continued acts of banditry, incursions by foreign armed
groups and attacks by politico-military groups that are
not part of the peace process.

The Lord's Resistance Army is the most high-
profile of the foreign groups active in the Central
African Republic. The atrocities that they commit are
well known. It is, however, just one of a number of
groups of militants, bandits and poachers that exploit
the absence of State security forces to operate freely in
the prevailing security vacuum. The start of the dry
season has led to a resurgence in attacks by armed
gangs - the "coupeurs de route" - that attack lines of
communication in the region and disrupt the free
movement of people and goods. The Central African
Republic cannot be allowed to become a haven for
criminality and armed groups in the subregion.

On 24 November, the Convention des patriotes
pour la justice et la paix (CPJP), a politico-military
group that is not part of the peace process, attacked
Birao, less than 10 days after the withdrawal of the
forces of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, which had previously
secured the town and the airstrip. The CPJP had
already attacked Birao on 18 July. The town was
re-secured a week later and, on 3 December,
international non-governmental organizations operating
in Birao confirmed that the airstrip appeared to remain
functional, although widespread looting had occurred
while the town's population had been displaced. As a
result, the civilian population of Birao remains
extremely vulnerable and short of food and medical
supplies.

The lack of security is responsible for the
considerable and unnecessary loss of life, suffering and
displacement of people. The Government is not in a
position to address this state of affairs without
adequate means and resources. The Secretary-General's
report highlights the need for increased capacity and
capability for the Central African armed forces, as well
as for the effective implementation of the stalled
security sector reform programme. The Secretary-
General reiterated that call to the international
community and to the Central African Republic's
bilateral partners following the recent attack on Birao.

The Central African Government has made
serious efforts to extend its authority and its ability to
provide services to citizens throughout the country
through its facilitation of reconciliation efforts among
3
the various factions and ethnic groups, including in the
Vakaga region. An important part of the work to be
done in order to bring the country together lies in
ensuring that the Follow-up Committee on the
Inclusive Political Dialogue continues to make
progress in implementing the recommendations agreed
between national stakeholders. In the days ahead, the
Follow-up Committee is due to undertake a further tour
of the country to assess progress made in implementing
the recommendations of the dialogue and to report its
findings to the National Assembly.

Let me conclude by expressing my personal
gratitude to the Peacebuilding Commission's Central
African Republic configuration and its Chair,
Ambassador Grauls, and to the Peacebuilding Fund for
their continued and committed support. My thanks go
to the United Nations country team and all in our
integrated mission for their invaluable contribution to
our shared goal of assisting the Government and people
of the Central African Republic in consolidating a
lasting peace and laying strong foundations for solid,
sustainable socio-economic development in a peaceful
and democratic environment.

