Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Is this the right place to be
today to discuss this issue? Yes, it is. Did we precipitate
this case this year? No. Does Africa seek confrontation?
Not at all; otherwise, we would not be in the Chamber
today. I would ask members to follow my argument.

Terrorism is the most serious threat to international
peace and security. It affects all the people of the world,
without discrimination, from the World Trade Center
in New York to the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi.
Fortunately, we have countries; we have leaders. We are
committed to the fight against terrorism, and Kenya and
its President and Deputy President are with us. They
are at the forefront of the fight against international

terrorism, and we are grateful for their commitment
and determination in the fight against Al-Shabaab
in Somalia - a country where African blood is shed
on behalf of this Council, which is supposed to bear
the primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In that regard, His Excellency President Uhuru
Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto
should be respected, supported, empowered at this
time - not distracted and undermined. That is why,
after the vote of this morning, Rwanda is expressing
its deep disappointment over what transpired regarding
the request for the deferral of the cases against the
President and Deputy President of Kenya, despite
the proactive efforts of Africa to engage the Security
Council in a legitimate process in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

That is why this is actually the right place. The
failure to adopt the draft resolution before us today,
which has been endorsed by the countries of the entire
African continent, is a shame; indeed, it is a shame. Let
it be written today in history that the Security Council
failed Kenya and Africa on that issue.

I express my deep gratitude, Mr. President, to
your delegation and country, China, as well as to the
delegations of Azerbaijan, Pakistan and the Russian
Federation for voting in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council, together with the delegations of
Morocco, Togo and Rwanda. Today's disappointing
vote undermines the principle of the sovereign equality
of States enshrined in the Charter ofthe United Nations,
and confirms our long-held View that international
mechanisms are subject to political manipulation and
are used only in situations that suit the interests of some
countries. It also undermines the tremendous efforts of
the Kenyan Government to achieve the reconciliation
of the Kenyan people. In that connection, I wish to
recognize, at this moment, the Speaker of the Senate of
Kenya, who is present among us.

Six months ago, in May, Kenya tried to engage
the Security Council regarding the cases against its
President and Deputy President. I must state that the
Council heard, but did not listen. Yes, the Council did not
listen. Then, on 12 October, African Heads of State and
Government, in an extraordinary session of the African
Union (AU), considered the threat posed by terrorism
in Kenya and in the Horn of Africa. Consequently,
they decided to request the Security Council, through
Kenya, to defer the investigation and prosecution of
President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto for 12
months so as to allow them time to deal with the threat
of terrorism.

It is not that, in coming before the Council today,
we have sought confrontation. No, we have not. We
believed that the request was reasonable. We believed
that the request was legitimate, as it was based on the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In order to ensure that the
Council would take the AU message seriously, our
leaders set up the African Union high-level contact
group on the ICC, which came to New York. It engaged
in an interactive dialogue with Council members and
delivered a message from Africa requesting their
support. Is that a confrontation that the Council would
have wanted to have take place here, today? No, not at
all.

We were therefore hoping that, after extensive
consultations, the Council would express solidarity
with Kenya and with Africa, by negotiating in good
faith and adopting the draft resolution. That did not
happen, as some members of the Council even refused
to negotiate on any single paragraph. We profoundly
regret that.

Our colleagues who did not vote in favour of the
draft resolution have argued - as members have
heard - that the Kenyan situation does not meet the
threshold needed to trigger the application of article
16 of the Rome Statute. They have explained that
article 16 shall be applied only when the investigation
and prosecution could create, or worsen, a situation
threatening international peace and security.

I am here and I am wondering: If a terrorist attack
by members of Al-Shabaab - an Al-Qaida-linked
movement that has killed more than 70 innocent victims
and wounded 200 others - does not meet the threshold
line that other situations have crossed, then which one
would? If a clear and present threat of terrorism against
the Kenyan people, resulting from their determination
and courageous intervention in Somalia, does not meet
the threshold, what other threat can be alleged to do so?
Are we in the wrong place today? No.

May I request that all members of the Council
recall why article 16 of the Rome Statute was proposed
in the Council more than 10 years ago. Let me repeat
that question. May I request that all members of the
Council recall why article 16 of the Rome Statute was
proposed, more than 10 years ago. That article was
not proposed by an African State - not at all. It was
proposed by some of the Western Powers present at the
Council table to be applied solely in their interest. In
other words, article 16 was never meant to be used by
an African State or any of the developing countries. It
seems to have been conceived as an additional tool for
the big Powers to protect themselves and protect their
own. Is that not so? That is how it appears here today.

Council members will remember that some
countries that did not vote in favour of the draft
resolution have enacted laws to refuse any cooperation
with the ICC that involves targeting their nationals, to
sanction countries cooperating with the ICC in that
regard, and even to use military means to release any
of their nationals arrested at the request of the ICC. I
hope that all Council members can agree that that is
a far cry from our modest request for a deferral of
12 months -just 12 months.

In that regard, we believe that an equal application
of all of the provisions of the Rome Statute not only
strengthens the ICC but also legitimizes it as a credible
and fair player. Justice becomes so when the vulnerable
and the strong have equal protection. It is unfortunate
that the ICC will continue to lose face and credibility in
the world as long as it continues to be used as a tool for
the big Powers against the developing nations.

We have always been preached to about the values
of democracy and self-determination, but surprisingly,
those who taught us those principles do not believe in
Africa determining its fate at all. Instead, Africa has
been given a bitter pill to swallow, and we have seen
that tendency during the whole process leading up to
the vote we just held.

In the same context, African Heads of State and
Government proposed, in their wisdom, a Kenyan
solution to a Kenyan problem. New York thought
otherwise; no, New York is a beautiful city - the
Council decided otherwise. The Western Powers indeed
had an alternative solution to resolve the Kenyan
concerns, namely, interaction with the Court and with
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute. Is
this the right place for that? Yes, it is. Is the Council
the right place? Yes, for those that are members it is
also the right place. We do not say that it is not - it
is - but let us come here and interact with the Council.
The Council must hear Africans; hear what the Heads
of State of Africa want; hear what the Kenyans want.

On the subject of the Court, let me say that, with
respect to acting too precipitously, we have to be very
careful about what the Council is stating. Let me say
that, after five long years of procedures against Kenyan
leaders, we were surprised that, suddenly, the ICC
was willing to show flexibility on the very day that
the African Contact Group was interacting with the
Council. Whose hand was behind that? Why was it on
that very day? Why did they decide that very day?

That shows us that, in fact, maybe this is not the right
place to be, that the Africans are not in the right place
to decide this matter, and that we belong elsewhere. But
we do belong here. As members have heard, two-thirds
of our time here in the Security Council is dedicated to
Africa. That is why the Africans came here. So how can
the Council explain to me the fact that, all of a sudden,
the Prosecutor said:

"You know what? Let me give you four months
now. It is okay, you do not need to go and bother
that exclusive club. No. Get out of there."

No. It cannot work like that. Are we living together in a
global world, in a fraternity? Are we really? I am asking
myself. No, it cannot work and it cannot continue like
this.

The Group was also surprised, actually, to learn
that members of the Council were aware of that issue.
Indeed, they asked us about the decision to request a
postponement ofthe commencement ofthe case against
the President of Kenya even before the decision was
actually taken. That raises serious questions concerning
the independence of the handling of this case. Yes,
members have forgotten that. They have started to say
that it is not the right place, that this is too precipitous,
that this is a confrontation. Come on. We do not want
confrontation at all. Actually, Kenya is a member of
the ICC. Members saw the Kenyan Deputy President go
there. How can they say that we want confrontation or
that we are too precipitous?

As for the Assembly of States Parties, I would
remind members that the Assembly is composed only
of States parties to the Rome Statute, and that Morocco,
Togo, Rwanda and other members of the Council are
not parties to the Statute and could not participate
in the deliberations concerning the Rome Statute. I
refer here to what the representative of the Russian
Federation was telling us. So why would there be any
amendment to enhance respect for African leaders?
The issue at hand is not simply a legal matter; it is an
issue related to international peace and security, and
the Security Council cannot abdicate its responsibility
in that matter.

In conclusion, one of the positive outcomes of
the process that led to the vote this morning is the
reaffirmation of African unity and solidarity. Today,
the Chairperson of the African Union is represented
here by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
whom I recognize, and the representative of the
country concerned, namely, Kenya. I therefore thank
all African members and their friends, and I hope that
we will continue to fight for our rights and for the equal
sovereignty of States and to advance the agenda of
mutual respect among nations. There is something very
special in Rwandan culture that we call agaciro, or our
dignity. Today was a great rendez-vous of agaciro, of
our dignity and of African dignity.

