Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are at the core
of United Nations activities, and those of the Security
Council in particular. It is therefore not only useful
but also, in our View, extremely important to take the
opportunity to interact at regular intervals with the Force
Commanders and directly hear their points of View and
recommendations based on their unique experience.
I therefore thank the Generals, our briefers today, for
their very comprehensive and useful presentations. I
also welcome all military commanders here today and
thank them for their presence. I would also offer a word
of thanks to Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous
for his introduction and for facilitating the organization
of today's meeting.

Let me begin by commending the work ofthe United
Nations peacekeeping operations and paying tribute to
all women and men that compose the personnel of the
various missions for the way they carry out their duties,
often in very challenging and difficult conditions. They
deserve our continuous admiration and support.

Let me also commend the work of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), not only in
facing the challenges of the ever more complex and
multidimensional activity of peacekeeping, but also
because of the reform process currently under way and
also, more recently, on the development of the United
Nations generic infantry battalion manual.

I will be very brief, since we believe that we are
here today essentially to listen. I will limit myself to
some comments on two or three issues already raised
by the briefers.

First, it is really a challenge for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to fulfil so many diverse
mandates and different tasks in the most varied
conditions, diverse environments and different
geographical areas, and with personnel coming from
dissimilar backgrounds and using different languages.
We therefore believe that a system is needed to put
in place and ensure common operational military
standards, of which the manual is a good example. A
precondition for such a system is to guarantee adequate
training before the deployment of a mission, a training
that takes into consideration the specific conditions on
the ground, but also essential values and objectives of
the United Nations, including issues of human rights,
women's participation, the protection of civilians, in
particular, vulnerable groups, and respect for cultural
diversity and environmental conditions.

On another, related issue, it is very important
that a balanced number of caveats and clear rules
of engagement be defined in order to allow a force
commander to reach the common operational goals.

Another theme I would like to address is the issue of
political consent by the parties on the ground, which is
essential to ensure the sustainability of a peacekeeping
mission and which implies a shared strategic
understanding of its objectives, and the permanent,
constructive and responsible cooperation between those
parties and the United Nations mission. In that context,
a specific mechanism could be implemented within
each mission in order to monitor how the parties are
implementing their given consent through meaningful
cooperation and to report its issues through the
Secretariat to the Security Council. That would allow
the Council to react in a prompt and timely manner to
sudden changes in the level of political support enjoyed
by the mission concerned.

It is often said that peacekeepers are the first
peacebuilders. That aspect merits our full attention,
since the quality of the connection between the two
sides of the same reality constitutes in most cases the
key to sustained success of United Nations actions
and interventions. That connection starts, obviously,
at Headquarters through proper coordination among
different branches of the Secretariat, but it is essential
to ensure that it remains a permanent concern of the
leadership of each mission. Indeed, the military
component plays an important role in early peacebuilding
efforts, namely, by keeping law and order, allowing
people to go back to their normal lives, establishing a
secure environment, strengthening the rule of law and
promoting institution-building. Naturally, none of those
efforts can work properly and effectively without the
full involvement and commitment of the host country
in a process of responsible national ownership.

Let me conclude by reiterating my country's tribute
to all men and women who, often through personal
sacrifice and risk, act on our behalf in order to achieve
peace and security in the world.

