We thank Russia for convening this open debate. Austria aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 38) and by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends on Women and Peace and Security (annex 27). Austria considers this year's open debate particularly timely, as we are celebrating not only the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. We should seize this opportunity to take stock of the implementation and identify the challenges that lie ahead of us. Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/946), which underlines, inter alia, the linkages between the women and peace and security agenda and international disarmament efforts, including on nuclear disarmament - a topic that Austria spearheads in its multilateral diplomacy. In recent years, the gendered impact of conventional weapons has revived increasing attention. To give an example, women are disproportionally affected by the long-term and reverberating effects of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Austria therefore encourages the Council to follow a comprehensive human-security approach in all its deliberations. Despite the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, hostilities, shamefully, continue and parties to armed conflicts persistently ignore their humanitarian law obligations with regard to the protection of civilians. In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council recognized that women and girls suffer disproportionately when international humanitarian law is ignored by parties to armed conflict. Austria therefore calls on the members of the Security Council to systematically mainstream the women and peace and security agenda in all its country-specific debates and mandates for United Nations peacekeeping and political missions. We welcome the efforts of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security in this regard. Furthermore, the Security Council should address situations of internal conflicts where gender-based violence is systematically used to target human-rights defenders, just as currently in Belarus. Overall, the widespread impunity for sexual violence committed in conflict is outrageous and can no longer be banalized. We need more decisive action to sanction such crimes. In this context, we applaud the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten, and her team to advocate for more accountability, in particular through closer collaboration with the International Criminal Court. The COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic consequences have increased existing vulnerabilities and put at risk hard-won gender-equality gains. Around the globe, we have witnessed a worrisome rise in gender-based violence. At the same time, due to lockdowns, effective help by women grass-roots organizations has proven to be more difficult. Therefore, at the national level, we are enhancing our policies to combat all forms of gender-based violence, including acts of violence committed online, in close collaboration with civil society organizations. Austria strongly believes in the transformative power of civil society in advancing the women and peace and security agenda. Through international cooperation, we will pursue our financial support to UN-Women, the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund and, in particular, civil society partners to further implement all pillars of the women and peace and security agenda together with partner Member States. We commend the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders and all its partner organizations at the grass-roots level for bringing the women and peace and security agenda from the Security Council Chamber to the ground level through localization programmes and the development of national action plans. In order to make the voices of those first responders heard, Austria, organized the Global Women's Forum in Vienna in February, together with our partners from the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders. The discussions among more than 70 representatives of local women's organizations from 17 countries on priorities and challenges in the full and effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda resulted in a set of concrete recommendations, which we should take into consideration in our future work. Twenty years after the adoption of the groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000), we are convinced that the focus of the international community should now centre on its full and effective implementation. To achieve this, we do not necessarily need new resolutions, but to act on our promises. We therefore welcome various initiatives, such as by Germany and the United Kingdom, to accelerate implementation through time-bound commitments. We look forward to the launch of the women, peace and security and humanitarian action compact under the framework of the Generation Equality Forum. More than ever, it is our conviction that women are agents of change for peace and security. Let us actively follow up on our pledges in order to further advance the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in a collective effort.
