Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
Guatemala on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to commend you for organizing
such an important debate. We participate in it convinced
that justice, peace and security are global public goods
that deserve enhancement and protection. Their nature
is complimentary, not contradictory, and their final
purpose is to protect the integrity and dignity of people
and to provide reparations to victims.

Former Secretary-General Kofi Anan says it well
in his recent memoir Interventions: A Life in War and
Peace:

"The choice between justice and peace is no longer
an option. We must be ambitious enough to pursue
both, and wise enough to recognize, respect and
protect the independence of justice".

In order to fully exercise its mandate ofmaintaining
international peace and security, the Security
Council has the duty to promote the full exercise of
international justice and the rule of law. That obligation
is particularly important in relation to the International
Criminal Court. Although the Court is an independent,
treaty-based tribunal, the Statute of Rome gives the
Council two prerogatives in its workings - to refer or
defer cases. From that arise the right of the Council to
influence the Court's actions and the possibility for the
Court to expand its jurisdictional scope.

The nature of the Council is political; that of the
Court is judicial. Therefore, their relation will always
be complex. But for the same reason, the cooperation
of the Council with the Court should be responsible and
guided by a set of impartial and general principles that
scrupulously respect the Court's independence. The
Council should abide by the principle that international
criminaljustice is not a licence for political negotiation
or a means to appease despots, but a tool to fulfil an
essential duty to humanity and to foster a more peaceful
and safer international order, based on general rules.

From that perspective, Costa Rica wishes to suggest
some guidelines to the Security Council regarding
its referrals to the Court. First, the Council should
establish a protocol to refer to the Court any case in
which there are strong indications of the perpetration of
crimes defined by the Rome Statute, provided there is
no action in the respective national jurisdiction. That is
precisely what is happening in Syria, but the Council's
reaction has been paralysis. It is time for this situation
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.

Secondly, the Council should make a commitment
to providing follow-up and support, including financial
support, to its referrals to the Court. In the two situations
referred to the Court so far, Darfur and Libya, follow-up
and further cooperation have been almost non-existent.

Thirdly, it should establish, in its referrals, the
obligation of compliance by all States, including arrest
warrants.

Fourthly, it should establish subsidiary bodies to
systematically ensure cooperation and follow-up.

Fifthly, it should harmonize and coordinate its
sanctions regimes, so that they support the orders and
decisions of the Court.

Sixthly, and finally, it should strengthen the
mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions,
so as to ensure their cooperation with the investigations
and actions of the Court.

In short, the Council should apply clear political
will in the interest of justice, establishing standards for
action, acting in accordance with them and rejecting
impunity. Thus the triad of peace, security and justice
will be promoted seamlessly and with consistency, for
the benefit of the rule of law.

The members of the Council that are signatories to
the Rome Statute should take the lead in this respect.
We congratulate Guatemala on its recent ratification of
the instrument and for its commitment to advancing it.

