Mr. Hain (United Kingdom): I am delighted to be
here. I should like to thank Secretary of State Albright,
and you, Mr. President, both for convening this debate
and for your energetic pursuit of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also welcome the historic
statements made by the all the heads of State gathered
here today.

Bringing peace to the Great Lakes region matters to
Britain. It matters to the United Nations, and most of all
it matters to Africa. We must end this war. We must
bring peace to a region too often torn apart by strife. We,

 

the United Nations - all of us - have failed Africa in the
past. Let us not fail now.

The Lusaka Agreement is a good one. It provides the
right formula for peace. It is Africa's agreement, an African
success that we should back. It is the only solution. So I
welcome what we have heard today from the African heads
of State. Every one of them has reaffirmed his support for
Lusaka and its principles and his commitment to its
implementation. This is a strong foundation on which we
can now build.

There has been some progress in implementing
Lusaka. President Chiluba was right to remind us just how
much has already been achieved. I should like to say to
President Chiluba that I normally have to apologize for the
British weather; now I find that I also have to apologize for
the British flu. The mechanisms to oversee implementation
are being put in place. Some observers have been deployed.

But I agree with President Chissano of Mozambique
that progress has been too slow. Fighting is continuing and
the national dialogue has yet to get under way. There has
been no planning for demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration (DDR). The Lusaka timetable has slipped. We
need an updated and realistic timetable, with targets and
benchmarks against which progress can be measured that
can form the basis of a partnership between the African
parties and the international community. I welcome the
work done in Harare to take this forward.

The national dialogue is crucial to the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people. We are
delighted that former President Masire has agreed to
facilitate the talks, and I hope that a date will be set now
for the start of the dialogue. I welcome President Kabila's
affirmation today of his readiness to begin that dialogue
immediately. I also welcome his commitment to see this
process lead to free and fair elections and lasting national
reconciliation. I call on all Congolese to engage
constructively, wholeheartedly and without preconditions.
Former President Masire underlined the need for resources
to assist the dialogue. Britain is providing funding. We are
prepared to consider further support.

We must move forward on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the militia groups.
Without a credible DDR plan, Lusaka will fail. We should
now agree on a set of political principles to underpin
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. These
should include ending support for all non-state militias; the
peaceful reintegration of those fighters from neighbouring
States into their countries of origin - except for those
accused of genocide, who should face justice - and
arrangements to achieve this which are as far as possible
cooperative and voluntary; the provision for collective
action by the parties - if this ultimately proves
necessary - to compel militia members who refuse
voluntarily to disarm and disband to do so; and
international monitoring to give all sides the reassurance
they need to make the process work.

I hope that this week - in the next few days - we
can agree on a way forward on DDR based on these
principles. If so, we should invite the Joint Military
Commission (JMC), the Organization of African Unity,
the United Nations and the World Bank to take these
principles forward and, in discussion with the parties,
produce a viable and fully worked out DDR plan.

Next, we need to ensure that the mechanisms
established by Lusaka to monitor and implement the
ceasefire and eventual troop withdrawal work better.
Those charged with overseeing this - the JMC, the
Political Committee, the OAU and the United Nations -
have a crucial part to play. We welcome what they have
done so far. We encourage them to work still more
closely together to drive the peace process forward. They
need to exercise leadership and to hold the parties
accountable for their actions.

As President Chiluba has reminded us, Lusaka's
implementation mechanisms will work properly only if
they are properly resourced. Britain has already provided
funding to the JMC. We welcome the announcement of
further support made by Canada today. Britain has
provided personnel to the United Nations, who are now
working closely with the JMC. More resources will be
needed. We are looking at what more we may be able to
do. We encourage others to do so, not least those in
Europe.

I agree with President Chissano of Mozambique that
we must address the humanitarian situation urgently. It is
deteriorating, and there is growing hardship. We are
willing to help, but we cannot get to all of those most in
need. There must be access for non-govemmental
organizations and United Nations agencies to make the
assessments that we all need to be able to provide
assistance. I call on those concerned to make those
pledges here today and over the coming few days of
negotiations.

 

It is absolutely crucial for us to agree on the next
phase of a United Nations mission - what it should do and
what support it should have. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the next stage of the United Nations
mission should be to deploy a force to monitor the ceasefire
and the redeployment of troops to defensive positions. It
needs adequate protection and the right logistical support.
And it needs to be on the ground as soon as possible.

We should also reaffirm now our readiness to support,
as soon as conditions allow, a full United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is time to bury the ghosts of the past and to
ensure an effective United Nations peacekeeping operation.
As President Museveni said, the cost of action is high, but
the cost of inaction is higher still.

But let us be clear on the mandate. I understand why
President Mugabe of Zimbabwe and President Museveni of
Uganda insist that there will need to be Chapter VII
authority. I also agree with President Bizimungu of Rwanda
that a new Security Council resolution is urgently required.
We need a force that will help the parties themselves to
implement the Lusaka Agreement, a force that can do so
provided that all the parties continue to show the same
political commitment to the Agreement that their leaders
have shown today - a force which will have guarantees of
security and cooperation from all concerned. I welcome
President Kabila's important commitments today in this
regard, and those from all the other African heads of State
directly involved.

The heads of State have all called for urgent United
Nations deployment. President Chiluba rightly said this
morning that there is no peacekeeping that does not have
some element of risk. I agree with him. But those risks
must be minimized, not just to protect individual United
Nations personnel, of whom we have lost too many in
recent years, but also to sustain the international momentum
behind the implementation of Lusaka. The factors which
maximize the prospects for success - political
determination and effective organization - also serve to
minimize risk. Energetic commitment to Lusaka and a
speedy, well-executed United Nations peacekeeping
operation therefore go hand in hand.

Last, we must keep the Democratic Republic of the
Congo high on the international agenda. As President
Mugabe so correctly underlined, there must be no
marginalization or segregation of this and Africa's other
challenges.

President Dos Santos's important contribution to the
debate reminds us of the terrible neglect of another
African conflict. We must make United Nations sanctions
against UNITA bite and bite now and we support
Ambassador Fowler's excellent work to achieve this.

But the Congo crisis is now the major challenge
facing Africa and one of the biggest challenges facing the
United Nations and the international community. Britain
will back all those determined to make the Lusaka
Agreement work: with finance, practical help, people on
the ground and political support.

The Secretary-General told the heads of State this
morning that this is their opportunity to serve the African
people and to enlist international support here today.
What all speakers have said today has done both. Britain
will stand with those leaders of Africa who are the
peacemakers of Africa. Let us go forward together in
partnership.

