Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing today on
developments in the Middle East, which we can all
agree are explosive and dangerous to the security and
stability of that sensitive zone of the world. His
briefing highlighted the need for the Council to
shoulder its responsibility to salvage peace in the
region and the added value of its visit to the occupied
Palestinian territories.
Settlement building is the most serious threat to
the entire peace process. The most recent development
in that regard was the decision taken by the Israeli
Government in the first week of this month to build

more than 1,000 housing units in the occupied
territories. In that connection, representatives of the
Quartet, meeting in Washington, DC, this month,
expressed concern at the settlement activity, settler
provocations and continued violence, and called on the
two parties to make efforts to resume negotiations in
order to find a solution to the conflict. They also called
on the international community to support and assist
the Palestinian authorities in overcoming the financial
crisis resulting from Israeli practices.

In that regard, the Human Rights Council has
authorized a fact-finding mission on the impact of
settlements on the human rights situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. East Jerusalem is the
main target of the Israeli authorities' settlement policy
of obliterating its features and altering its
demographic, religious and cultural composition. The
policy is implemented by pressuring the Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem to emigrate by constructing
bypass roads, settling Israelis in their confiscated
homes and expanding settlements, all in order to isolate
East Jerusalem from the rest of the Palestinian
territories.

In that connection, I wish to quote a letter sent by
His Majesty King Mohammed VI on 3 April, in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee, to
the five permanent members of the Security Council
and the Quartet. His Majesty wrote:

"All such unilateral illegal actions and other
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people
run counter to international law and international
humanitarian law. This scheme will increase
tension in the occupied Palestinian territories and
have further repercussions that will endanger the
entire region."

His Majesty urges the Secretary-General and the
five permanent members of the Council to take every
measure to compel Israel to cease its actions and
practices that run counter to international agreements
and instruments. The Palestinians have demonstrated
time and again that they are committed to negotiations
and the peace process to end the conflict between Israel
and Palestine.

The recent summit of the League of Arab States,
held in Bagdad in March, reaffirmed that fair and
comprehensive peace is the strategic option under the
Arab Peace Initiative, as affirmed at various Arab
summits since 2002. Accordingly, we believe that the
initiative taken by President Abbas to write to Prime
Minister Netanyahu on the revival of the negotiation
process, which has been in limbo for years, will serve
to revive the peace process and to enable the
Palestinians to establish their independent and viable
State on the Palestinian territories, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. In this context, we encourage the
Palestinian parties to embark on the path to
reconciliation in order to end division, in accordance
with the Doha Declaration.

The economic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is deteriorating rapidly under
Israeli occupation. In a recent report, the World Bank
sounded the alarm that the Palestinian budget deficit is
more than $1 billion. The situation of hundreds of
Palestinian prisoners, including peaceful activists and
activists, is precarious. They endure isolation and
arbitrary detention and are prevented from seeing their
families and from continuing their educations.

Arab leaders have endorsed the resolution
adopted by the Arab League on 23 September 2011, to
support the inclusion of Palestine as a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations, along the 4 June 1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. Palestine's
membership, which would be in line with the vision of
President Obama to achieve peace based on the two-
State solution, is notable in particular given that most
countries in the world have recognized the State of
Palestine on the basis of reports by international
organizations that Palestinian authorities and
institutions are capable of administering the affairs of
an independent Palestinian State.

At the same time, we call for the implementation
of the relevant international resolutions, instruments
and initiatives regarding a solution to the Palestinian
question. We also call on Israeli to withdraw from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, including the
occupied Golan and the remaining Lebanese territories.
We believe that establishing a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East is the only way to guarantee
security, stability and prosperity in the entire Middle
East.

