Mr. Trautwein (Germany): We deeply deplore
and condemn the ruthless killing of children in Kosovo
on 13 August. We extend our sincere condolences to
the families. The perpetrators of the attack have not yet
been identified. Independent of their background, this
is another attack in a progression of violent incidents
that have taken place in Kosovo over the past weeks.
We have seen attacks against institutions, public
buildings and vehicles. We have seen revenge for the
sentences against four former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA). And now we are faced with
an attack against children. The police officer of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) who was shot in the northern part of
Kosovo two weeks ago and the Kosovo Serb children
seem to have been targeted deliberately. Today, Kosovo
Albanians were attacked when passing through a
Serbian village near Pristina. While many of those
attacks might have individual motives, together they
result in creating an atmosphere of lawlessness and of
intimidation. They poison the relations between the
ethnic groups and can damage relations with the
international presence in Kosovo.

If the perpetrators' aim is to obstruct
reconciliation, refugee returns or the envisaged direct
dialogue or if they believe they can force the
international community into a premature status
discussion, they must know that this is totally
unacceptable and that they will not succeed.

We welcome the statements by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo condemning
the violence and urge all their representatives to exert
their influence on public opinion and to speak out for
the acceptance of the rule of law. No one is above the
law. UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia will
ensure that the perpetrators who committed the attacks
and murders of the past weeks, as well as those who
committed crimes during the time of armed conflict,
will be brought to just.

Concerning the future status of Kosovo, the
parties have to understand that no unilateral act can
change the status of Kosovo as laid down in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The fact that for the
time being there is no common ground between the
parties on the future status of Kosovo is one more
reason why the international community must insist on
the policy of standards before status. There can be no
debate of the status issue before the benchmarks are
met.

One of the benchmarks is the initiation of a direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on practical
matters of common concern. This must not be confused
with the dialogue on the status question. This direct
dialogue must start immediately. The present security
situation, as well as the current internal debate about
the new Serbian Constitution, should not be taken as a
pretext by Kosovar politicians to escape from their
responsibility for a peaceful and stable Kosovo. We
urge them to concentrate on the next steps.
I would like to conclude by expressing my
Government's full support for the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, in the challenges that lie ahead.

