Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open meeting of the Security Council to
allow us to consider developments in the situation in
the Middle East, including Palestine.

We thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
excellent briefing to the Council. We commend the
efforts of the international community, particularly the
Quartet, to ensure that the disengagement proceeds in a
coordinated manner. We welcome the Knesset's
decision to oppose any postponement of that
disengagement.

In that context, we express our support for the
mission entrusted to two special envoys for the
disengagement: General Ward, responsible for helping
the Palestinian Authority set up appropriate structures
for reforming the security apparatus, and Mr. James
Wolfensohn, responsible for issues that do not concern
security. We welcome the Secretary-General's decision
to ensure that Mr. Wolfensohn has all the assistance he
needs to establish an office in Jerusalem so that he can
carry out his mandate.

Those efforts by the Quartet clearly demonstrate
the will of the international community to assist in the
implementation of the disengagement, which is
considered to be a stage of the implementation of the
road map approved in resolution 1515 (2003) as a
framework for the final settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the end of the occupation.

It is regrettable that those efforts are now being
thwarted by the renewed outbreak of violence in Gaza
with the approach of the occupying Power's
disengagement, which is to take place in August. My
delegation is following this new crisis with great
concern; it has already forced the Palestinian Authority
to declare a state of emergency in the occupied
territories.

However, the agreements reached at the Sharm
el-Sheikh summit allowed us to hope that the weapons
would fall silent, which would permit the resumption
of a frank dialogue between the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority with a view to the
implementation of the disengagement plan. It is
essential to reverse this negative trend, which can only
compromise the outcome of the operation, given the
real risk of worsening tensions in view of the actions of
the forces of the occupying Power and of the
Palestinian resistance.

In that regard, we do not understand the obstacles
that continue to hinder freedom of movement and
circulation in the occupied territories. We also deplore
the continued destruction of Palestinian property in the
occupied territories and the resumption of the practice
of the extrajudicial killing of Palestinian militants, in
flagrant violation of the commitments undertaken at
Sharm el-Sheikh. We call upon the occupying Power to
put an end to that practice. For its part, the Palestinian
Authority must take all appropriate measures to
prevent attacks targeting Israeli civilian populations.

The continued construction of the wall of

separation despite the decision of the International
Court of Justice constitutes a real challenge for the
international community. We urge the Government of
Israel to substantially implement the Court's decision,
particularly with regard to halting the construction,
dismantling the wall and returning property confiscated
in that connection.

We are also concerned by the continued
construction of settlements in the occupied territories.
Ending the construction and dismantling those
settlements are obligations under the road map, which
is and remains the indisputable point of reference for
carrying out the peace process. Here, we express our
attachment to the main objective of the peace process:
the creation of a Palestinian State existing side by side
with Israel within fixed and internationally recognized
borders.

Disengagement from Gaza would be a decisive
step in that direction. We urge all the parties involved
to do their utmost to ensure the success of the process
now under way in order to open up new prospects for
the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Given
the central nature of this conflict, all progress on the
ground will have positive repercussions on the whole
range of situations that affect the region's stability.

