Mr. Hyseni: I would very much like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to share with
the Security Council our views on the current state of
affairs in the Republic of Kosovo and on the challenges
ahead of us. It is an honour to speak before the Council
today about the continued progress in Kosovo after
independence, with particular emphasis on the
developments in and around Kosovo since my last
Statement to the Security Council, on 25 July 2008.

Let me once again underline the important role
that the Security Council has played at every stage of
Kosovo's post-war development.

I am very proud of the progress that my country
and my Government have made since the declaration of
independence, on 17 February. In nine busy months,
we have laid the foundations for a democratic and
multi-ethnic State at peace with all its neighbours and
firmly established on its path towards integration into
Euro-Atlantic structures. We have adopted a modern
constitution, which is based on the recommendations of
Nobel Peace Prize winner and former United Nations
Special Envoy for Kosovo Marti Ahtisaari and provides
far-reaching protections for ethnic minorities.

Our Government has worked intensively to
implement both the ideals and the objectives enshrined
in the Constitution and the Ahtisaari Plan. The
municipalities of Kosovo have been afforded a large
degree of local governance under Kosovo's new legal
framework. Members of Kosovo's ethnic minorities -
including the Serb community - regularly participate
in Parliament sessions, in the Government and in other
institutions of the Republic of Kosovo.

Fifty-two States from around the world have
recognized our independence, including a majority of
nations represented in this Council. The recognition of
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State has
continued. Since I last addressed the Security Council,
another nine countries around the world have
recognized my country as an independent and
sovereign State. Let me take a minute here to extend
our profound thanks and appreciation to the peoples
and Governments of Colombia, Belize, Malta, Samoa,
Portugal, Montenegro, Macedonia, the United Arab
Emirates and Malaysia for supporting the right of the
people of Kosovo to freedom and independence.

There have also been practical moves and
measures, even on the part of countries that have not
yet recognized Kosovo's independence formally, to
accept our passports and find ways to accommodate the
reality of an independent Kosovo. The recent
recognitions are further clear evidence of the progress
Kosovo has made in all areas since the declaration of
independence. Recognition by Montenegro and
Macedonia, our closest neighbours, besides confirming
that Kosovo's independence has added significantly to
the overall stronger sense of safety and stability in the
western Balkans, has also strengthened the will and
determination of the countries of the region to work
together more closely on many issues of common
concern and interest. We and all the countries of the
region hope that, in due course, the Republic of Serbia
will also join in the efforts to establish an environment
of cooperation and understanding in the region,
including the normalization of relations with the
Republic of Kosovo.

Most countries in Europe have already
recognized Kosovo, underscoring what we in Kosovo
already know - that our hearts and our place are in
Europe. The people of Kosovo are grateful to all the
Governments that pledged nearly $2 billion in
economic development assistance to the Government
of Kosovo in July, including some countries, such as
Saudi Arabia, that have not yet taken the decision to
recognize us. We are deeply thankful to NATO
members for continuing to provide resources and
personnel to help ensure the safety and security of our
country.

I expect more recognitions in the coming months,
in spite of the fact that the Serbian Government
requested from the International Court of Justice an
advisory opinion on Kosovo's independence. It is
regrettable that such a request was ever made. We and
many of our international supporters have noted
repeatedly that the question of the independence of the
Republic of Kosovo is settled and irreversible. We are
confident, though, that the referral to the Court will not
hinder nations around the world from assessing
Kosovo's continued progress or their eventual decision
to recognize its independence.

We are going to take an active part in presenting
our case before the International Court of Justice. We
are confident that the Court's deliberations will be fair
and impartial. We also strongly believe that our
position will be reconfirmed. Kosovo will, however,

pursue its development and progress as an independent
State working with our international partners and
friends. We will pursue further recognitions of
Kosovo's independence through diplomatic activity
and persistent international outreach from various
sectors of our society. We have already started the
membership processes with the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank, and we will in due course
initiate the process of seeking membership with other
international financial and political institutions.

The first 10 embassies of the Republic of Kosovo
have already been established. I am very pleased and
happy that today, sitting next to me in this Chamber, I
have Mr. Avni Spahiu, the head of our embassy in
Washington, DC. The first half of 2009 will see the
establishment of another 10 to 15 embassies of the
Republic of Kosovo throughout the world.

In spite of the huge progress achieved so far, we
are deeply conscious of the tasks that still lie ahead of
us. Among the most pressing is the need to establish a
unitary system of rule of law with a European
perspective. On the very day that independence was
declared, the sovereign authority of the Republic of
Kosovo the President of the Republic of Kosovo -
invited the European Union and NATO to perform
specific functions in an independent Kosovo. The
Parliament of the Republic of Kosovo, other State
institutions and the people of Kosovo have endorsed
and welcomed the establishment of the International
Civilian Office to supervise the implementation on the
ground of the provisions of the Ahtisaari
comprehensive settlement proposal.

 

The deployment of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which has been
designed to help the Kosovar institutions in the police
and justice sectors, also enjoys the full support of the
people and State authorities of Kosovo. The
deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo is critical
and indispensable in all possible terms. Central and
local authorities in Kosovo look forward to working
closely with EULEX to improve the living conditions,
safety and security of all citizens of the Republic of
Kosovo.

We are therefore very committed to the early
deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo, in
accordance with the mandate that derives from the
Kosovo Declaration of Independence, the Ahtisaari
package, the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo,

08-6204]
the laws of the Republic of Kosovo, the European
Union joint action plan of 4 February 2008, and the
invitations of 17 February and 8 August 2008 for
EULEX deployment.

In a declaration of 18 November, the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo made very clear their
rejection in its entirety of the six-point proposal
contained in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/354). Our position and response to the report
remains the same. We cannot permit any action that
infringes upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Kosovo. We will cooperate with
EULEX on its deployment throughout Kosovo on the
basis of the mandate deriving from the aforementioned
documents, fully respecting the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unitary character of the Republic of
Kosovo.

We note that the international community has
continued to underscore the illegitimacy of parallel
municipal structures, self-declared municipal
officeholders, and attempts in some Serb majority areas
to intimidate those individuals who wish to work with
their Albanian neighbours to build a better future for
all of Kosovo. As always, the institutions of the
Republic of Kosovo will continue to cooperate with the
European Union, the United States and NATO to
achieve those goals. Close cooperation between the
Republic of Kosovo and our international partners is
indispensable as we implement the Ahtisaari plan and
as we work to build a multi-ethnic Kosovo based on
democratic values and the highest international
standards.

Once again, Kosovo welcomes EULEX and looks
forward to its reaching operational capability in
December. EULEX will help reinforce the European
perspective and orientation that is critical to my
country's future. Our Government and our people
pledge to cooperate with EULEX as we work to
implement the Kosovo Constitution and strengthen the
rule of law throughout Kosovo, a goal that is to the
benefit of all the people of Kosovo and in the interest
of all countries in the region.

As we persistently seek ways to reach out and
cooperate with Belgrade on many issues of common
interest, and in the framework of regional cooperation
structures and initiatives, so we continue to react with
restraint and moderation to provocations coming from
Serbia, believing this approach to be the only way
towards the establishment of a democratic and multi-
ethnic State. In an independent Kosovo there is room
and opportunity for all. Our future lies squarely on the
path to European integration, and Kosovo intends to
pursue this path very vigorously.

In conclusion, let me emphasize Kosovo's strong
commitment to becoming a contributing member of the
international community. The Republic of Kosovo
looks forward to working with all of the members of
the Council to promote the shared goals of
international peace and safety. Once again, I wish to
thank the Council for the opportunity to present the
views of the Republic of Kosovo.

