As South Africa prepares to conclude its two-year term on _ the Security Council, allow me to take this opportunity to commend the work of the Security Council's subsidiary bodies represented here today. They continue to work diligently and consistently in parallel to the main meetings of the Council itself on critically important components of international peace and security, namely, counter- terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The efforts of the committees and their groups of experts are invaluable in keeping Member States abreast of new and emerging threats and in assisting in the implementation of the relevant instruments, including via technical assistance to those who request it, as well as capacity-building initiatives. I also wish to commend Indonesia, which will conclude its term on the Security Council at the same time as South Africa, for its excellent chairmanship of both the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the course of the past two years. Its skilled leadership and diplomacy, through the tireless efforts of Ambassador Djani and his team, have ensured that those important subsidiary bodies have effectively delivered on their mandates, ultimately contributing to keeping the world more peaceful and secure. We also wish to commend Tunisia, a fellow African country and valued partner in the configuration of the three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in the Security Council, on its chairing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). It is a source of pride to Africa that this important subsidiary body is being chaired so ably by an African country, and we are pleased to know that the continent's interests are in good hands. All three subsidiary bodies have made sterling efforts to ensure business continuity during these challenging times under the strains of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The counter-terrorism-related subsidiary bodies have also shown impressive agility in rapidly incorporating the impact of the pandemic into their analyses and assessments of the global terrorism threat, taking into consideration, inter alia, emerging conspiracy theories surrounding the pandemic and the disturbing possibility of attempts to weaponize the COVID-19 virus for the purposes of terrorism. The CTC, supported by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), has continued to pursue its active and busy agenda, developing innovative approaches to its core responsibilities such as temporary hybrid visits to Member States under assessment, virtual informal-informal meetings and a series of meetings held virtually on important thematic issues in the counter-terrorism domain. Those issues include maritime security, terror financing and, recently, the role of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in bringing terrorists to justice, including the effective use of battlefield or military-collected evidence. Likewise, the 1267 Sanctions Committee has remained equally active. It has been holding virtual meetings that have allowed for continued engagement on the excellent reports of its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which continues to track and report on the evolution of the threat of the groups it monitors, most notably the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Regrettably, its reports have confirmed a concerning increase in the establishment of ISIL affiliates and a commensurate increase in terrorist attacks on the African continent over the two years that we have served on the Security Council. Turning now to the 1540 Committee, allow me to state that resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery. It is evident that there are important links between the 1540 Committee and its resolution and the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations in ensuring that terrorist organizations never have access to the types of materials covered by resolution 1540 (2004). South Africa believes that the full and effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task, and we therefore value the collaborative role of the 1540 Committee in assisting States with their obligations under the resolution. With regard to the implementation of the mandate contained in resolution 1540 (2004), South Africa believes that the 1540 Committee should continue its awareness-raising activities to ensure that all States are aware of their obligations under the relevant resolutions. However, it remains the prerogative of States to decide which measures are effective, appropriate or necessary as per their national procedures, as set out in paragraph 2 of resolution 1540 (2004). To that end, South Africa welcomes the significant progress made towards the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we renew our commitment to working with the other members of the Committee to address the challenges that remain, particularly in terms of national implementation and assistance. We welcome the continued integration of the 1540 Committee's mandate into the work of international and regional organizations in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, which has provided a wealth of expertise and experience for States to draw upon in their implementation efforts. We valued the opportunity to engage with the 1540 Committee during our term on the Security Council in championing those positions, not only on our behalf but also on behalf of Africa, the developing world and all of humankind. We are confident that the international community is making great strides in ridding the world of the threat of weapons of mass destruction. Allow me to conclude by reiterating South Africa's steadfast condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and our strong commitment to supporting the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As always, we call for the further development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships, including with the African Union, in both critical areas of the international peace and security architecture maintained by the Security Council. We also emphasize the vital importance of ensuring that all of our counter-terrorism measures, across the board, are conducted in full accordance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law. We also reiterate our strong call for a holistic approach to counter-terrorism that seeks to engage with and address the root causes of radicalization and terrorism, not least underdevelopment and poverty. Of equal importance is the need to provide the requisite technical and capacity-building assistance to the Member States that request and require it in order to implement the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). That will ensure that the horrendous consequences of an attack employing a weapon of mass destruction are not visited upon the world as a result of the lack of resources or capacity to implement such an important resolution.
