Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): We are honoured to have you,
Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, in the presidency of the
Security Council on this important occasion. Our best
wishes are also addressed to the Permanent Representative
of Gabon, the President of the Security Council for this
month. We are convinced that his leadership of the Security
Council will be effective and successful. We would also
like to take this occasion to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Alain Dejammet of France for his effective
leadership as President of the Security Council for the
month of January.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
detailed report concerning the situation in the Central
African Republic and also for the report of the International
Committee for the Follow-up of the Bangui Agreements.
We would like in particular, Sir, to express our admiration
for the President of your country, Mr. Omar Bongo, and for
his efforts to establish peace and normalcy in the Central
African Republic.

We note with appreciation, from the reports that were
received by the Security Council recently, the positive role
of the Inter-African Force to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB). Its efforts have
resulted in the gradual restoration of peace and security to
Bangui since the signing of the Bangui Agreements. We
also note with satisfaction the third report of the Member
States participating in MISAB and the efforts for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements referred to in
that report.

The situation in the Central African Republic and the
peace process are still very fragile. Therefore we are
encouraged by the willingness of the States participating in
MISAB and the Central African Republic to extend
MISAB's mandate in order to complete its mission,
assuming that the United Nations peacekeeping operation
established after that will follow.

We attach the highest importance to the expeditious
implementation of the outstanding provisions of the
Bangui Agreements. In that connection, we recognize the
support provided by the United Nations Development
Programme, and we encourage it to continue with its
efforts.

The commitments to the implementation of the
provisions of the Bangui Agreements expressed by
Mr. Patasse, President of the Central African Republic, in
his letter to Secretary-General of 8 January 1998, are
essential and ought to be fulfilled expeditiously.

Slovenia also believes that further support by the
international community is necessary. We thus attach the
highest importance to the extension of MISAB until 16
March 1998 with the prospect of the peacekeeping
operation to be established by United Nations. We support
proposals to that effect made by the Secretary-General.

The political will of the international community and
the efforts of the affected country itself are essential for
the construction of stable peace and security, as well as
for the successful implementation of the structural-
adjustment programme.

Hence, we are encouraged by the fact that all
political parties in the Central African Republic have
expressed their intention to participate in the National
Reconciliation Conference in Bangui from 23 to 28
February 1998.

In conclusion, I wish to express the Slovenian
delegation's satisfaction that the draft resolution submitted
for action by the Security Council today addresses all the
relevant issues of the situation in the Central African
Republic at this stage. We congratulate the group of
African States which, under the leadership of Kenya,
prepared the draft resolution. We shall vote in favour of
the draft resolution.

