Mr. Melkert: It gives me great pleasure to speak
today before the Security Council. I would like to
congratulate the membership and the presidency of the
Security Council for keeping our collective attention
focused on the important issue of children and armed
conflict. In the United Nations system, we are
particularly grateful for the leadership of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

For the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and for the broader development community,
children and youth are significant partners in building
sustainable peace, preventing violent conflict and
contributing to development and the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals. Children and
youth are not just victims with special needs, but are
also powerful agents for reconciliation and positive
change. Many of our programmes and policies that
engage with the rights, protection and well-being of
war-affected children are increasingly premised on this
core belief.

Let me mention a few examples. In south Sudan,
UNDP and development partners have not only
supported disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes for under-age
persons, but also recently helped organize, in
collaboration with civic actors, a youth peace
conference. In Uganda, DDR programmes have made
special provisions for the return of young girls who
were abducted by rebels and who upon return to their
communities face the stigma attached to bearing
children out of rape or wedlock. In Sierra Leone,
UNDP has supported a national initiative - the
National Youth Councils - to give young persons the
skills to re-engage in the process of governance by
electing their councils, which have official decision-
making powers at both the district and the national
levels. In the Niger delta region of Nigeria, UNDP and
other partners are supporting efforts, in collaboration
with Shell Oil, to provide youth with viable
alternatives to armed violence. Instead of short-term
vocational training, this assistance involves district-
level youth centres, which provide youth with an
integrated package of skills, from business formation
to conflict management, as well as the long-term
accompaniment that they need to become self-reliant
entrepreneurs. In Port-au-Prince, a highly successful
employment-generation initiative has engaged youth in
civic activities, such as garbage pick-up and repair of
basic utilities, thus making them active agents for
reconstruction.

Those examples illustrate that we need to, and
can, engage young persons in conflict management and
peacebuilding initiatives, including the provision of
concrete skills for youth in accompanying their
communities in reviving agriculture, thus reducing the
pressure on urban areas, and training in leadership
skills.
Through the Mano River Union Peace Initiative,
UNDP is supporting efforts in Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea to implement those means. They include

the successful United Nations-led demobilization of
60,000 former combatants in Liberia, where UNDP and
other agencies have sought to focus attention on the
lasting reintegration of primarily young combatants,
especially girls and young women, into their
communities. At least half of the former combatants
have now been successfully reintegrated into their
communities. The challenge is to equip them with
longer-term opportunities for political and economic
empowerment, particularly through job creation.

We therefore must look critically at how we can
improve our efforts to make young people active
agents for peace. How often do we craft post-conflict
needs assessments or interim poverty reduction
strategies that place a particular emphasis on initiatives
for the political and economic empowerment of youth?
We often worry about the threat that large numbers of
unemployed youth pose to peace and security in fragile
situations, but how often do we make the effort to train
youth as election observers, or peace monitors in their
communities, or as a national network of mediators
that can help bring peace to their communities? As we
spend billions in reconstructing post-conflict societies,
we also need to invest more to establish national
service schemes that provide youth with life skills, as
they help to rebuild their communities.

In the same way that we have moved from
traditional approaches to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration to the so-called three Rs approach,
which prioritizes not just the disarming of former
combatants, but their return, rehabilitation and
sustainable reintegration into their home communities,
we need a fresh approach to young persons and armed
conflict. That new approach could be called the "three
Es", as in engage young persons in efforts to build
lasting peace, educate young persons with life skills
and not just perfunctory job training, and empower
young persons to develop and seize political and
economic opportunities so that they can transform their
countries and their societies.

In conclusion, I call upon Security Council
members, and indeed all Member States, to give the
United Nations presence on the ground - including
the United Nations country teams - the tools and
resources that they need to move towards working
more proactively with young persons in situations of
armed conflict, so that children and youth become full
partners in bringing their countries and societies closer
to peace and stability.
