Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): It is
indeed difficult for the international community to keep
pace with the successive crimes committed by Israel.
Before I deal with the question before the Council
today, I cannot but refer to the crimes committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the Rafah refugee camp
and around the city in the last few days. We had sent
two letters to you, Mr. President, about this matter.

The occupation forces killed eight Palestinians
and wounded more than 70. According to a report by
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), it
completely demolished nearly 120 houses, and 50
houses were partially destroyed. This led to the
evacuation of about 1,500 Palestinian citizens from
their homes. Rafah now looks as if it had been struck
by an earthquake. This is the result not of a natural
disaster, but of human evil - the evil of the Israeli
occupation.

Amnesty International has described the events
that took place in Rafah as a war crime. Nevertheless,
the occupation forces today returned once again to the
area and issued military orders to deport 15 Palestinian
citizens from their homes in the occupied West Bank to
the Gaza Strip. This is a grave violation of
international humanitarian law and of numerous
Security Council resolutions.

The Council and the international community
must deal with all these matters and other, similar ones,
at a subsequent stage.

Israel, the occupying Power, is committing an
immense war crime against the Palestinian people - a
crime that has the magnitude of a crime against
humanity - by building an expansionist wall in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. This has involved the confiscation and
destruction of thousands of dunums of Palestinian land;
the destruction of the livelihood of tens of thousands of
Palestinian civilians; and the illegal, de facto
annexation of extensive areas of occupied Palestinian
land.

With the continued building of this expansionist
wall - if the international community permits the
continuation of such a crime - Israel will have
effectively transferred large numbers of Palestinian
civilians and will have confined the rest of the
Palestinian people in several walled bantustans with
additional secondary walls inside them. It will, of
course, also have effectively destroyed the possibility
of the existence of an independent, sovereign State of
Palestine and the potential for achieving a political
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in line
with the two-State vision, based on Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and the armistice line of 1949,
known also as the line of 1967.

Israel, the occupying Power, began building the
first phase of its wall in the northwest areas of the
occupied West Bank in June 2002. For several months
it succeeded in avoiding any real response by the
international community to this action because of the
secrecy surrounding the planning of the wall and the
false impression it created about compliance, albeit
relative, with the armistice line. In addition, of course,
to the continuation of its bloody military campaign
against the Palestinian people and the continuation of
its media and political campaign against the Palestinian
Authority and leadership, different immediate priorities
were imposed on the Palestinian side and on the
international community.

Under this cover, Israel, the occupying Power,
actually concluded what it refers to as the first phase. It
declared, in April 2003, the completion of 27
kilometres of the expansionist wall and then, by the
end of the summer, the completion of the entire first
phase of about 150 kilometres.

The wall is composed of several components,
including, in some areas, concrete walls 8 metres high
with fortified guard towers and, in others, several
fences, including electrical ones, containing all or most
of the following: trenches, dirt paths, two-lane paved
patrol roads, barbed wire, sensors and "no-go" areas,
making the width of the wall anywhere from 70 to 100
metres. I hope that Council members will take a look at
the two pictures distributed with our statement today.
In its first phase, this expansionist wall has already
resulted in the confiscation and destruction of
approximately 15,000 dunums of land for just the
footprint of the wall alone, which also involved the
uprooting of more than 100,000 trees and the
destruction of 30 kilometres of water networks.
Moreover, because the wall has cut deep into
Palestinian territories - up to 6 kilometres from the
armistice line - it has isolated more than 105,000
dunams of Palestinian land. If the wall is not removed,
the fate of that land will be its illegal, de facto
annexation by Israel.

The confiscation of the Palestinian land on which
the wall has been built and of the Palestinian land
isolated between the wall and the armistice line has had
destructive effects on the lives of more than 200,000
Palestinian civilians in 65 villages and towns on both
sides of the wall. Among other things, it has partially
or completely separated those civilians from their land
and water resources and from the rest of the Palestinian
people. In addition, severe restrictions have been
placed on the movements of some of them. These
restrictions include the complete walling of the city of
Qalqilya and the control of entry and exit into and out
of the city through one gate, which is open for only a
few hours a day for the city's 40,000 inhabitants.

With regard to occupied East Jerusalem, Israel,
the occupying Power, has not contented itself with
isolating the city from the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory and with its ongoing attempts to
Judaize the city and change its demographic
composition. It has built a similar wall up to 8
kilometres long - which could be called the northern
wall of Jerusalem - which has resulted in the
confiscation of 800 dunams of Palestinian land from
the villages of Al-Ram, Kalandia and Kufr Aqab. All
of that is part of the plan for a Greater Jerusalem that
extends deep into the occupied territory to include the
illegal Israeli settlement of "Maale Adumim".

Similar plans are in store for the city of
Bethlehem. The city has been completely besieged,
especially since the building of a wall 15 kilometres
long north of the city - that is to say, south of
Jerusalem. The wall is totally suffocating the city in an
attempt to provide for the expansion of the Israeli
settlements south of occupied Jerusalem.

On 1 October, the Israeli Government adopted
plans for the expansionist wall's second phase, which
dwarfs the first phase in terms of the extent of the
illegal expansion and conquest of Palestinian land, as
well as other dangerous consequences in that regard.
The second phase is to begin with the establishment of
the wall east of the illegal Israeli settlements of "Ariel"
and "Kedumim", which will cut more than 22
kilometres into Palestinian land. The consequences of
that can only be imagined. Once again, I invite the
Council to review the map distributed with our
statement, which illustrates the first and second phases,
as well as the entire project. If the international
community allows the implementation of this phase of
such an Israeli crime, then the third and fourth phases
will follow, making the length of the wall more than
500 kilometres, at a cost of more than $1 billion. After
that, the establishment of the wall on the eastern side of
the Palestinian territory will begin in order to isolate it
from its international border with Jordan, allowing for
the conquest of the Jordan Valley and the completion of
the walls of the three or four bantustans on half of the
occupied Palestinian territory.

To restate the obvious, the expansionist wall of
conquest - in its parts and in its entirety - is illegal.
Its construction represents a violation of both Article 2,
paragraph 4, and Article 1, paragraph 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations. It violates the established
principle of international law that prohibits the
acquisition of territory by force. It violates article 47 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which bans any
annexation by the occupying Power of the whole or
part of the occupied territory. It also violates article 33
of the Geneva Convention, which prohibits collective
punishment of protected civilians. Finally, it represents
a grave breach of the Convention under article 147, as
it involves extensive destruction and appropriation of
property. All of that is in addition to its serious
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 242 (1967), cornerstone of the
peace process, and of the Oslo Agreements. Thus, it is
abundantly clear that the establishment of the
expansionist conquest wall by the occupying Power is a
war crime and, I reiterate, it is of the same magnitude
as a crime against humanity.

The establishment of this expansionist wall
complements Israeli settlement activities. Their nature
is the same in terms of the colonization, conquest and
annexation of the land. The wall is another war crime
that compounds the other war crime - the Israeli
settlement of our land - in addition, of course, to the
countless other war crimes committed by the
occupying Power against the Palestinian people.

Israel, the occupying Power, has illegally
transferred more than 400,000 Israeli settlers to the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, placing them in more than 200 settlements
built on more than 8 per cent of Palestinian land, in
addition to the land in their vicinities and the additional
land they attempt to control. It has established a
separate infrastructure and a complete network of roads
for those settlers, and it has enabled them to exploit
and abuse our natural resources, including our water,
and to terrorize our people. Now, with the building of
its expansionist wall, the occupying Power is
attempting to annex the Palestinian land on which half
those settlers are living, while leaving enough room for
the expansion of the rest of the settlements and, at the
same time, destroying the Palestinian national
existence.

Israel has done all of this despite the absolute
prohibition of such colonization under the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocol 1,
which defines such action as a war crime, as does the
Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court. Israel
has done all of this despite the fact that the Security
Council has reaffirmed the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention in 26 resolutions, which demand
that the occupying Power comply with its provisions
and some of which specifically demand the cessation of
settlement activities and declare the annexation of East
Jerusalem to be null and void.

How can these Israeli war crimes be appropriately
described? Is this classic colonization? We believe it is
worse than that. Is this a new apartheid system? We
believe it is worse than that. It is a combination that
has drawn upon those two ugly phenomena, amounting
to the lowest-level thinking of racist colonizers with
regard to achieving expansion, colonization and
negation of the indigenous people's national existence,
which are all in grave breach of fundamental laws and
values of the United Nations Charter, international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Indeed, the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Commission, Professor John Duggard, in his
report to the Commission on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, stated, inter alia, the following with regard
to the issue of the wall:

"Like the settlements it seeks to protect, the
Wall is manifestly intended to create facts on the
ground. It may lack an act of annexation, as
occurred in the case of East Jerusalem and the
Golan Heights. But its effect is the same:
annexation. Annexation of this kind goes by
another name in international law - conquest."
(E/CN.4/2004/6, para. 14)

He goes on to say:

"The right to self-determination is closely
linked to the notion of territorial sovereignty. A
people can only exercise the right of self-
determination within a territory. The amputation
of Palestinian territory by the Wall seriously
interferes with the right of self-determination of
the Palestinian people as it substantially reduces
the size of the self-determination unit (already small) within which that right is to be exercised."
(Ibid., para. 15)

Israel claims that it is building the expansionist
wall as a security measure to prevent suicide bombings.
This is not only incredible and illogical, but a
repetition of the same lie and pretext that has been used
by Israel over the years to commit all of its crimes
against the Palestinian people, particularly its
campaign of expansionism and settler colonialism.

Israel could build walls along the armistice line
and could raise them to 80 metres instead of eight. It is
true that this would be a bad thing in terms of
coexistence between the two sides, but no one could
say it is illegal. Indeed, Israel did that to some extent
around the occupied Gaza Strip. If this were now the
case with regard to the occupied West Bank and the
armistice line, then it would be possible to believe that
Israel is actually building the wall as a security
measure.

It is imperative to recall in this regard that in the
past Israel repeatedly used the same meaningless
security pretext before the Security Council to justify
its illegal settlement activities throughout the territories
it has occupied since 1967.

Indeed, over the years the Council has repeatedly
witnessed, as can be seen in the record, the actual
colonization of our land while the Israeli side
continued to repeat the argument that this was all just
"a security measure". The transfer of 400,000 settlers
was described before this Council as "a security
measure". In reality, the entire issue has revolved
around one thing, land, and Israel's plans to illegally
expand and conquer more land at the expense of the
rights of the Palestinian people.

In the war of 1948, immediately after declaring
its existence, Israel conquered almost half the territory
allotted by the United Nations to the Arab State when
the United Nations partitioned Mandated Palestine in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
of 29 November 1947, under the pretext that it was
attacked by the Arab States. In the war of 1967, Israel
occupied the remaining half allotted to the Arab State,
which represents less than one-quarter of Mandated
Palestine, and has refused to withdraw for more than
36 years.

When the Palestinian leadership made the
unparalleled historic concession to accept coexistence
between the two States, with Palestine established only
on the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, Israel
continued instead to colonize our land and to illegally
transfer its nationals to that land.

Even after the start of the Oslo peace process, the
occupying Power continued in this regard, actually
doubling the number of settlers since then, and it has
continued since the launching of the road map.

Israel is doing all of this when it has not even
solved the issue of the ownership of land in Israel
itself. There are 5.5 million dunums of land privately
owned by Palestinian refugees. I speak here
specifically about private ownership and not public
ownership, all of which was accounted for and
documented by the United Nations Conciliation
Commission for Palestine (UNCCP), composed of the
United States, France and Turkey. In fact the UNCCP
record was recently modernized in a way that has made
it available for practical use. These 5.5 million dunums
constitute almost half of the land of Israel if we
exclude the Negev desert.

Apparently, for Israel taking over these lands
instead of restoring them to their rightful Palestinian
owners was not enough. It has actually moved to
colonize the land left to the Palestinian people in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza
Strip, once more as part of the biggest war crime of its
kind in our contemporary history.

Absolute madness and compounded crimes, the
arrogance of power and the absence of morality, have
all been sustained by illegitimate protection, by a huge
influx of funds and unlimited armaments, all provided
by basically one source.

The Security Council clearly bears responsibility
for the prevailing situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. In addition, the
Security Council, the Middle East region as a whole,
and the entire international community are now
approaching the moment of truth. Either Israel, the
occupying Power, will be allowed to continue all that it
has been doing illegally - that is, colonizing our land,
conquering it and denying the existence of the State of
Palestine, with all the consequent grave results, not
least the demise of the two-State solution and the
emergence of a more radical solution or the
continuation of a perpetual conflict - or Israel is to be
stopped. Settlements must be stopped. The wall must
be stopped. And both must be reversed. That will
rescue the potential for achieving peace and a final
settlement based on the existence of two States, Israel
and Palestine.
Accordingly, the meeting of the Council and its
decision this time have strategic and historic
importance. We hope that the Council will rise to the
level of this challenge.

