Mr. Ruiz Massieu: It is an honour to present
to the Council the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia (8/2019/265) and to update the Council
on developments since its publication. It is a pleasure
to do so in the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo,
and the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila, who are both vital
partners of the Verification Mission.

I also welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Rosa Emilia Salamanca, representative of
Colombian civil society, which plays a critical role in
the peace process.

As the Council has acknowledged, Colombia's
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and
the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace is a
historic achievement. It has helped to end decades of
armed conflict and provides an example to countries
around the world that negotiated solutions are possible.
At the same time, we know that it is during the long
and often difficult process of implementing such
agreements that peace is truly forged. Today, a diverse
array of Colombian institutions, as well as community
leaders, rural families, former combatants and members
of civil society, remain actively engaged in the process
and count on the international community's continuing
support and engagement.

Colombia's final peace agreement is a broad
agreement that includes interconnected commitments
to ending the conflict as well as to foster rural reform,
political participation, the reintegration of former
combatants, security for conflict-affected communities,
illicit-crop substitution and transitional justice. It
is therefore key to implement the agreement in a
comprehensive, integrated manner so as to ensure that
all areas of its implementation are adequately resourced.

Many of the connections across those areas of the
peace agreement were evident last week on a visit,
during which I had the honour of joining President
Duque at a territorial area for the training and
reintegration in Icononzo, in the mountains of central
Colombia, where 200 former combatants and their
families live. That was his third Visit to a territorial
area. At that time, the former combatants conveyed a
range of concerns, including Government support for
their productive projects, security and uncertainty
regarding their legal guarantees and with respect to the
status of 24 territorial areas after the current legal status
expires on 15 August. President Duque's message on
that visit was to reassure the former combatants about
the Government's commitment to their reintegration.
Those are valuable opportunities to sustain dialogue and
address the continuing insecurity and uncertainty that
are highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General.
Additional visits by members ofthe peace commissions
of both houses of Congress to the territorial areas have
also helped convey the commitment and engagement of
Colombian institutions in the peace process.

With regard to reintegration, individual and
collective projects for 1.774 former members of the
Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP), including 520 women, have
now been approved. A recent census completed by the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization identified
more than 10,500 former FARC-EP members within the
reintegration process. Nearly two years after they laid
down their arms, a critical challenge is to maintain their
optimism in the face of continued uncertainties about
their future. In that respect, I respectfully encourage
the Government to accelerate the approval of more
projects and the prompt disbursement of funds, as well
as the implementation of a gender-sensitive approach
and timely decisions on access to land.

Former combatants are undertaking productive
initiatives as diverse as establishing bakeries and
restaurants, producing clothing, shoes and agricultural
products, and opening tourism projects in areas of the
country that were previously inaccessible owing to the
conflict. For most of those projects, a key challenge
remains access to markets. The Government, together
with the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun
(FARC), regional authorities, the private sector, the
United Nations country team and, of course, the
Mission continue to facilitate opportunities to connect
the markets to products and services offered by former
combatants, in partnership with local communities.

In its latest press statement on Colombia (SC/13676),
the Council encouraged timely decisions concerning
the future of the territorial areas, once their current
legal status expires, to help provide greater certainty
and reinforce the confidence of former FARC-EP
members in the peace process. I welcome the recent
efforts of the Government to formulate proposals for
each of those territorial areas. It is also important to
ensure an inclusive discussion on those proposals that
involve former combatants, as well as local authorities.
Those decisions should be taken and communicated
to the former combatants as soon as possible so as to
ensure a smooth transition. As always, the Mission
stands ready to support the Government and the FARC
in the transition process.

With regard to security guarantees, the killing of
community leaders, human rights defenders and former
FARC-EP combatants continues and remains a grave
concern. The deployment of Colombian military and
police near the territorial areas has been and remains
critical, but violent competition among illegal armed
groups for territorial control in areas outside those
security perimeters continues to threaten the security
of former combatants and communities, as well as to
undercut the overall peace-implementation efforts.
During a recent visit to Tumaco on the Pacific
coast, I had a sobering discussion with a group of
courageous Afro-Colombian social and community
leaders, several of whom are under direct threat from
armed groups and criminal organizations. All of them
have friends, family members or colleagues who
have been assassinated, displaced or threatened by
criminal elements, including groups involved in illicit
economies. They shared with me specific proposals and
ideas for ensuring their safety that should be taken into
account in devising local protection strategies.

In that regard, I welcome the Government's
efforts to hold sessions of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees in the territories. One such session
actually is being held today in Cucuta. I encourage the
Government to ensure that those sessions translate
into prompt decisions and concrete actions tailored
to local dynamics. The leaders with whom I talked
in Tumaco were also emphatic that security in the
territories demands an integrated and coordinated
presence of State authorities - civilian institutions
and security forces alike. This is a message that I have
heard consistently across the country. In that regard, I
welcome the approval of the 16 development plans, with
a territorial focus that will benefit 170 municipalities
affected by the armed conflict, and I encourage the
Government to devote the resources necessary to ensure
the implementation of those plans. More than 200,000
community members contributed to the formulation of
those plans, which is a positive example of effective
dialogue between communities and State institutions.

Recent weeks have been dominated by divisive
debates regarding transitional justice, which is a
contentious issue in most peace processes. Last month,
President Duque objected to six articles of the draft
statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Following avote against those objections in the Chamber
of Representatives earlier this week, consideration
of the objections is still pending in the Senate. The
Secretary-General has called for prompt action by all
concerned to ensure that a statutory law consistent with
the peace agreement is adopted as soon as possible.
That statutory law is the last missing element of the
legal framework for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and is needed to ensure that the institution can operate
with the necessary independence and autonomy. The
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, under the leadership of
its President, Patricia Linares, continues to advance
its work with impressive results. It has now initiated
seven large cases that are examining significant
violations affecting 820,000 victims. Moreover, close
to 9,700 former FARC-EP members and almost 2,000
individuals from the armed forces have subjected
themselves to its authority.

President Duque has also announced his intention
to propose three constitutional reforms to the articles
underpinning the transitional justice framework of
the peace agreement. In introducing the first of those
proposals, the Government assured that they would
be applicable in the future. Indeed, no such initiatives
should be applied in a retroactive manner to those
who laid down their arms in good faith and on the
strength of commitments made under the agreement.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the principle of
non-retroactivity is critical in preserving confidence in
the process going forward. In a climate of uncertainty
for Victims, those subject to the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, FARC members awaiting funding for social
and economic reintegration and communities that have
suffered from the conflict, the greatest uncertainty
would be to reopen core elements of the underlying
peace agreement itself.

As the peace process continues, it is fundamental
to bring Colombians together and to heal divisions,
just as President Duque signalled on the day of his
inauguration. The path to consolidating peace requires
consensus, and consensus can be achieved only
through dialogue. I strongly encourage all such efforts
in that regard. I am encouraged that at the local level
Colombians throughout the country are engaging with
one another across ideological lines to embrace the
opportunities provided by the peace process. In the
territorial areas I have visited, I have seen soldiers
and former combatants playing football and living and
working together, when only a few years ago they were
fighting against each other. A few weeks ago in Cali,
Colombia's third-largest city, the Mission participated
in the launch of the Municipal Pact for Peace, Life and
Reconciliation, which was signed by all political forces
in the city, as well as civil society. In the Mission's
ongoing work on youth, peace and security, we have
been inspired by young Colombian men and women
coming together across political, geographic and class
divides to embrace reconciliation and support former
combatants in their reintegration into society.

In those and all their efforts to consolidate peace,
Colombians, as always, can count on the unwavering
support of the United Nations. The Security Council's
firm and unified support to the peace process remains
as crucial as ever.
