Portugal aligns itself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European Union (see annex 25) and would like to add some remarks. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was issued in 1948, the same year in which the first United Nations peacekeeping mission was established. Despite that auspicious coincidence, it took decades before the creation of the first human rights component of a peace operation. Since then, human rights components have played an essential role in promoting and protecting human rights, fighting against impunity for gross human rights violations and abuses, and laying the foundation for long-lasting, sustainable peace. With that in mind, during our most recent presence as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, Portugal highlighted the close link between concrete actions to enhance peace and security and the protection of human rights. Human rights should be taken into account at all stages of conflict, from addressing human rights violations and abuses as one of the root causes of conflicts to protecting civilians during the deployment of operations, as well as in the pursuit of political solutions. In that respect, we highlight the importance of collaborating with civil society, especially regarding the reporting of human rights violations. Women are fundamental drivers of change. It is therefore essential, as set in resolution 1325 (2000), to include women in conflict-prevention, management and resolution mechanisms, as well as in the promotion of peace and security. This year, we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of that resolution, which is an opportunity to increase our efforts to further integrate a gender perspective into peacekeeping. The protection of children in armed conflict is also pivotal. With regard to the recruitment or use of children in conflict, we would like to point out the need to work towards the implementation of the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Moreover, we would like to highlight the particularly long-lasting effect of attacks on schools, which put at risk the future of entire generations. Safeguarding educational opportunities is therefore crucial to preventing child recruitment, as well as early and forced marriages. Specialized and dedicated personnel in peace operations is fundamental to mainstreaming women and peace and security and children and armed conflict considerations into the fulfilment of all mandated tasks. Moreover, all elements - civil, police and military personnel - of peace operations should pool efforts and resources, including through joint training. The coronavirus disease aggravates the situation of millions of people already affected by the scourge of war. In that context, we applaud the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We would also like to point out our responsibilities as troop- and police- contributing countries with regard to our performance in the fulfilment of protection- of-civilians and human rights mandates. The Portuguese Quick Reaction Force in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic operates without caveats and has an important role in protecting civilians, in accordance with the Mission's mandate of preventing massacres against civilians. Moreover, our police forces are also involved in joint patrols and capacity- building activities, drawing attention to human rights and gender issues, as well as cautioning local police forces about the need of a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse. Those activities build on the importance we attach to predeployment training. Portuguese military and police personnel meet the highest standards of training, with a strong emphasis on international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as well as the protection of civilians, the United Nations code of conduct and protection from sexual exploitation and abuse. To conclude, as the Secretary-General has pointed out in The Highest Aspiration: A Call to Action for Human Rights, the best form of protection from different threats is to avert such threats in the first place. With that in mind, we call for the increased participation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the work of the Security Council. This would improve the Council's early warning work and reinforce the prevention agenda.
