Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be in the Chamber
today to introduce the latest report of the Secretary-

General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/549).

I have four key messages to share with the Security
Council today with regard to the developments in West
Africa and the Sahel. First, since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8442), further progress has been made in
democratic consolidation in West Africa and the Sahel.
Secondly, such progress in the democratic space has
not been linear or without complications; it has been
the result of contestations that have sometimes been
palpably antagonistic. Thirdly, democratic progress has
been delayed and complicated and, on occasion, almost
negated by a rapid expansion of violent extremism in the
region. My fourth and final message, in recognition of
the progress made and despite continuing challenges, is
one of hope for the future and confidence in the Council's
support as we work together towards sustaining peace
and preventing conflict in West Africa and the Sahel.

Indeed, we should first of all recognize and
celebrate the progress made in the consolidation of
democracy in the region, including through peaceful
transfers of power. In the past six months, presidential
elections were organized in Nigeria, on 23 February;
Senegal, on 24 February; and Mauritania, on 22 June.
Ahead of those fiercely contested elections, I met all
of the presidential candidates and conveyed to them,
alongside regional and international partners, the
need to uphold high electoral standards in the region.
In Nigeria, my Office also organized, jointly with the
National Peace Committee and other partners, several
peace forums to appease tensions in electoral hotspots.

Beyond successful elections, the past six months
also saw the opening of political dialogue between the
ruling Governments and the oppositions in Burkina
Faso and Benin, while in Ghana political stakeholders
started a dialogue on vigilante groups. In Liberia, on
7 July, the Government indicated its respect for the right
to peaceful protests and agreed to begin a dialogue on
strengthening the economy.

However, pre- and post-electoral periods continue
to be characterized by tensions, antagonistic contests
and disputes, including around non-consensual
constitutional amendments. Addressing such potential
sources of conflict remains a major priority ahead of the
upcoming cycle of high-stake presidential elections in
West Africa, scheduled for next year in Burkina Faso,
Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, the Niger and Togo.
Furthermore, tensions around electoral periods derail
the attention that must be given to the pressing need to
address questions of development and inequality.

My second message is therefore that the journey
of democratic consolidation in the region has not
been easy and cannot be taken for granted. Several
countries in the region continue to struggle with human
rights challenges. I am particularly concerned about
the instrumentalization of the judiciary for political
objectives in some cases and a predominant sentiment
of impunity for Violent crimes, which undermine
respect for the rule of law. In this sense, I commend
the exemplary path chosen by the Gambia, in which the
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission and
the National Human Rights Commission have embarked
on their challenging tasks in a credible manner that has
contributed to transitional justice and social cohesion.

While the region saw a slight increase in the number
of female members of Government - and the first-
ever appointment of a female speaker of parliament,
in Togo - women's representation remains a matter
of concern. A persistently high level of inequality
continues to have negative impacts on women, making
them prone to gender-based Violence. The passing of
legislation in Cabo Verde classifying gender-based
Violence as a priority prevention crime must be
applauded in this context.

Thirdly, since my last briefing, the region of West
Africa and the Sahel has witnessed an even more Visible
and significant rise in violent attacks directly related
to violent extremism. The security situation remains
volatile in the entire Sahel region, where escalating
Violence and insecurity have sparked an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, leaving a total of 5.1 million
Burkinabes, Nigeriens and Malians in need. Notably,
the past six months have shown a rapid deterioration
of the security situation in Burkina Faso. A total of
226 security incidents contributed to an acceleration
in the displacement of persons, rising from 47,000 in
December 2018 to 220,000 internally displaced and
more than 25,000 refugees in June, representing an
almost five-fold increase. The north and east of the
country remain the areas most affected by recurrent
attacks of terrorist and armed groups and an increase
in intercommunal violence, with the involvement
of seemingly uncontrolled self-defence groups.
Furthermore, terrorist groups are directly targeting
schools and forcing health centres to close. Today,
a total of 2,024 schools and 37 health centres remain
closed in Burkina Faso as a direct result of the crisis.

Amid the rapid escalation, Secretary-General
Guterres has requested a significant scaling-up of
the United Nations response and has put in place an
emergency task force in Burkina Faso. The task force
also builds on the findings of an inter-agency mission
that I was privileged to lead to Burkina Faso in February
and which defined a multisectoral response that would
address immediate needs and the structural causes of
insecurity. A humanitarian response plan with a budget
of $100 million has been launched and is currently
being revised upwards to accommodate rising needs.

In the Lake Chad basin, attacks by Boko Haram
terrorists and splinter groups continue to threaten the
peace and stability of the region. In the first half of
this year, 30 suicide bombings were reported, a 70 per
cent reduction on the number from last year, owing
to the efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
However, the period under review also witnessed the
deadliest attack to date on the Chadian military, where
Boko Haram fighters killed 23 soldiers in Dangdala.
The terrorist group also attempted to launch a rocket
attack on the airport in Diffa and led seemingly more
sophisticated terrorist attacks in other parts of the Niger.
As of June, at least 147 civilians have been kidnapped
in the Diffa region, the highest number since 2015.

In View of this rapid escalation, including growing
linkages among terrorism, organized crime and
intercommunity clashes in the region, the Heads of
State of the Economic Community of West African
States decided, during their summit on 29 June, to hold
an extraordinary summit on terrorism in Ouagadougou,
now scheduled for 14 September. The summit will
aim to discuss a concerted security approach for
West Africa and the Sahel and represents a unique
window of opportunity to harmonize the fragmented
security arrangements.

While the implementation of humanitarian response
plans has seen laudable support, I urge Governments
and partners to redouble their efforts aimed at defining
a concerted approach to preventing a further expansion
of the terrorist threat and fostering support for greatly
needed medium- and long-term stabilization measures,
in line with the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel (UNISS). In this regard, the second meeting
of the Lake Chad Basin Governors Forum, which took
place only last week, on 17 and 18 July, in Niamey, once
again stressed the importance of holistic approaches
for effectively tackling instability in West Africa and
the Sahel and successfully launched a stabilization
facility for the Lake Chad region. Through inclusive
approaches based on national ownership and in line with
UNISS, we must continue to work harder at addressing
governance deficits, extreme poverty and the lack of
development that feed and sustain armed violence and
extremism. Enhanced support for the implementation
of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad Basin Region and the Priority Investment
Programme of the Group of Five for the Sahel, together
with a concerted effort to support national development
plans, remains essential for boosting development of
the region and exploring its full potential.

This is my fourth and final message of hope:
with support from the Council and guided by the
inclusive national ownership of the countries of
the region - and the region as a whole - I am
confident that the consolidation of democracy can
be further strengthened and the activities of violent
extremists better addressed and countered through
preventive measures.

In conclusion, let me assure Council members of
the continued commitment of UNOWAS to working
with all stakeholders in the region to promote peace and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. I trust that we
can continue to rely on the support of the Council. In
this regard, I am looking forward to the strategic review
of UNOWAS, which should contribute immensely to
responding to our quest for adequate resources that
enable us to sharpen our tools for preventing conflicts
and sustaining peace. I thank Council members for their
support and look forward to working further with them.

