Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to start by congratulating your country,
Sir, on its election as non-permament member of
the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January.

This morning we addressed two identical letters
to the Secretary-General and to the President of
the General Assembly concerning the emergency
humanitarian work undertaken by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

It is well known that one of the essential principles
of humanitarian assistance is the avoidance of all
politicization and double standards. This has been
clearly established in the United Nations guidelines on
the provision of humanitarian emergency assistance,
as provided in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Unfortunately, some use humanitarian issues to further
their political agendas. The problem is that this runs
counter to the guiding principles of United Nations
humanitarian action, and does not serve humanitarian
action as a whole. Therefore, such action is immoral,
and the objective is not to assist those in need, but
rather to exploit their suffering to achieve specific
political goals. Those who wish to help the people in
Syria must first tackle the deeply rooted causes of the
problem - for example, terrorism fuelled from abroad.
The humanitarian disaster emerged in several parts of
Syria only after terrorist groups entered the country.
Before that, individuals enjoyed a safe, secure and
dignified life.

Humanitarian assistance requires full transparency,
coordination and cooperation with the Syrian
Government, rather than unnecessary criticism. I
wish to remind members that the Syrian Government
has deployed all its efforts and resources to provide
assistance to all those suffering, without discrminiation.
The Syrian Government has cooperated with the
United Nations, and we have done so in fact, not just
words. We need help in bearing this burden. The
Syrian Government and the United Nations thus far
have implemented six humanitarian assistance plans,
by which assistance has been provided to millions of
Syrians. It must be recalled that the Syrian Government
continues to bear the major burden of this emergency
assistance because of the insufficient financing for the
humanitarian assistance plans.

Some attempt to say that access of humanitarian
assistance to troubled areas can be achieved by
accepting all demands of the United Nations and
that aid would then be delivered, and that the Syrian
Government should simply agree as if were nothing
more than an administrative procedure. This is a
simplistic way of seeing things and is not in keeping
with the facts on the ground. There are a number of
considerations that cannot be ignored. We are referring
to providing assistance to dangerous areas, where armed
terrorist organizations are active, including terrorist
organizations that have been listed by the Security
Council, and in areas neighbouring those areas. These
terrorist groups carry out terrorist acts, and military
actions are being undertaken to combat them. All
precautions need to be taken to ensure the safety and
the security of those active in the humanitarian field
and that the routes they use are safe.
Furthermore, humanitarian assistance must be
delivered to individuals, and should not fall into the
hands of terrorists, as has happened in the past. For
example, terrorists seized humanitarian assistance sent
to the inhabitants of Madaya; they looted their houses,
seized the aid and then exploited the inhabitants by
selling the food they had looted at exhorbitant prices,
creating a source of financing of terrorism. That
was what the whole world heard yesterday from the
inhabitants of Madaya in their testimony given to
representatives of international organizations.

The Syrian Government is the Government that is
most mindful of its people. No one can claim to care
more about our people than we do, no other country,
particularly when it comes to providing assistance to
dangerous areas under the control of armed terrorist
groups. The Syrian Government is making real, concrete
efforts in this context. These are notjust empty words. I
recall by way of example, and the list is not exhaustive,
a single case regarding the city of Madaya, this city
that some have used to try to manipulate international
public opinion. The reality is that a great many
people are not aware that the Government of Syria, in
cooperation with the United Nations and international
organizations, enabled the provision of three shipments
of humanitarian aid to Madaya, starting on 18 October
2015. The last shipment arrived yesterday, 14 January
2016.

The Syrian Government addressed a note to the
Resident Coordinator dated 27 December 2015 to ensure
that humanitarian aid would be delivered to Madaya, to
which we have not had a reponse. I quote here the note
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs for Syrians Abroad:

"It is our honour to request your august office to do
everything possible as rapidly as possible to ensure,
in parallel with the evacuation of those injured in
these areas, that medical, food and fuel supplies are
deliverd on 29 December 2015 as a priority, and
that food assistance be delivered three days later in
cities such as Madaya, Kafraya and Fu'ah, where
living conditions are very difficult".

The Syrian Government still has not received a response
to its request. The assistance provided during the last
shipment consisted of 89 truckloads.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic areas identified by the United Nations as hard-to-rcaeh
would like once again to reiterate its commitment to or under siege.
cooperate with the Organization and the Office of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to provide humanitarian assistance to affected civilians
in all parts of Syria, without discrimination, including The meeting rase at 5pm.

