Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
our briefers, Special Envoy Kafando and Ambassador
Lauber, for their insights and efforts made so far to
continue negotiations between the Government of
Burundi and all stakeholders in the country.

We welcome the recent appointment of Mr. Kafando
and believe that he will do everything in his power to
ease the situation in the country. As we can see from
his briefing, during his short but very productive
visit, Mr. Kafando was able to establish good working
relations with the Government of Burundi and
other actors in the country, as well as with regional
organizations.

Kazakhstan supports the East African Community-
led inter-Burundian dialogue and the work of the
Tripartite Joint Commission. We are concerned by slow
progress in the political negotiations. We reiterate our
call to all parties in the country to actively participate
in the dialogue with no preconditions. That process
must be supported and reinforced by the regional
organizations, including the African Union (AU) and
its mission in Burundi, which monitors the overall
situation.

We also support the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a great platform for
dialogue between Burundi and all international
partners. We welcome the outcome ofthe socioeconomic
retreat, which was recently held in Bujumbura. We
urge the Burundian Government to sign the relevant
memorandum ofunderstanding with the African Union
for the deployment of the rest of the 200 AU military
and human rights observers. We also commend the
European Union for supporting the deployment of 48
AU observers.

The full implementation of the provisions of the
Arusha Agreement is vital to prevent a further escalation
of violence and maintain peace and security in the
country. It is our hope that all parties in the country
will start to implement the Arusha Agreement. Another
round of negotiations will facilitate that process.

Another problem that concerns us is the worsening
humanitarian situation, which is affecting the entire
Great Lakes region. Its causes are not just political;
there are other reasons, such as a poor macroeconomic
situation and drought. In that connection we call upon
the international community to continue supporting
all of the regional States that are hosting Burundian
refugees. Humanitarian actors must further scale up
their response in order to meet the needs of nearly
3 million people in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to express our firm
belief that the political sovereignty and integrity of
Burundi must be preserved in strict compliance with
the principles of international law. Also, it is critically
important that the Government of Burundi maintains
a political dialogue with the United Nations and its
agencies, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and all other
members of the international community.

