Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): As Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Feltman noted in his
statement, this is the sixth time since 1 March that
we have met to address the crisis caused by Russian
aggression against Ukraine. In the meantime, the
Heads of State of the European Union have condemned
the unprovoked violation of Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity by the Russian Federation, and
called on the later to immediately withdraw its armed
forces to their areas of permanent stationing. That call
was reinforced by a similar statement issued by the
leaders of the Group of Seven and the Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) to stress the illegality of the referendum in
Crimea and call on all actors to refrain from supporting
unconstitutional activities.

As a leader and a patriot, ex-President Yanukovych
should have put Ukraine first and done everything
within his power to normalize the situation. He should
have led the implementation of the oft-cited 21 February
agreement, which he signed very unwillingly and
which Russia refused to co-sign, as eloquently pointed
out by the French Ambassador. Instead, Yanukovych
abandoned his country and fled, exposing it to
partition and annexation. Under those circumstances,
the Ukrainian Rada, whose legitimacy have never and
cannot be challenged, appointed a new Prime Minister
in accordance with the Ukrainian Constitution and
by the overwhelming majority of votes, enabling
the formation of a unity Government that is fully
representative of the ethnic and geographical diversity
of the Ukrainian population, as was also pointed out by
our colleague from the United States.

We commend the incredible restraint and moral
fortitude of the Ukrainian Government, its people and
its military in the face of the continuous escalation of
provocations and a massive propaganda onslaught. It
speaks volumes on the Prime Minister's readiness and
commitment to pursuing the peaceful resolution of the
current crisis.

Never has a referendum been set up so hurriedly,
and even that very short time frame was out still shorter
in a clear violation of Ukraine's Constitution and also
the constitution of Crimea, which unambiguously states
that Crimea shall be an integral part of Ukraine. The
original inhabitants of Ukraine, Crimean Tatars, have
spoken loudly against the referendum and Crimea's
secession and have reaffirmed their desire to see their
homeland as part of Ukraine. But their voices will not
count, nor will the voices of many other ethnic groups
inhabiting Crimea, including Ukrainians themselves,
because the referendum is specifically designed to
endorse secession. There is simply no other option but
to say yes to partition.

Notably, in the meantime, Russia is fast-tracking
legislation that will facilitate the annexation of
Crimea - or any piece of any other country, for that
matter. One can only imagine the shudders that is
sending across the entire region, whose memories of
the recent Soviet occupation and invasions are still very
much alive.

As a signatory of the 1991 Almaty Declaration,
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, the 1997 Agreement
between Russia and Ukraine on the Status of Conditions
of the Presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet on the
Territory of Ukraine and the 1997 Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership between Ukraine and
the Russian Federation, the Russian Federation has
repeatedly recognized Ukraine's territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Furthermore, as a signatory of the
Budapest Memorandum, it has undertaken the obligation
to protect and guarantee Ukraine's sovereignty,
inviolability and territorial integrity, in exchange - as
has been pointed out - for Ukraine's relinquishing its
nuclear-weapons arsenal.

The blatant breach of bilateral obligations and
international law by Russia is undermining the very
foundation of international law as well as regional and
international peace and security. We strongly call on all
States to make it clear that they will not recognize the
referendum and its outcome.

Nothing that has been said, including by the
Russian Ambassador - nothing on Earth - warrants
orjustifies Russia's actions and those ofthe pro-Russian
forces in Crimea. Whatever concerns - legitimate
concerns - may be raised about the conditions of
ethno-linguistic minorities, they could have and still
can be readily addressed through existing regional
and international instruments. The Council of Europe
has plenty of mechanisms to that effect and is ready to
engage; so do the OSCE and the United Nations. Let
those organizations do theirjob, just as they have done
with success on multiple other occasions, especially
since Ukraine has repeatedly invited monitors and
representatives of those organizations and declared
its openness to be visited, assessed, inspected and
monitored. Ukraine has nothing to hide.

But its opponents do. Why else would certain
forces try to do everything in their power to isolate
Crimea before the illegal referendum? The pro-Russian
forces propped up by the ever-growing Russian military
presence on the peninsula have repeatedly denied
access to OSCE teams, to Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovic' and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Robert Serry, who was harassed and denied
entry twice. Crimean Ukrainians are attacked and
accused of being occupiers in their own country,
taunted en masse as fascists and Nazis, simply for no
other reason but being Ukrainian.

Crimean airspace is closed to flights, except
those from and to Moscow. Waterways are blocked,
electricity and supplies to Ukrainian forces cut. Ships
are sunk at water entries to the peninsula, trenches dug
and, as reported by the International Campaign to Ban
Landmines, landmines are being laid. Land access is
monitored by so-called unidentified Russian-speaking
men who are armed to the teeth. Crimea's information
space has also been blocked. All Ukrainian information
channels and the local Tatar network have been clamped
down and replaced by Russian channels transmitting
continuous anti-Ukrainian propaganda. Journalists
have been threatened, assaulted and kidnapped.

It is in that context of Crimea's isolation, gunpoint
tactics by pro-Russian forces and extreme levels of
anti-Ukrainian hysteria that the illegal referendum is
to take place this coming weekend, paving the way to
Crimea's annexation by Russia. The crisis is deeply
troubling. Besides violating the underlying principles
of international law and of a country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, it also has a highly explosive
human dimension. The anti-Ukrainian propaganda and
a barrage of lies risk unleashing the most dangerous
demons of hatred, with potentially devastating
consequences for the region and international security
as a whole.

We call on the Russian Federation to stop the
warmongering and its dangerous propaganda campaign
aimed at its neighbours, and to use whatever little
time remains for open dialogue and the participation
of international mediation. While it is still possible,
we appeal to the Russian Federation to withdraw its
troops to their regular locations, accept the primacy
of international law and reaffirm its respect for
the Charter of the United Nations, engage in direct
dialogue with Kyiv without any further delay, revert
to existing mechanisms of crisis resolution, and accept
the initiatives of the United Nations, the OSCE, the
Council of Europe and whatever other initiatives there
are that are aimed at preventing further escalation and
launching international monitoring mechanisms.

The solution to the crisis in Ukraine can be
based only on the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of the country, as well as on strict
adherence to international law and international
standards of behaviour. If this chance is missed, the
consequences for the international order are difficult
to assess, and the full responsibility for them will be
Russia's to bear. The window of opportunity, as our
British colleague has referred to it, is still open. It is up
to Russia to keep it open, or to shut it in the face of the
international community.

