Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to express my appreciation to the United
Kingdom presidency for convening today's important
debate. My thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the co-founder of the
PAIMAN Alumni Trust for their informative briefings.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

In a world where disputes and conflicts are
increasingly complicated and are having ever
more devastating effects on the humanitarian and
development fronts, it is crucial that the United Nations
continue to play a primary and central role in preventing
conflicts, settling disputes by peaceful means and
assisting countries in overcoming the consequences
of those conflicts. Viet Nam therefore fully supports
the Secretary-General's call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace, including promoting the use of mediation
throughout the cycle of a conflict. In order to best
strengthen and support those efforts, I would like to
emphasize the following.

First, the United Nations should make full use of
the available tools of preventive diplomacy and its good
offices and mediation, including through the Secretary-
General's special envoys and political missions, in order
to help strengthen capacity-building for mediators and
opposing parties on the ground. It must also enhance
coordination and synergies within the United Nations
system, as well as partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with due attention to encouraging the broader
participation of all stakeholders, including women and
young people, so as to help affected countries improve
their national capacities to address the root causes
of conflict.
Secondly, the Security Council must remain united
in pursuing the peaceful resolution of disputes and
conflicts, including through mediation at early stages
and by making greater use of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly Article 33.
In that regard, we appreciate the meaningful political
support that the Council has given to the Secretary-
General and to his good offices and other regional
actors in their mediation efforts addressing regional
and country-specific issues.

Thirdly, we reaffirm the Vital importance
of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In our region, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations has been
contributing proactively to promoting dialogue and
mutual understanding, fostering an environment of
cooperation and friendship, establishing regional
codes of conduct, rules and norms and implementing
various confidence-building and preventive measures
to manage differences and settle disputes by peaceful
means, in full respect for international law.

Fourthly, we urge the parties to a dispute or conflict
to create conditions that favour mediation efforts by
refraining from any action that could escalate tension
and complying strictly with international law. Any
measure must have the consent of the parties concerned,
take into account their legitimate interests and conform
to the principles of objectivity, fairness and respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
equality in international relations.

In conclusion, we reiterate our strong commitment
to working closely with the Security Council, the United
Nations generally and all partners to explore further
ways to enforce these peaceful tools in a more effective
and timely manner, in order to ensure that world peace
and security can be achieved, secured and sustained.

