Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, given the theme of today's
meeting, let me thank all those who have responded to
the latest terrorist attacks against Russia, particularly
the tragedy of unprecedented magnitude in the Russian
city of Beslan.

The Security Council adopted, on 1 September, a
presidential statement condemning the recent terrorist
acts in Russia and appealing for increased international
efforts at a time when terrorists have launched a global
war. Today, two days after the anniversary of the
tragedy of 11 September, it is clear to all that the war
on international terrorism is far from completion. The
most recent reminder of this was the terrorist attack
against the Australian embassy in Jakarta.

It is important that the international community
has responded as a united front and has demonstrated
effective solidarity in this fight against terrorism. A
serious role in consolidating Member States' counter-
terrorist efforts must be played by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities. In the last four
months, the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee
has continued to take an active role in ensuring the
effectiveness of the restrictive measures imposed by
the Security Council against the Taliban, Al Qaeda and
their accomplices. We are pleased to note that the
Consolidated List of the Committee has been
supplemented in this period of time with new names
and information essential to ensuring the appropriate
identification of terrorists. Considerable progress has
been made in adapting the procedures of this body's
work to the requirements of resolutions 1455 (2003)
and 1526 (2004).

The groundwork has been laid for genuine
cooperation between the Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Contacts and efforts to enhance
coordination of the activities of both these committees
are under way, both at the level of the Chairs and at the
level of expert groups. As the current Chair of the
CT C, we would like to reaffirm our fundamental intent
to accelerate the pace of such cooperation.

Solid support for the efforts of the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee in the implementation of
its mandate is provided by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which has recently
provided its first report (S/2004/679), containing an
assessment of the impact of the sanctions regime. We
share the majority of the conclusions and
recommendations of this report. We note that the
assessments of the team with respect to the scope of
the threat that continues to be posed at this juncture by
the Taliban and Al Qaeda to the international
community and to security fully coincides with our
own conclusions and recommendations. In particular,
we agree with the fact that the leaders of the Taliban
and Al Qaeda continue to maintain close contacts with
each other. We are also certain that, were the Taliban to
acquire control of at least a portion of the territory of
Afghanistan, one could soon anticipate the emergence
there of new bases of international terrorism.

We support the view of the Monitoring Team that,
in the near future, the Security Council needs to give
additional clarifications with respect to the scope of the
arms embargo and the travel ban. Currently, the
provisions of resolution 1526 (2004) do allow for
varying interpretations of these elements of the
sanctions regime, thereby reducing the effectiveness of
relevant measures. More precise and comprehensive
indications to this end are meant to tangibly ease the
task of Member States in appropriately complying with
these bans.

In conclusion, let me again underscore that
success in the fight against terrorism depends directly
on the unity of the efforts of the entire international
community. In this context, we believe it is important
to build a dialogue of trust between Member States and
the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee on all
aspects of the sanctions issue.

One key tool in the sanctions regime is the
Committee's Consolidated List. We have had occasion
to hear considerable complaints with respect to the
completeness and accuracy of the information
contained therein. One can discuss the flaws of the List
at great length, but complaints will not help the matter.
The Committee clearly does need support from
Member States, and we call on Member States to
provide such support, including through the submission
of additional information to enhance the effectiveness
of the contents of the List.

