Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like first to thank the Ambassadors of the United States
and the United Kingdom for the information they have
provided us on the unfolding events in Iraq. We feel
that it is constructive for the members of the Security
Council to receive such information and to make
comments.

We fully understand the difficulty of discussing
concrete achievements in a context so strongly marked
by the events surrounding the deadly terrorist attack on
the United Nations offices in Baghdad. We cannot pass
up this opportunity to reiterate our firmest
condemnation of that criminal attack and to emphasize
the need to bring the perpetrators to justice. We have
conveyed our condolences to the Secretary-General
and, through him, to the families of the victims, in
particular over the death of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a
fellow Latin American and a brilliant diplomat. The
United Nations has paid with human lives for its right
to participate in the process of reconstructing Iraq.

Terrorism, which seeks the prevalence of hatred
and violence over rationality and tolerance, is one of
the greatest threats of our times. We have seen this in
Baghdad and in Jerusalem. And yet, our struggle
against terrorism cannot and must not be a series of
isolated individual efforts. It must be a joint effort of
the international community. These events confirm the
truth of this assertion.

Despite our sorrow at the loss of the lives of
international civil servants and Iraqi staff members of
the United Nations in Baghdad, we must not allow
these actions to divert us from the course towards the
recovery by Iraq and its people of their full
sovereignty. We know that the situation is highly
complex and that new and greater efforts are required
to stabilize the situation in Iraq.

In the view of the Chilean delegation, the new
circumstances require the Council to focus its attention
on two urgent and principal aspects. The first is the
issue of the security of United Nations personnel
throughout the world and, in particular, in Iraq. In this
regard, we deem it necessary to review the measures
that have been taken to date and to make any necessary
corrections so as to avoid a recurrence of such
distressing incidents as those of last Tuesday. We feel
that this task must be undertaken jointly by the
Security Council, the Secretariat and, of course, the
representatives of the coalition forces in Iraq.

Secondly, we believe that, in the light of recent
events, the Security Council must launch a process of
seeking new mechanisms and different approaches to
its future work in Iraq. In this respect, we believe that
the starting point of such a process of reflection must
be the decision, reaffirmed yesterday, to pursue the
United Nations aims and purposes in Iraq. Any step
backwards would signal the triumph of violence and
terror. We believe that the Council is duty-bound to
consider ways and means by which the United Nations
and the international community can cooperate more
actively in humanitarian tasks and in the reconstruction
of Iraq in all its aspects.

Experience gained and mechanisms used in other
regions, such as Afghanistan or Kosovo, may be useful
in this regard. It may also be appropriate once again to
consider a time frame for transition in Iraq, as proposed
to the Council by the Secretary-General, in order to
restore sovereignty to the Iraqi people as soon as
possible.

Lastly, my delegation has no doubt that the
stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq ultimately
represent a test for and the responsibility of the entire
international community.

