Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing, which, as always, was very useful, and to
reiterate to him our admiration for his work as well
as that of his team in responding to the humanitarian
emergency in Syria. I wish also to commend Germany
and Belgium, which, along with Kuwait, will be
assuming the key function of co-penholders on Syria.
I also thank Sweden and Kuwait for their outstanding
work, particularly with regard to resolution 2449
(2018), adopted last December, which renewed cross-
border assistance.
It would be irresponsible if we were to downplay
the situation in Syria as the country enters its ninth year
of conflict, with the threat of further escalation still
very real. That is why we must remain fully mobilized
around three key priorities: maintaining the ceasefire
in Idlib and the protection of civilians; guaranteeing
humanitarian access; and ensuring a lasting political
solution in Syria.

Concerning the first priority, maintaining the
ceasefire in Idlib in the long run, the Russian-Turkish
agreement on Idlib made it possible to prevent a
further offensive, which would have had disastrous
humanitarian, migratory and security-related
consequences throughout the region and would have
further diminished prospects for a political solution.
We supported the ceasefire that it made possible,
which is vital to stability in the region. The situation
in Idlib remains extremely tense, with terrorist groups
ramping up their efforts to control that zone. We cannot
rule out a worst-case scenario and therefore must do
everything possible to maintain the ceasefire over the
long term, in keeping with the commitments made at
the four-party summit held in Istanbul. This must be
an absolute priority for all stakeholders, as it is the
only way to protect the 3 million civilians who live in
Idlib, including medical and humanitarian personnel.
Everyone knows that since the beginning ofthe conflict,
hundreds of humanitarian workers have been killed or
wounded. We therefore need to hammer home the fact
that all parties need to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

The second priority is ensuring humanitarian
access to the entire Syrian territory. The Syrian regime
is relentlessly pursuing its strategy of aid politicization
by constantly creating obstacles to the delivery of aid.
Indeed, the most minor of activities or displacements
on the part of humanitarian organizations are subject to
authorizations, which are handed out in dribs and drabs.

I would recall here also that the regime has not
hesitated to criminalize humanitarian organizations
for political reasons. It is particularly difficult to
understand that the regime can for more than two
months have been able to delay the convoy headed
for Rukban camp, where more than 40,000 people are
living under inhuman conditions. It is imperative that
a new convoy be deployed immediately. Once again
we call on all actors with influence on the regime
to guarantee full, safe, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access throughout Syrian territory, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and international humanitarian law. This imperative of
access for humanitarian assistance should be respected
at all stages, from independent needs assessments to
the implementation and follow-up of humanitarian
projects, in order to ensure that aid reaches the most
vulnerable segments of the population.

In the areas that are not under the regime's control,
it is vital that the entire international community
continue its efforts to help those who are in situations
ofincreasing uncertainty. Here I am thinking especially
of the north-eastern and north-western parts of the
country. In the north-east, our mobilization to respond
to the needs of the people must remain full-fledged,
as this is a humanitarian imperative and will also help
to prevent any resurgence of Da'esh in the region. In
the north-west, all actors must maintain the greatest
vigilance, given that Security Council-listed terrorist
groups - and here I am thinking in particular of Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham - have consolidated their civilian and
military control.

Finally, and lastly, I would reiterate that there can
be no sustainable humanitarian solution in the absence
of a credible political process. Syria is today at a
crossroads. While risks remain tremendous in Idlib and
elsewhere, we remain convinced that today, perhaps
for the first time in eight years, there is a very small
window of opportunity to find a way to resolve the
Syrian conflict. But that window of opportunity might
soon close. It is more important and urgent than ever
that everyone assume their responsibilities to establish
a credible political process, under the supervision of the
United Nations and in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). That is the task of the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we
reiterate our full support.

I would like to reiterate the distinction between
humanitarian aid and reconstruction. Humanitarian
aid is an immediate need, subject to the principles of
strict neutrality, impartiality and independence. It is
to be distinguished from reconstruction, which will
be possible only once an irreversible, inclusive and
credible political transition has begun. Moreover, let us
not forget that it is not the absence of reconstruction
that prevents the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of refugees; it is the absence of guarantees for their
safety, in particular against arbitrary arrests, forced
conscription, forced expropriations and the loss of
identity documents. The continuation of those practices
by the Syrian regime in the areas over which it recently
regained control are completely unacceptable and should
be denounced as such. It is therefore not surprising that
very few refugees have chosen to return to Syria, as
demonstrated by the statistics from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Against that backdrop, where the realm of the
possible is especially broad, I especially want to call
on all the members of the Security Council to rally
together to break the cycle of the Syrian tragedy and
create positive momentum with the view to reaching
an inclusive political settlement in Syria. Only credible
progress in the political process will make it possible
to achieve a lasting improvement in the humanitarian
situation and, in the long-term, make possible the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. As
the Council knows, France stands fully committed to
that end.

