The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt and Israel in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) took the seat reserved for
him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 31
December 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2008/844, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Council that will be held on
Wednesday, 31 December 2008, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 31
December 2008 from the Permanent Mission of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in
which it is requested that the Permanent Observer for
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
two letters dated 31 December 2008 from, respectively,
the Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt and the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, which will be issued as documents
8/2008/842 and 8/2008/843.

I should also like to draw the attention of Council
members to a letter dated 31 December 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of France, transmitting a
statement by the European Union on the situation in
the Middle East, which will be issued as document
8/2008/841.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.


