Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): At the outset,
Bangladesh would like to express its great pleasure at
seeing you, Sir, preside over our deliberations. Your
presence attests to the importance of today's meeting.

It is a special privilege for the Council to have
His Excellency President Paul Kagame with us this
morning. We are grateful to him for making the time to
come here, despite his pressing schedule. Coming as it
does a few days after our meeting with President
Joseph Kabila, our interaction this morning with
President Kagame offers an important opportunity to
put the peace process in Central Africa back on track.
We noted the three areas that he highlighted in this
context. The statement by the Secretary-General
outlined the areas where action needs to be focused.

The Great Lakes region has been at the centre of
the Council's preoccupations for some time. We have
seen various efforts being made at the United Nations
and in the region to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict. It is unfortunate that the immense suffering of
millions and the colossal loss of resources have not
brought about a significant change so far. Agreements
are signed, certainly with the best intentions; but when
it comes to implementation, there is little progress.

In our meeting with President Kabila last week,
we noted his determination to make fresh efforts to
bring peace to the country, to hold free and fair
elections and to extend full cooperation to the United
Nations. We spoke ofa new departure. We are happy to
note that the urge to look towards the future is shared
among the leadership in the region.

We understand that efforts are being made for a
regional meeting, possibly at the summit level,
involving all signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. The Council should be supportive of such
initiatives. It will be important to see substantive
progress on the ground prior to our meeting with the
Political Committee here later this month.

We welcome President Kagame's assertion that
an opportunity exists and that it must be seized now.
The Lusaka Agreement provides for a workable
compromise for all parties and the subsequent plans
detail concrete steps. In pursuing these agreements, the
parties must take a realistic approach. The resolution of
the most complex and the most intractable conflict of
recent times will naturally require the most courageous
decisions on the part of the leadership of the region. It
will require hard concessions, difficult compromises
and, above all, a lot of pragmatism.

The security concerns of the neighbours of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and related issues,
will need careful consideration. The imperative of
justice should be pursued with the ultimate goal of
healing past wounds and promoting reconciliation
between societies.

Peace has its costs, but the cost of war is certainly
much higher. Given its immense natural and great
human resources, the Great Lakes region can become
an important positive force. The transition from
senseless confrontation to regional cooperation is what
the peoples of the region require. Their leaders can
bring that about.

