Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, Under-
Secretary-General Holmes and High Commissioner
Pillay for their briefings and their tremendous work on
behalf of endangered civilians around the world. Let
me also thank Mr. Holmes for his service to the United
Nations. He has been an outspoken and dedicated
leader. He has shown a rare and resolute determination
to end the suffering of civilians under threat of war or
famine. The Under-Secretary-General has my
Government's abiding respect and my warm personal
thanks.

Eight months after the Council adopted resolution
1894 (2009), we still have far more work to do together
to save the lives of civilians in conflict zones. The
victims in situations are different: children forced to
take up guns, women and girls tormented by rape and
sexual abuse, refugees and internally displaced persons
longing for a home and shelter, ordinary people caught
in crossfire. But they all are innocent, and they should
all be sheltered by the rule of law and the rules of war.

Their suffering is particularly tragic because it is
so often preventable. Their voices call out to our
common conscience and remind us of the urgent need
to act.

Let me highlight briefly three critical areas today:
first, providing the safety that humanitarian efforts
need to function; secondly, moving from the ambition
to protect civilians to successful actions by
peacekeeping missions; and thirdly, enhancing the
legal capacity to support accountability.

The United States is deeply disturbed by the
increasing frequency of attacks on humanitarian
workers. Such assaults violate basic principles of law
and decency. Such violence not only obstructs the
delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance, but
also can create an atmosphere that restricts the
movement, even the presence, of international
humanitarian actors. As we have recently seen in
Pakistan and the Sudan, workers have been attacked,
kidnapped or killed, often in cynical attempts to extend
the suffering of civilians for political gain.
Humanitarian agencies' local staff members can be
especially vulnerable to attacks.

That is a deplorable phenomenon, but not a new
one. The Council has expressed its intentions, in the
words of resolution 1894 (2009), to "take appropriate
steps in response to deliberate attacks against
humanitarian personnel" (para. 16(c)). We have also
acted, for instance, by designating al-Shabaab last
April, under resolution 1907 (2009). We must make a
concerted effort to identify those responsible for all
attacks on humanitarian workers so that humanitarian
agencies can go about their work, protecting the
innocent.

Here, the resources of United Nations country
teams often prove invaluable, and the United States
strongly supports the protection mandates of UNICEF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Together, they help
promote civilians' basic rights, meet their physical
needs, respect their dignity, and work to ensure their
safety.

We respect the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence under which those and
other humanitarian groups, including non-
governmental organizations, operate in the field. We
encourage humanitarian organizations to strengthen
programmes to end conflict-related sexual violence,
and we urge our fellow Council members to fully
support, in terms of both finances and policy, the
efforts of such organizations to protect civilians and to
implement the commitments that we unanimously
agreed to in resolution 1888 (2009).

My second point is that peacekeeping missions
play a vital role in providing support to States in which
civilians are at risk. However, the Council's mandates
directing peacekeeping missions to protect must be
matched by resources, guidance, training and
leadership.

We welcome innovative approaches by all
involved to identify the threats and vulnerabilities of
civilian space in the area of a mission. We applaud
efforts by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
supported by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, to develop a strategic framework for
mission-wide protection strategies. As Member States,
we must all support those efforts and back up
peacekeeping missions with political support and
capacity-building efforts. We must also pay close heed
to the challenges faced by peacekeepers in the field,
whether civilian, police or military personnel.

Serious challenges remain on the ground, such as
those today in Darfur. That is something we must bear
in mind as we approach the renewal of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) at the end of this month. The
United States supports full and proper backing to
peacekeeping mandates, including that of UNAMID, so
that deployed peacekeepers can protect themselves and
endangered civilians, as identified in each specific
mandate. Host countries with peacekeeping missions
must shoulder the primary responsibility for the safety
and security of their populations, as well as for
supporting those missions as they implement their
mandates.

My Government fully backs the work of United
Nations peacekeeping missions, working in concert
with United Nations country teams and host
Governments, to strengthen police and judicial
mechanisms so that respect for the rule of law can
counter those who seek to profit from lawlessness. We
undertake significant efforts to promote the rule of law
around the world, and we urge others to do the same.

Peacekeeping missions, when properly trained,
well equipped and deployed with robust mandates, are
critical to our overall efforts to protect civilians. But
today we face the question of how to ensure that
civilians are protected where strategic consent for
United Nations peacekeeping evaporates and those
forces are ultimately withdrawn. Such a situation is
now playing out in Chad, with the continued drawdown
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). By the end of the
year there will be no United Nations peacekeepers in
Chad, and the United States is extremely concerned
about that situation.

The Government of Chad should protect its own
population and refugees within its territory. The
international community recognizes that the
Government of Chad is accountable for the welfare not
only of its own citizens, nearly 170,000 of whom are
internally displaced, but also for the more than 270,000
Darfuri and 74,000 Central African refugees within
Chad's borders.

Finally, let me turn to the question of
accountability. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. But other parties
to armed conflict must also comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law -
and all too often they do not. Those legal obligations
should have legal consequences. It is incumbent upon
the international community to end impunity by
helping Governments create, maintain and operate
credible and effective national courts where possible,
or by supporting international and other mechanisms
where necessary. The International Criminal Court can
also be useful in the fight against genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

Ongoing dialogue on this important subject is
worthwhile. But this Council will be judged by its
actions and their impact on civilian lives. I hope that
we will take concrete action to directly challenge those
who violate their obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict, that we will continue to craft
peacekeeping mandates that back missions with the
necessary training capability and leadership of
deployed peacekeepers, and that we - both as a
Council and in our national capacities - will help
Governments emerging from conflict to rebuild their
infrastructure and institutions to protect and provide
for their civilians.

In that regard we urge continuation of the
Secretariat's important work to develop a strategic
framework for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations supported by mission-wide
planning and senior leadership training. We also urge
the Secretariat to complete the assessment of resources
and capabilities required for those tasks as soon as
possible.

We look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on this crucially important topic.
United Nations action has saved untold lives and eased
unimaginable suffering, but in all too many places
innocents still bear the brunt of war and conflict. We
cannot yet afford to sleep easily.

