Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to welcome and thank you, Mr. President, and
Minister Lavrov for this timely meeting and to welcome
also the participation of the eminent authorities who are
here with us this afternoon. We are also grateful for the
important statement made by Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.

We recognize the responsibility and unity ofAfrican
peoples and leaders in terms of achieving the ambitious
goal that they have set of silencing the guns and of
promoting, in line with the efforts of the international
community, sustainable peace on the continent. We
welcome in particular the agreements reached in the
Sudan and the Central African Republic, where we
participate with a significant number of troops as a
part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

The development of a comprehensive regional
legal basis with new administrative structures and
coordination mechanisms has been fostering synergies
and complementarities among the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, and the various
African regional and subregional organizations with
a view to institutionalizing and making the peace and
global security architecture more effective. In that
regard, we would like to refer to three areas in which
we believe there is still significant potential for shared
effort to be developed.
First, in the area of conflict prevention, we consider
it necessary to strengthen the continent's monitoring
and early-warning capabilities, including the United
Nations offices in the region. In particular, it will
be crucial to continue promoting the development of
preventive diplomacy and recourse to peaceful means
of dispute settlement at the regional level, in the light
of positive experiences and lessons learned, including
those of the Economic Community of West African
States in Guinea-Bissau and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in South Sudan, with which
the Council promotes active cooperation.

Secondly, in the area of peacekeeping operations,
we believe that the current momentum aimed at
increasing efficiency and performance standards in
such operations requires capitalizing the comparative
advantages of both global and regional bodies. The
promising results of the joint analysis and evaluation
visits carried out by officials of the Secretariat and the
African Union show the potential of that approach,
grounded in resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2457 (2019)
and the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. We would also like to highlight
African experience with combating terrorism gained
through regional operations in Burundi and Somalia
and, recently, by the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram, which constitute innovative initiatives
under the African Peace and Security Architecture. We
believe it is crucial that the United Nations contribute
to building the capacity of those entities with the aim
of providing them with predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, particularly where the needs are
greatest, in line with the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

Thirdly, in the area of sustainable development
and peacebuilding, we believe that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union should mutually reinforce each other
with the ultimate goal of addressing the root causes
of conflict, promoting economic growth on the basis
of the rule of law and encouraging the participation of
women and youth as agents of change in their respective
societies. We would also highlight, in the context of
national reconstruction and reconciliation processes,
the role ofthe Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory
body contributing to the forging of alliances required
for the consolidation of peace on the continent.

In conclusion, we emphasize that investment in
the development and strengthening of African regional
and subregional capacities represents, in the current
context, the most efficient and effective alternative
for our shared responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.

