Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the United Kingdom for convening today's meeting
on the situation in Somalia. We welcome you,
Mr. President, in your capacity as President of today's
meeting. I would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Deputy Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing. And we appreciate the participation in today's
meeting of Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji
Adan, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia.

As many Council members have emphasized,
Somalia is at a critical juncture. There have been signs
of hopeful progress as well as daunting challenges. The
dangers of Al-Shabaab can easily overshadow many
political and security developments. Today, I would like
to focus on three points that are crucial to maintaining
positive momentum. First, we commend the fact that the
second London Conference, held in May, successfully
garnered the necessary political will and commitment
needed to enhance the political situation in Somalia.
We hope that the Federal Government of Somalia
(FGS) will continue to establish well-functioning State
institutions and to settle constitutional issues with firm
resolve. Proactive engagement with local authorities
will be a big task for it. Dangers still lurk, however.
Clan-based rivalry in Jubaland threatens federalism
in Somalia and risks inciting further conflict. We
strongly encourage the Federal Government and the
regional authorities to continue constructive dialogue
on consolidating federalism. In that regard, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM)
provides a useful platform from which the international
community can pursue engagement with the Somali
authorities in a coordinated and effective manner.

Secondly, addressing the security threats posed by

Al-Shabaab is vital. Although it has been weakened by
successful operations conducted by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), there is still a risk that
the political and security gains achieved so far may be
reversed. The Federal Government should continue with
its efforts on security sector reform. At the same time, it
should also tackle the continuing abuses of civilians by
undisciplined elements of the Somali National Security
Forces. We appreciate the sacrifices and efforts made
by those countries contributing troops and police to the
Mission. We also recognize the efforts of the Member
States and regional organizations that are contributing
financially to sustaining AMISOM's operations.

Another vital necessity is the strict application of
the sanctions regime, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/326) underscored. The international ban on
charcoal from Somalia established by resolution 2036
(2012) is a useful measure for preventing the flow of
revenues to Al-Shabaab. In that regard, it is worrying
that charcoal is still being produced and exported. The
Federal Government should take concrete measures to
find a lasting solution to this problem, and Member
States should also make the greatest possible effort to
implement the embargo on Somali charcoal.

Security Council resolution 2093 (2013) partially
suspended the arms embargo in Somalia in order to
support the strengthening of its security institutions.

The potential flow of arms into the hands of
terrorists should be avoided at all costs. In this regard,
the Somali Government and supplying States are
strongly requested to abide by the provisions of the
resolution. As Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, the Republic of Korea will do its
utmost for the effective implementation of the Somalia
sanctions regime.

Thirdly, measures to improve the human rights
and humanitarian situations need to be taken. Women
and children are the major victims of human rights and
humanitarian violations. The level of sexual violence
remains high. In this regard, we welcome the joint
communique issued by the Federal Republic of Somalia
and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual
violence.

Although the humanitarian situation in Somalia
is improving, the need for humanitarian assistance is
still grave. In order to help cope with the persistent
humanitarian challenges, the Republic of Korea is now
seeking ways to increase bilateral support for Somalia
in line with the national plan, in addition to multilateral
cooperation.

Long-term sustainable economic development is
another key area that the Somali Government and the
international community should pursue. We believe
that Somalia should first seek a competitive economic
basis on which it can advance economic growth. After
that, the well-coordinated support of the international
community will be crucial in realizing Somalia's vision
for economic. In this process we would like to stress
that measures to improve the situation in Somalia
should be based on the principles of Somali national
ownership, partnership and coordination.

