Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to sincerely
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto. I would like to say how much we appreciate
his update on the work ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador
Umarov for their briefings. I would like to point out
how much we appreciate the presence and input today
of Commissioner Haress and, as always, the visionary
intervention by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal.

We welcome the renewed efforts towards a
political settlement in Afghanistan. We fully support
the invitation of President Ghani to unconditional
peace talks and continue to urge the Taliban to engage
constructively in talks with the Afghan Government.
As we have heard, it is critical that the peace process
continue to be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led and that
it be inclusive. That means that it should include groups
that do not traditionally have a strong voice in society,
including ethnic minorities. The full and effective
participation of women is fundamental. With two-
thirds the population under the age of 30, youth must
also have a central role in any agreement on the future
of Afghanistan. Ms. Haress has eloquently set out why
that all matters.

Strong and cohesive international support will
continue to be needed. We urge all stakeholders,
and especially Afghanistan's neighbours, to engage
constructively. The Kabul process, under the leadership
of the Afghan Government, is the vehicle that
international initiatives should feed into. UNAMA has
an important role to play in supporting current efforts,
not least to help ensure that the peace process is as
inclusive as possible and that its outcome upholds the
achievements of the past 17 years with regard to human
rights and fundamental freedoms, notably of women.
The social gains of past years must be preserved and
built upon. As one of Afghanistan's largest and most
long-standing development partners, those are issues
Sweden will be considering carefully as we calibrate
our very substantial development cooperation with
Afghanistan going forward.

The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
last month was a welcome opportunity for the
international community to take stock and assess
progress. Reports that the anti-corruption framework
is improving were encouraging, and it is now important
to move forward with implementation. As stated in
the communique issued at the Geneva Conference, the
continued delivery of mutually agreed commitments
will be essential for sustained international support.
UNAMA also has a key role to play in supporting that
reform agenda.

The timely conduct of inclusive, credible and
transparent elections is imperative for stability and
for strengthening Afghan democracy. The recent
parliamentary elections demonstrated the commitment
of Afghans to democracy, as millions turned out
to vote across the country, braving obstacles and
defying serious security threats. There were, however,
serious operational and organizational shortcomings
that put the credibility of democratic institutions at
risk. It is therefore crucial that preparations for next
year's presidential elections be improved at all levels.
Responsible institutions must draw necessary lessons
and address unresolved issues without delay. UNAMA's
capacity-building efforts and technical assistance
to the electoral process are vital. We also encourage
close cooperation with UN-Women to promote the
participation of women in the elections.

Cooperation with UN-Women and other actors is
also important for the implementation of the national
action plan on women and peace and security, which
contains a framework for women's active participation.
It now needs to be integrated into existing national
programmes, not least into their budgets. The progress
made in strengthening the role of women over the past
two decades must not be lost. Ms. Ghizaal Haress made
a very compelling appeal on that issue today. It is not
a side issue. It is central to the future of Afghanistan
and powerful forces are working against it. UNAMA
also has a critical role to play in those efforts, and
we welcome the attention given to that issue in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1092), including the
use of gender disaggregated data.

We share the deep concern of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The continuous
attacks in Kabul and around the country, including
targeted attacks on schools, religious minorities and
journalists, have increased the number of civilian
casualties, not least among children. Severe drought
has caused food insecurity at emergency levels
for 3.6 million people. Such climate-related food
insecurity is also forcing people to leave their homes,
thereby increasing the number of people displaced.
Six million people are now in need of humanitarian
assistance - almost double the needs compared to last
year. The very clear call of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General this morning on all parties to
reduce the level of violence and protect civilians must
be echoed by all of us here at the Security Council.

The humanitarian response must also be stepped
up and closer coordination between humanitarian and
development actors is needed to address root causes.
Safe and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
granted, in accordance with international humanitarian
law. Attacks against humanitarian and development
workers are unacceptable. We urge all parties to the
conflict to comply with their obligations and ensure
the protection of civilians, as well as the protection
of humanitarian and health-care workers and medical
facilities. The Arria Formula meeting on Friday will
offer an opportunity to discuss the protection of health-
care facilities in more detail with a representative
of Afghanistan.

As Chair of the local Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in Kabul, we are concerned about
the continued lack of accountability for the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, as well as the sexual
exploitation of children. We welcome the leadership
of UNAMA in more actively addressing the issue, as
serious challenges remain.

Since 2001, Afghanistan has rebuilt its political
system, State institutions, infrastructure and economy,
with real improvements for its people. However, serious
challenges of insecurity, poverty and the rule of law
persist. The civilian toll of the conflict continues to be
appallingly high. Finding a political solution is more
urgent than ever. We may now have a rare opportunity
and must not miss it. The renewed commitment of
the international community will be important and
UNAMA will continue to have a critical role to play.
Sweden, as a steadfast supporter over three decades,
will continue to support Afghanistan as it implements
its reform agenda and takes other essential steps on its
path towards development and inclusive, sustainable
and equitable peace.

