Mr. Eide: I am deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General for having asked me to undertake a
comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo. I am
grateful to you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
present the main findings and conclusions to the
Security Council. I am pleased to see Prime Minister
Kostunica here today; our many discussions in
Belgrade provided very important inputs for my work.
I would also like to express my admiration for the
dynamic leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, over
the past year.

The purpose of the review was to assess whether
the conditions are now in place for conducting the
process to determine Kosovo's future status.

In a report to the Secretary-General last year
(S/2004/932, annex I, enclosure), I emphasized that
there would never be a good moment for addressing
Kosovo's future status. That impression was confirmed
during my recent work.

First, determining Kosovo's future status is, and
will remain, a highly sensitive political issue with
serious regional and wider international implications.
Secondly, the basic positions of the parties remain
diametrically opposed with no - or at least very
little - common ground. Thirdly, the prospects for a
genuine reconciliation process on the ground are, and
will probably remain, modest under the current
circumstances.

A significant part of the work on the
comprehensive review was devoted to reviewing
developments on the ground, including the
implementation of standards. The picture is, indeed,
mixed.

The establishment of institutions and of a broad
legal framework and the development of public
services have been impressive. Over the past year,
significant transfer of competences has taken place,
and more is planned for the near future. The local
leaders are gradually taking ownership of the new
institutions and becoming more efficient. A civil
service is taking shape and becoming more
professional. I commend Kosovo's leaders and the civil
service for those achievements. There are, of course,
shortcomings in many respects, due to lack of
expertise, lack of resources and lack of accountability.
The international community should remain ready to
provide long-term assistance for institutional
development, including capacity-building.

The institutional framework also includes law-
enforcement bodies: the Kosovo Police Service and a
justice system. Both are operational throughout
Kosovo. However, there is a lack of ability and
readiness to enforce legislation. While the Kosovo
Police Service is developing in a promising way, the
justice system remains weak. Both find it difficult to
address serious crimes, including crimes of an inter-
ethnic nature, organized crime and corruption, which
remain serious threats to Kosovo's stability. Under
such circumstances, the number of international judges
and prosecutors should be maintained, a strong and
well-qualified international police presence should be
ensured and great caution should be exercised in the
transfer of competences in such sensitive areas as
police and justice. We must ensure that all components
of the law-enforcement system are strengthened, so
that every person can have confidence in them.

The situation with regard to inter-ethnic relations
is grim. It is true that the overall security situation
seems more stable than it was a year ago. However, the
situation on the ground remains worrying. Frequent
unreported incidents of inter-ethnic violence and crime
affect security and freedom of movement. When
perpetrators remain at large, an atmosphere of impunity
prevails.

Furthermore, tens of thousands of property cases
remain unresolved. With no access to illegally
occupied land and properties, sustainable returns are
hard to achieve. The backlog of such unresolved
property cases must be urgently addressed.

The overall return process has virtually come to a
halt. It is a widely held view that as many or more
Kosovo Serbs are now leaving than returning and that
that process may be accelerating. We have to reverse
that trend. The return policies should be revised in
order to allow for support for those who wish to return
to places where they can live and not only to places
where they have lived. It must also place greater
emphasis on support for returnees over longer periods
of time and for those who have remained, in order to
attract those who wish to return.

While our focus is almost always concentrated on
the relationship between Kosovo Albanians and
Kosovo Serbs, we must not forget that other minorities
also face serious hardship. I would like to single out
the continued existence of internally displaced persons
camps - such as those in Plementina and Zitkovac -
as distressing. To reverse that trend in inter-ethnic
relations, great emphasis should be placed on
protecting the identities of all communities and on their
ability to influence their own future. In that respect,
allow me to highlight two areas where action is
required.

First, there is a need to create a protective space
around Serbian Orthodox religious sites and
institutions, with the involvement of the international
community, in order to make them less vulnerable to
political manipulation. Secondly, wider
decentralization will be a critical element in any effort
to ensure a viable, multi-ethnic Kosovo, where all
communities can influence their own lives in a
meaningful way. Devolution of powers and enhanced
competences to municipalities where minorities, in
particular Kosovo Serbs, have a comfortable majority
would establish effective institutional guarantees for
minorities and increase confidence in Kosovo's central
institutions.

As I said at the outset, there is probably no good
moment for addressing Kosovo's future status.
Nevertheless - and in spite of the shortcomings I have
mentioned - I sincerely believe that the time has
come to start the future status process.

Since last year, a political process driven by a
more dynamic international engagement has been
underway in Kosovo. That process cannot be
interrupted or halted. Having moved from stagnation to
expectation, stagnation cannot again be allowed to take
hold.

It is also unlikely that postponing the future
status process will lead to significant progress in the
implementation of standards. Progress will be achieved
only if the sense of a political perspective is
maintained and if the international community is ready
to mobilize greater political energy and pressure.

In addition, there is also a shared expectation in
Pristina and in Belgrade, as well as in the region, that
the future status process will now start. During the
work on the comprehensive review, there has been a
gradual shift in the preparedness for a future status
process.

I am convinced that all will benefit from clarity
with regard to what Kosovo will be. People will be
able to make important decisions about their own
future on an informed basis. I repeat, all need clarity.
Such clarity will also remove an element of instability,
which today hampers the political and economic
development of Kosovo, as well as of the region.

The goals of the standards process are ambitious;
they cannot be met over a short period of time. The
standards process will require constant and determined
efforts, stretching into and beyond the process of
defining Kosovo's future status.

With a future status process underway, there is a
risk that attention and energy would be focused on
status to the detriment of standards. On the other hand,
opening the future status process means that the
international community will have enhanced leverage
for further standards implementation. I would urge the
international community to make full use of that
leverage. Success in negotiating and implementing a
future status will depend on further standards
implementation. Insufficient standards implementation
entails the risk of turning a future status into a failed
status.

I would like to offer a few thoughts on the status
process as such. In Kosovo that process will be very
different from peace processes in other parts of the
former Yugoslavia. In contrast to those processes, there
is little to build on in Kosovo in terms of previous
plans and preparations. Furthermore, the negotiations
concern a territory that is still a part of a sovereign
State but is administered by the United Nations through
provisional self-governing institutions.

Every effort should be made to bring all the
parties together and to keep them together throughout
the status process. The process should not be rushed
forward. However, once it has started, it must also be
brought to a conclusion within a reasonable timeframe.
The search for clarity should not lead us into a
protracted period of confusion. Neighbouring States
will need to understand the process, support it and, not
least, be reassured by the way it is conducted.

The international community will require strength
to carry the future status process forward and to
implement its results. A reconfiguration of the
international presence in Kosovo will be required, but
it should take place in a coordinated manner in order to
ensure that gaps do not emerge and that current and
future requirements are met. During and after the
future status process, the credibility of the international
community will be of critical importance.

Kosovo will continue to depend on a significant
international presence on the ground - military and
civilian. The support required in so many areas cannot
be provided by remote control. Entering a future status
process does not mean entering the last stage, but the
next stage of the international presence.

