Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Kubis for his comprehensive and
informative briefing. I also thank Ambassador Tanin
for his statement.

Japan highly appreciates the comprehensive
review of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), conducted by the
Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 1974
(2011). Based on the review, it is critically important
that UNAMA continue to play an appropriate role,
together with the international community, in support
of Afghanistan's leadership and ownership and towards
building a promising future for Afghanistan.

While we welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General and its description of the second
phase of the transition as having progressed as planned,
we also witnessed some shocking incidents very
recently. We must not allow such incidents to recur and
we must stop the cycle of violence. We should also
remind ourselves that it is incumbent on both
Afghanistan and its international partners to tackle the
common challenges of improving security in
Afghanistan and also to consolidate the Afghan-led
political process.

In this regard, Japan continues to provide its
assistance in such areas as security to strengthen the
capacity of the Afghan police and the reintegration
process. Last month, Japan decided to provide
assistance amounting to $585 million, which includes
$231 million for police assistance and $5 million for
promoting reintegration. Japan welcomes the fact that
3,825 ex-combatants have been enrolled formally in
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme,
as described in the Secretary-General's report.

Building on the Bonn and the Istanbul
Conferences last year, we are set to make this year
even more fruitful. There will be the NATO summit in
Chicago, focusing on security issues in May, the first
follow-up on the Istanbul Conference, focusing on
regional cooperation in June, and the Tokyo
Conference in July. These conferences will be the best
occasions to discuss the future of the country.

Notably, the Tokyo Conference, co-hosted by
Japan and Afghanistan, is expected to be an occasion to
build a solid foundation for Afghanistan's sustainable
economic development through the transition period
and beyond. That foundation is to be based on the
mutual commitments made between the international
community and Afghanistan at the Bonn Conference,
which are aimed at prioritizing the country's national
priority programmes and providing concrete assistance
within those prioritized programmes, as well as
promoting regional economic cooperation.

At the same time, in order to conduct meaningful
discussions and produce tangible outcomes through the
Tokyo Conference, it is expected that, prior to the
Conference, the Afghan side will make its utmost
efforts to tackle issues of governance, such as
corruption, and show concrete improvements. In this
regard, we welcome the fact that the Afghan
Government recently organized a forum to discuss
governance. It is indispensable that in our efforts we
maintain a long-term view towards establishing good
governance in the country. We commend UNAMA's
proactive role in facilitating our discussions in this
area.

UNAMA continues to play an important role, and
Japan supports the extension of UNAMA's mandate in
accordance with the draft resolution scheduled to be
adopted soon. In order to make the Tokyo Conference
successful, Japan is determined to exert its utmost
efforts and cooperate with Afghanistan, international
partners and UNAMA.

In conclusion, we would like to once again
express our sincere appreciation for the dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis,
and reiterate our commitment to supporting UNAMA's
efforts, together with Special Representative Kubis,
and all the men and women of UNAMA, who have
demonstrated a deep commitment to this very difficult
mission.

