Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to thank France for
having convened this open debate on the situation of
children in situations of armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf ofthe 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam.

Mr. President, while commending your initiative
to convene this open debate, we would like to thank
Luxembourg for its successful chairmanship of the
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict over the past two years and congratulate our
fellow ASEAN member Malaysia on its assumption
of the chairmanship of that body. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. We
are grateful to the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict and to the other briefers for their
insights.

ASEAN welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict since the adoption of the
first resolution, resolution 1261 (1999), to date.

We applaud the Member States concerned for
their efforts in implementing their respective Council-
mandated action plans and welcome the integration of
the protection of children in armed conflict in their
national policies. We appreciate the work done by
United Nations bodies and the concerned agencies in
armed conflict, particularly in monitoring and reporting
on grave violations against children, incorporating
child-protection policies in peacekeeping operations,
and promoting the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

We welcome the progress made by the "Children,
Not Soldiers" campaign, which was launched last year
with the aim of ending and preventing the recruitment
and use of children by national security forces by 2016.

ASEAN, however, remains deeply concerned about
the fact that a growing number of children continue
to be affected by grave violations in armed conflicts,
including killing and sexual violence. We particularly
condemn the increasing number of cases of abduction
of children and attacks targeting schools and hospitals.
It is all the more alarming as we are witnessing the rise
of complex and well-organized non-State armed groups
that have total disregard for international law, especially
in certain regions in the Middle East and Africa.

We urge States, United Nations entities with
their respective mandates, the relevant international
and regional organizations and other stakeholders to
redouble their efforts to address, with added vigour,
these new challenges posed by violent non-State armed
groups.

In this connection, ASEAN wishes to emphasize
the following points.

First, States bear the primary responsibility
and authority to protect their civilians, including
children, in armed conflict. Interactions between the
United Nations and non-State armed groups should be
conducted in line with this principle.

Secondly, non-State armed groups, as their nature,
form and motives vary widely, requires different
measures of engagement and should be undertaken
within a broader strategy of conflict prevention and
response. That strategy should, inter alia, address
the root causes of armed conflicts and cover social,
economic and development issues during and after
armed conflicts.

Thirdly, child protection concerns should be
consistently reflected in peace processes and peace
agreements, and children's particular needs must be
included in post-conflict planning.

ASEAN always attaches great importance to
the protection of children, especially those affected
by armed conflicts, and has been working closely to
prevent violations of children's rights in the region. All
ASEAN member States are parties to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, and have been implementing
their obligations and commitments in a serious manner
at the national level. Those national efforts are closely
coupled with regional cooperation efforts.

In 2013, ASEAN leaders reiterated their collective
political will by adopting the ASEAN Declaration
on the Elimination of Violence against Women and
Children in ASEAN. ASEAN also strives to make
sure that our commitment is materialized. In 2011,
the ASEAN Commission for the Protection and
Promotion of the Rights of Women and Children was
established, and is now actively implementing its
2012-2016 work plan, which includes detailed actions
to support the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. ASEAN is working closely
with international partners as part of those efforts.
We appreciate the continued close engagement by the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
child-protection related issues, under their respective
mandates, with ASEAN member States over the years,
as manifested most recently by the visit of the Special
Representative for Violence against Children and to the
region and her substantive discussion with the ASEAN
Commission in February.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate ASEAN's
continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to protect
and promote the best interests of children affected by
armed conflicts. We stand ready to work closely with
other States and partners in the preparations for a
productive review of progress in this area, and earnestly
look forward to the next Council debate on this topic in
June under the presidency of Malaysia.

