Mr. Zmeevski (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): In using its prerogative under the Charter
of the United Nations to deal with numerous conflicts in
various parts of the world, the Security Council cannot
fail to react to one of the ugliest aspects of those
conflicts: the growing involvement of children in the
armed confrontations of competing States and factions.

Children, more than any other segment of the
population, suffer from every aspect of war, and in
particular from the indiscriminate use of mines. Leaders
of military factions are using children ever more
frequently in armed conflicts as cannon fodder. Over the
years of political chaos and armed struggle in
Afghanistan, Somalia and other countries, a whole
generation of young people has grown up who know
nothing of school, books or children's toys, but who have
an excellent knowledge of sophisticated weaponry.

In its consideration of specific conflict situations, the
Security Council must devote more attention to the
problems of children, and must do so in a result-oriented
manner. In our view, reports of the Secretary-General on
any armed conflict should include a section on the status
of children, as should briefings by his representatives to
the Council. We should also ensure that agreements
between parties to a conflict, including those involving
the assistance of the United Nations - whether a simple
ceasefire or a comprehensive settlement - contain
specific provisions on alleviating the plight of children, on
their withdrawal from the most dangerous zones and on
ensuring access for humanitarian assistance; in the case of
child soldiers there should also be provisions on
accelerating the process of demobilization and
reintegration into normal life, on access to education and
on acquiring a civilian job. These tasks should be
assigned to and be given particular attention by the
relevant special representative of the Secretary-General
and United Nations peacekeeping command.

A separate, and important, issue is sanctions. Before
imposing and implementing sanctions regimes, there must
be an evaluation of their harmful impact on children, and

 

humanitarian exceptions must be permitted for children who
are victims of conflicts, with a view to minimizing their
impact.

All these measures can be carried out within existing
mandates and procedures, without any special decisions.
There can be no comprehensive solution to the problem of
children in armed conflict without drawing on the whole
range of measures available to the United Nations. Relying
on the collective will of its Members, the United Nations
must erect reliable barriers to the increasing involvement of
the young generation in armed conflict.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted
by the General Assembly in 1989 and to which 191
Governments have acceded, addresses the problem of
children in international armed conflicts. Moreover, there
are other international legal norms pertaining to children
and urging the adoption of all possible measures to ensure
the protection of children affected by armed conflicts, and
to care for them by assisting with the physical and
psychological rehabilitation and social reintegration of
children who have become victims of armed conflict.

Russia was among the first to ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, and is working tirelessly to
implement the recommendations made by the Committee on
the Rights of the Child. We strongly condemn the unlawful
use of children in armed conflict, and we believe that those
guilty of this must be prosecuted. We advocate the
formulation of new, effective instruments in this sphere,
notably an optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child relating to the involvement of children
in armed conflicts.

Both at the national and at the international levels, we
must devise a broad spectrum of preventive measures,
including training relevant personnel and disseminating
knowledge on how to deal with children who are victims of
armed conflict and on their rights, needs and interests, as
well as on existing legal norms in this sphere. I hope that
today's debate will lend the necessary momentum to this
endeavour.

We highly value the role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ambassador Otunnu, and believe that the ideas he set out
today deserve full consideration and inclusion in the
activities of the United Nations.

