Mr. Gambari: I also would like to say how
delighted I am that the Secretary-General has decided
to attend our meeting this morning. It shows the
importance he attaches to African issues in general
and, of course, to the long conflict in Angola in
particular. I feel like a member of the faculty of a
secondary school addressing a gathering at which the
headmaster is present, so if I am a bit nervous, please
forgive me.

I am delighted to brief the Council on my last
mission to Angola. The mission took place at the
invitation of the Government of Angola, upon the
directive of the Secretary-General and with the
blessings of the members of the Council, which was so
powerfully expressed at the last open meeting on
Angola, on 15 November. The main objective of my
mission was to hold consultations with the
Government, the political parties, the churches, civil
society representatives and other concerned parties on
how best the United Nations can help accelerate the
peace process in Angola within the framework of the
Lusaka Protocol. I was also in Angola to discuss with
the authorities and national and international non-
governmental organizations the ways and means to
improve the humanitarian situation facing the people of
Angola.

The highlight of my visit was the meeting with
President Jose' Eduardo dos Santos, who for the first
time received me at the beginning of my visit and not,
as usual, towards the end. I believe this was a
deliberate act meant to set the tone for subsequent
discussions with the relevant members of his Cabinet. I
also met with the Ministers for External Relations,
Mr. Miranda; of Interior, Mr. Dos Santos "Nando"; and
of Planning, Ms. Lourenco.

Meetings were also organized with the President
of the National Assembly, Mr. Roberto de Almeida; the
Secretary-General of the ruling MPLA party,
Mr. Lourenco; representatives of the Inter-
Denominational Committee for Peace in Angola
(COIEPA) and other members of the civil society;
leaders of the parliamentary groups; UNITA
parliamentarians; UNITA Renovada; humanitarian
agencies; national and international non-governmental
organizations; the Troika and other members of the
diplomatic corps; the group of donor countries; and
other stakeholders in Angola.

When I briefed the Council on my last Visit to
Angola, in May this year, I mentioned that there were
three sets of issues that constituted the outcome of that
visit, and in fact compared them to a set of lights.

First, the green light: these were issues on which
the Government would like to begin immediate
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations,
such as the management of the Fund for Peace and
National Reconciliation, the design and implementation
of pilot projects for demobilized soldiers and resettled
internally displaced persons, and assistance in the
electoral process.

Secondly, the amber light: these were issues on
which the Government informed me that more time
was needed for further consideration before giving
definite responses, such as the modalities for the
disarmament of UNITA combatants and the collection
of weapons, as mentioned in the Government's four-
point peace plan; direct contacts with UNITA's Jonas
Savimbi; and the possibility of establishing
humanitarian corridors.

Thirdly, the red light: these were issues that were
regarded as non-negotiable, such as any attempt to
resolve the Angolan conflict outside of the Lusaka
Protocol framework or any attempt to renegotiate the
Protocol itself. In this regard, however, the
Government recognized that some adjustments may
have to be made to the provisions of the Protocol in
order to take account of the changed realities on the
ground in Angola.

I am happy to report to the Council that during
my last visit to Luanda, from 8 to 14 December, all
these issues were discussed extensively with the
Government in a spirit of give and take. My overall
assessment is that progress is being made on all fronts
and that the main elements of the United Nations
policy and strategy for helping to end the conflict in
Angola appear to have been reaffirmed.

Let me reiterate to the Council the fundamentals
of this policy. First, there can be no military solution to
this conflict. Secondly, sanctions are an important
instrument with which to press UNITA to abandon war
and return to the political process. Thirdly, support for
civil society is an important aspect of the peace
process. Last but not least, the Government should be
encouraged to implement programmes of political and
economic reforms, which, we believe, will be
additional contributions to the peace process.

In my last briefing to the Council, I informed it
that the Secretary-General had approved the dispatch of
a multi-agency exploratory mission to Angola from 17
to 27 September 2001. Its report was carefully
reviewed in the Secretariat. A second mission was then
sent to Angola ahead of me, and it stayed in Angola
during my visit to discuss with the authorities the
findings of the earlier exploratory mission and prepare
a programme of action. The Minister of Interior, who is
also the Chairman of the intersectoral Commission for
peace and national reconciliation, informed me that the
Government of Angola is fully satisfied with the
recommendations made by the mission and the spirit of
cooperation that has been established between the
Government team and the United Nations team.

A technical team is to be sent for a follow-up
mission in J anuary-February 2002 for a four-week stay
in Angola to work on details of the programme of
action and the implementation strategy. Three main
areas of cooperation and support have been identified,
as follows: first, the design of an integrated
development pilot programme in two provinces
involving the creation of capacity to plan and prepare
appropriate budgets at the provincial level, and
rehabilitation of infrastructures and preparation of
programmes to alleviate the social hardships of the
people and employment generation; secondly, the
design of a programme for peace and reconciliation in
which the Fund for Peace and National Reconciliation
is expected to play a leading role; and thirdly, the
design of a civil registration programme and other
programmes to strengthen institutions, which will
address the current obstacles to free and fair elections,
envisaged for 2002.

With specific regard to the proposed national
elections, the Government continues to express its
commitment to hold them soon. However, it is
becoming clear that the second half of 2002, which the
Government had indicated as the date for the elections,
is not realistic. The discussions of the fundamental
principles for a new Constitution appear deadlocked,
the main obstacle being whether the provincial
governors should be directly elected or, as the case is
now, appointed by the President of the Republic.

However, this and other contentious issues may
be resolved by February 2002, when the Constitutional
Commission will submit a draft of the Constitution. It
is important to remember that the draft will then be
submitted for public debate, which may take another
six months before the final draft is approved.
Furthermore, it is estimated that currently more than 60
per cent of Angolans do not possess any form of
identity document. A multi-agency technical team will
be helping the Government to draw up a programme
for civil registration, which is crucial for electoral
registration and other issues.

The humanitarian situation was generally
described as worsening in a number of areas. The
number of internally displaced persons and refugees
has grown beyond the capacity of humanitarian
agencies to cope. It is estimated, for example, that the
number has reached 4.1 million - and one must recall
that this is a country with a total population of about 12
million.

This rapid and large increase in internally
displaced persons is attributed to the current Angolan
Armed Forces offensive and to the so-called mop-up
operation undertaken by Government forces. The mop-
up operation is a strategy consisting of moving people
from their areas of origin into camps for internally
displaced persons with the aim of depriving UNITA of
its support base, especially for food and recruitment of
military personnel. In any case, the increase of
internally displaced persons has led to high rates of
malnutrition within the camps, among other problems.

Nevertheless, the Government has made
enormous efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
in the country. For example, it has allocated additional
funds to tackle the increasing influx of internally
displaced persons to urban areas, resulting from recent
military offensives by Government forces. Moreover,
the Government has made plans to resettle 500,000
people by early next year, and the United Nations
agencies have pledged to resettle another 150,000. The
Government has also closed down the transitional
camps, whose facilities are grossly inadequate. The
situation in the nutrition centres showed some
improvements from May to early September, although
it appears to have worsened from about two months
ago because of the new movement of the population
from rural areas to urban areas.

Moreover, the Government has improved access
and food delivery to many parts of the country that
were not possible to reach by road. The World Food
Programme (WFP) representative, who is also Deputy
Humanitarian Coordinator for Angola, informed me
that the WFP convoys have started delivering food by
road to places that could not be reached until a few
months ago. The Government has also repaired some of
the infrastructure, such as bridges and airstrips. The
airstrip in Kuito, particularly, is currently being
repaired, and access has improved on the whole in the
south, the north and the centre of the country. Only the
eastern province remains rather difficult to access.

Furthermore, the Government has instructed the
defence forces to deliver food where security cannot
yet be guaranteed, while attempts are being made to
meet the security standards imposed by humanitarian
agencies and to extend State administration to those
areas.

The challenge now being faced by the authorities
is how to consolidate the delivery of humanitarian aid
to places that are now accessible by road as a first step
and gradually expand access to the entire country.
However, the Government is of the view that there is
now no need for the establishment of humanitarian
corridors in classical terms, because UNITA does not
control any known territory. Nonetheless, it is willing
to consider the idea of "safe areas" where humanitarian
assistance can be delivered to those who badly need it.
These places will be secured and protected through an
arrangement which is satisfactory to the United
Nations, humanitarian agencies and other interested
parties.

Now I would like to come to the crux of the
matter: the peace process itself. With respect to the
prospect of peace, it is gratifying to note that for the
first time, there is a convergence of opinion among the
people consulted that the United Nations should play a
more proactive role in the peace process. The
Government reiterated that it would have no objection
to the role of the churches in facilitating contacts with
Savimbi's UNITA, but that this should be done through
the United Nations, which should resume its role as
mediator. Meanwhile, the Government believes that
UNITA's military capacity has been almost totally
destroyed and that only a miracle could save it.
According to the Government, UNITA is operating
with residual forces only, without any capacity to
attack military targets. It controls no territory or
municipalities and is facing numerous defections from
its rank and file, including some top officers. In fact,
we are told that right now there are a total of about 200
officers left with Savimbi's UNITA. However, the
Government recognizes that UNITA is still capable of
conducting attacks of terror, which undermine peace
and the socio-economic development of the country.

On their part, UNITA parliamentarians also
reiterated the organization's commitment to peace
through a dialogue within the framework of the Lusaka
Protocol. However, they cautioned that the Lusaka
Protocol should not be used simply as a platform to
obtain UNITA's surrender. The Lusaka Protocol should
be implemented with the necessary adjustments, as
indicated in the 12-p0int peace plan that UNITA had
communicated to the United Nations. They also
emphasized that, while the group could largely convey
UNITA's position, the final decision still lay with
UNITA leadership, headed by Mr. Savimbi. Hence, if
peace is to be achieved, dialogue with Mr. Savimbi
should be reopened.

In this regard, we have recent information to the
effect that Mr. Savimbi has expressed interest in re-
establishing dialogue with the Government in Luanda,
within the Lusaka Protocol, but there is a need to
authenticate this source. Throughout our consultations
in Angola, I appealed to the parties, saying that it was
time to take the peace process off the streets and to find
the right channels through which serious discussions on
peace could take place. The Government and UNITA
parliamentarians appear to have seen the wisdom in
this appeal.

On a related matter, my delegation has also had
the opportunity to discuss with the authorities the issue
of the collection and destruction of weapons, in the
event that the peace process accelerates. The
Government had indicated, in its four-point peace plan,
that the United Nations should assume responsibility
for this task. Accepting such a task would, however,
involve an adjustment to the current mandate and
capacity of the United Nations Office in Angola
(UNOA). As we know, its current mandate allows
UNOA to have two dimensions: capacity-building in
the area of human rights and helping to promote
humanitarian assistance.

We now have a subject which is ripe for further
discussions in the Secretariat and, later, with the
Council. Nevertheless, it is anticipated that,
meanwhile, the pilot programmes that have been
discussed with the United Nations technical teams and
the Government of Angola will have a component of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants into civilian life, in which the
Government of Angola will take the lead. The
Government has also informed us that there are a
number of UNITA combatants defecting to
Government-controlled areas who are arriving with
their weapons. Hence, it is important that a mechanism
be considered and designed which can facilitate the
collection and destruction of such weapons.

In conclusion, there is indeed now a window of
opportunity to advance the peace process in Angola
which the United Nations should explore. In this
regard, the Secretary-General has directed me to
continue consultations with certain Southern African
Development Community (SADC) leaders, other
African leaders and other Member States on the way
forward. Under the guidance of the Secretary-General,
we in the Secretariat will continue to work on these
issues and also to work with the Council and all other
interested parties to find ways to accelerate the peace
process in the context of the Lusaka Protocol, so that
peace can come to Angola sooner rather than later.

