The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls the press
statement of the Council members on 10 December
2016, and takes note of the communique of
the Chairman of the African Union (AU) on
10 December 2016, as well as thejoint communique
of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Commission, the African Union
Commission and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) on 10 December
2016 regarding the situation in the Islamic Republic
of the Gambia (the Gambia).

"The Security Council welcomes and is
encouraged by the decisions on the political
situation in the Gambia of the fiftieth Ordinary
Session of the ECOWAS Authority, held in Abuja
on 17 December 2016, and the decisions of the AU
Peace and Security Council at its six-hundred and
forty-fourth meeting, held on 12 December 2016,
and of the African Union to recognize Mr. Adama
Barrow as President-elect of the Gambia.

"The Security Council reiterates its request
to outgoing President Jammeh and the relevant
Gambian authorities to fully respect the results
of the presidential election of 1 December 2016,
to respect the will of the Gambian people and to
carry out a peaceful and orderly transition process,
and to transfer power to President-elect Adama
Barrow by 19 January 2017 in accordance with
the Gambian Constitution. The Security Council
further welcomes the decision of ECOWAS Heads
of State to attend the 19 January inauguration of
President-elect Barrow in Banjul.

"The Security Council commends the
initiatives of ECOWAS, including the Visit of an
ECOWAS/United Nations high-level delegation
to Banjul on 13 December 2016, led by Her
Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President
of the Republic of Liberia and Chairperson of the
ECOWAS Authority, aimed at ensuring a peaceful
and orderly transition process in the Gambia.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment by ECOWAS of His Excellency
Mr. Muhammadu Buhari, President and
Commander-in-Chief of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, as the Mediator in the Gambia, and His
Excellency Mr. John Dramani Manama, President
of the Republic of Ghana, as the Co-chair.

"The Security Council recalls its members'
request that the security of President-elect Adama
Barrow, and that of all Gambian citizens, be fully
ensured, and supports the decision of the ECOWAS
fiftieth session in this regard.

"The Security Council further requests that the
Gambian defence and security forces demonstrate
maximum restraint to maintain an atmosphere of
calm in Banjul.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General, including through his Special
Representative, in collaboration with the relevant
regional and sub-regional organizations, to
facilitate, as appropriate, political dialogue between
the Gambian stakeholders in order to ensure a
peaceful transition of power in the Gambia and
in full respect of the outcome of the presidential
election as recognized by ECOWAS and the AU,
and to provide technical assistance to the ECOWAS
mediation where required.

"In this regard, the Security Council emphasises
the important role of Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas,
Special Representative of the Secretary General
and Head of UNOWAS, in the current political
situation in the Gambia.

"The Security Council further welcomes and
reiterates its full support for the continued efforts
of the AU and ECOWAS to promote peace, stability
and good governance in the region.

"The security Council expresses its intention
to continue to follow the situation in the Gambia
closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/ 19.

The meeting rose at10,10 a.m.
