Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Mueller for
her briefing.

Once again, we express our gratitude to all
humanitarian actors who continue to provide assistance
under truly challenging conditions. We believe we should
commend in particular the Syrian non-governmental
organizations engaged in humanitarian in work.
Those organizations are proof of the often-overlooked
resilience and solidarity of the Syrian people. To all of
them, I express our deepest gratitude.

The growing humanitarian needs of the vulnerable
population, fuelled by successive displacement and
conditions of insecurity, are a source of grave concern
to the Dominican Republic. The alarming statistic of
630,000 newly displaced persons represents a major
humanitarian challenge that demands a robust and
urgent collective response backed by the necessary
funding to achieve the objectives of providing
protection, basic services and shelter, while preserving
the humanity and dignity of those people. We are
talking about a population that was mostly already in
conditions of extreme poverty, with little capacity to
withstand further blows.
We echo the joint appeal issued by the Secretary-
General and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross regarding the use of
explosive weapons in urban areas, which affirmed that
parties in conflict

"must recognize that using explosive weapons with
wide area effects in cities, towns and refugee camps
places civilians at high risk ofindiscriminate harm".

Idlib is no exception.

Hundreds of thousands of girls and boys in the
north-west of the country have been unable to begin
because their schools have either been attacked or are
being used as a shelters. How could we possibly justify
this situation to those children? What promises for the
future can be made in such a climate ofinsecurity? For
the Dominican Republic, the price that children have
paid for this conflict is particularly alarming. It is more
crucial than ever that we ensure those children will enjoy
a better future, free of threats to their development.

We wish to draw the Security Council's attention
to an important point Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock raised during our latest briefing (see S/PV.8619), when he quite rightly noted that it had not
received a great deal of attention: food security. While
harvests have increased as compared to 2018, according
to the latest report of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization on the situation on Syria,
6.5 million people suffer from acute food insecurity
and 2.5 million additional people are on at risk of food
insecurity. The factors driving that food insecurity
include conflict-induced migration, the destruction of
crops, limited agricultural equipment, a lack of inputs
and rising food prices, to name but a few. As a result,
millions of Syrians are dependent upon food assistance,
which means it remains an urgent priority for Member
States to honour their financial commitments to the
humanitarian response plan.

