There is hardly a better time to have a discussion on the working methods of the Security Council than in the current extraordinary circumstances. From March until now, we all have witnessed an evolution of the Council's adaptation to the new reality of being forced to move its deliberations and negotiations online. That journey has been nothing but quite remarkable. When the lockdown owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak was imposed in March, for a short while the Council virtually disappeared from the public eye and the wider United Nations membership had to rely on scraps of information circulating on Twitter. Moving forward to 8 May, a truly global Arria Formula meeting was held with the participation of more than 40 ministerial-level speakers from all over the world and a public video stream on various platforms visible to all. The adjustment of the Council was perhaps not as swift and all-encompassing as many of us would have liked, but the progress in the opening up of the Council's activities is undeniable. The presidencies of China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia have all made their very important contributions to adjusting the Council to the current harsh realities. Ukraine has always been among the proponents of a more transparent Council, and we welcome the progress made on that track in recent months. In the current circumstances, it is particularly important to hold open video-teleconferences whenever possible. Closed video-teleconferences, an equivalent to consultations of the whole, should be the exception rather than the rule. We proceed from the understanding that, if closed video-teleconferences are held, the outside world deserves to know what was discussed. We would therefore like to see a more concerted effort being made in the preparation of substantive elements for the press. The practice of having joint media stakeouts by European Union or wider groups of Council members is especially important when contentious issues are discussed and reaching consensus language on joint press elements is all but impossible. It is equally encouraging to see that some Council members make public their remarks delivered at those closed meetings. Even though that practice is not yet firmly established, it is a great step forward towards greater transparency, which is something that all of us want. During our term on the Council in 2016 to 2017, we did our best to contribute to ensuring greater openness of the Council. It is encouraging to see that most of the current members are committed to that goal as well. In that regard, we would like to pay tribute to the dedicated efforts last year by Kuwait's delegation, whose perseverance ensured the adoption of eight presidential notes aimed at improving the working methods of the Council. We see some of them already being implemented, while others may take some time to be put into practice. Ukraine welcomes the most recent application of presidential note S/2019/992 by the Estonian presidency, which issued an addendum listing all currently scheduled activities that are not reflected in the approved provisional programme of work. We hope that all the following presidencies will duly implement that note as well. However, there is one matter that has been problematic for quite some time - the much criticized and, equally, much expected annual report. It is worth recalling that presidential note S/2017/507 foresees the preparation of the annual report in two stages: drafting the introduction part, which should be completed by 31 January, and compiling the whole report, which should be completed by 15 March. We realize that the COVID-19 lockdown this year has disrupted all timetables, but we would very much appreciate to learn from Council members as to where the preparation of the report for 2019 stands as of now. Keeping in mind the value of monthly assessments in the preparation of the report, we note with concern that five monthly assessments for 2019 are still missing. It is hardly a sign for optimism. We encourage those delegations that have not yet submitted their reports to do so in a timely manner. In that context, it is also worth recalling that presidential note S/1997/451 provides for the preparation of such a report under a respective delegation's responsibility. On the other hand, we are very happy to see that this year's presidencies of Viet Nam and China have already submitted their monthly assessments in a timely manner, and we hope that others will swiftly follow suit. Another issue that we all will follow very closely this year is the process of preparations of newly elected members for the work on the Council. In the light of the ongoing coronavirus-related challenges, it is particularly important that, following timely elections, incoming members receive all the necessary support in the process of getting ready to carry out their duties for the next two years. It is by responding promptly in crisis situations such as this, by adjusting to existing limitations, by exploring new opportunities, by adapting its working methods to the needs of the time, by following up on its own commitments, by opening up new venues for engaging the United Nations wider membership, and by being proactive and transparent that the Council can truly prove its relevance, strengthen its credibility and deliver concrete outcomes.
