Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremie and
Foreign Minister Hyseni back to the Council this
afternoon. I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for his thorough briefing in his service as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo.

Let me begin by addressing briefly the advisory
opinion of 22 July of the International Court of Justice.
It has been the hope of the United States that the
delivery of this opinion would be a springboard for
Kosovo and Serbia to move beyond the debates of the
past and pursue cooperation to support peace and
stability in the Balkans. The advisory opinion
decisively affirmed the view of the United States and
many other countries that Kosovo's 2008 declaration of
independence was in accordance with international law
and did not violate resolution 1244 (1999). We believe
that the Court's opinion will encourage those countries
that have not done so to now recognize Kosovo.

Kosovo is a special case and is not a precedent
for other conflicts. The Court's opinion recognized that
the declaration of independence of Kosovo had to be
considered within the factual context that led to its
adoption, including, as the opinion described, the
framework established by resolution 1244 (1999) to
resolve the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo and the
developments in the 2005-2007 final status process
brokered by the United Nations, which, despite
exhaustive efforts, was unable to yield a mutually
agreeable outcome on Kosovo's status.

Kosovo is an independent, multi-ethnic
democracy. Its independence is irreversible and its
borders are inviolable. We call now on Kosovo and
Serbia to work together on practical issues that will
move both States forward on their respective paths to
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/40l), let me make three additional points
about the progress that Kosovo has made in recent
months. First, the Secretary-General's report notes
several areas in which Kosovo is consolidating its
multi-ethnic democratic institutions, including by
implementing the decentralization of power from
central to municipal authorities that is envisioned in
Kosovo's Constitution. The recent elections in the
newest Kosovo Serb majority municipality of
Partesh/Partes demonstrate the progress Kosovo is
making toward ensuring the participation of all
communities in its institutions.

Secondly, the Secretary-General points out the
challenges posed by economic difficulties. Last month,
Kosovo signed a standby agreement with the
International Monetary Fund. In the run-up to the
signing, Kosovo's institutions showed their maturity
and responsibility by passing four major financial
reforms into law in one month in order to meet the
agreement's conditions.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General's report notes that
the overall number of security incidents has decreased
during the reporting period. The Kosovo Police, with
the assistance of European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), has demonstrated its growing
capacity to protect all of Kosovo's communities. In late
May, the Kosovo Police, along with EULEX and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), quickly responded to clashes
among large groups of Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo
Serbs over illegal, parallel elections and prevented the
incident from escalating. In late June, the Kosovo
Police provided security for a large demonstration in
connection with Vidovdan celebrations.

The Kosovo Police is increasingly filling crucial
roles once performed by the international community.
Without incident, it has taken responsibility for
security at a patrimonial site previously guarded by
KFOR and alongside EULEX. It is currently
investigating the July violence related to the opening of
the civil service centre in Mitrovica and the shooting of
a Kosovo Serb member of Parliament. In addition,
there has been progress in returns and the reintegration
of returnees supported by municipal authorities and the
central Government with the protection of the Kosovo
Police and KFOR.

But as the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
absence of reconciliation continues to threaten unrest.
For example, some returning ethnic Serb families have
experienced harassment and attacks. My Government
regrets the loss of life and injuries that accompanied
the opening of the civil service centre in northern
Mitrovica last month, and we urge that those
responsible for these criminal acts be held accountable.
The centre has remained open and it continues to
provide necessary services to those most in need in the
local community.

Efforts to promote stability have been hindered
by threats of violence against those who seek to
participate in legitimate institutions of Kosovo's
Government. We strongly condemn the death threats
targeting judges appointed to the Mitrovica District
Court and intimidation directed at Kosovo Serbs who
work with Kosovo's institutions. We call on all parties
to take firm steps to halt incitement to violence.

Let me reiterate our hope that Kosovo and Serbia
will use the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice as an opportunity to work together to resolve
technical issues that can improve the daily lives of
their citizens. Further, we welcome the European
Union's efforts to assist both countries in realizing
their European perspective.

