Mr. Jalang'o (Kenya): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Council on such an
important matter as the situation in Africa.

Mr. Minister, I should like to take this
opportunity to heartily congratulate Mauritius on its
assumption of the presidency, and I also welcome your
presence here. I also extend my congratulations to the
new members of the Council, and take this opportunity
to welcome the presence of the Secretary General of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Amara
Essy, and the very important statement to the Council
he made yesterday.

My delegation notes with great appreciation that,
since Mauritius assumed the presidency, there has been
more attention devoted to Africa, and it is hoped that
today's meeting will greatly help in refocusing
attention on Africa, with the aim of achieving tangible
results. This meeting will no doubt focus on
achievements attained with regard to improved peace
and the security situation in Sierra Leone. The United
Nations peacekeepers have done a commendable job,
and we look forward to the planned elections in Sierra
Leone. We would be failing in our duty if we did not
commend Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), the regional
force that first answered to the call of distress. Their
timely action saved many limbs and many lives.

Secondly, the cessation of hostilities between
Ethiopia and Eritrea has been another success story.
The signing of the ceasefire agreement in Algeria,
followed by the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers, has put an end to hostilities between the
two neighbours. It is hoped that the border issue will be
settled soon.

On the other hand, we still have many problems,
bottlenecks and shortcomings in many countries, such
as Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Somalia. Nevertheless, this meeting is a manifestation
of the commitment of the Security Council and the
United Nations in its entire membership to remain
seized with the search for durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. It also affords us
the opportunity to evaluate the efficacy and adequacy
of the assistance rendered to the OAU by the United
Nations.

The Millennium Declaration charged the world
with the responsibility of paying special attention to
Africa. One year and four months have passed since
then, and Africa can boldly state that the specific goals
and time frames that were set in the Declaration for
addressing pressing problems - such as the HIV/AIDS
pandemic and other diseases, poverty reduction and,
not unrelated, the debt burden and the problem of small
arms - all seem like a dream. Looking at this
catalogue of problems, the only consistent thing about
them is that they continue to grow worse. What has
happened to the promise of special focus on Africa?

It is for this reason, Mr. President, that my
delegation once again thanks you for rekindling
concern about Africa in this very important debate.
Permit me to observe, however, that one day is too
short a period to do justice to the weighty and diverse
matters of Africa. More time must be found to give
Africa the attention it deserves.

We therefore welcome the proposal by Mauritius
to establish a working group to coordinate relations
between the United Nations and the OAU, especially in
the implementation of important decisions and
programmes. Also, closer working relations are called
for between the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council if we are to make headway in
tackling the many problems facing Africa, as the
distinction between the security aspects and economic
aspects of these problems is more imaginary than real.
They are two sides of the same coin.

In the same vein, the announcement by the United
Kingdom that it intends to use its presidency in the
Security Council in July to give further impetus to the
focus on Africa is both timely and welcome. In
between, however, the momentum generated by this
meeting should be sustained.

Given the constraints of time, I wish to touch
briefly on three important issues: the situation in
Somalia, the Sudan peace talks, and the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
United Nations Conference on the Illegal Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons.

On Somalia, I should like to inform the Council
that in a meeting held in Nairobi from 13 to 24
December 2001, the Transitional National Government
of Somalia signed agreements with the United Somali
Congress/Somali Salvation Alliance, the Somali
Reconciliation and Restoration Council and the
Somalia National Alliance. They undertook to establish
an all-inclusive Government in Mogadishu, with
equitable power sharing among Somali clans. They
also agreed, upon the establishment of an all-inclusive
Government, to embark on a programme of
disarmament, rehabilitation and integration under the
auspices of the United Nations. They agreed to
renounce violence and, finally, to settle disputes
through dialogue.

His Excellency President Daniel T. arap Moi of
Kenya reported the above positive development to the
summit meeting of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) held in Khartoum earlier this
month. The IGAD summit decided that a reconciliation
conference on Somalia would be held in Nairobi within
two months, under President Moi as coordinator of the
front-line States - Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti. I
wish to announce that a meeting of Foreign Ministers
of IGAD is scheduled to take place in Nairobi on 14
February 2002.

It is encouraging that the IGAD peace process on
Somalia is gaining momentum and building on the Arta
process. Kenya is also grateful that the United Nations
inter-agency visit to Somalia has taken place and that
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa,
Ambassador Mohamed Sahnoun, remains very actively
engaged with the problem of Somalia. Together with
the support of the OAU and all other international
support and partners, a clear message of goodwill is
being sent to Somalis themselves, urging them to put
their house in order.

Throughout 2001, President Moi again, as
Chairman of the IGAD Committee on the Sudan,
spearheaded several initiatives aimed at moving the
peace process forward. One of the most critical
meetings was the Summit of the IGAD Committee on
the Sudan held in Nairobi in June 2001 and attended by
the Presidents of the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and
Ethiopia and the Chairman of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement. The meeting re-affirmed the
commitment to the peace process on the Sudan on the
basis of the Declaration of Principles. The meeting also
commended the international community, particularly
the IGAD Partners' Forum, for continued diplomatic
and financial support, especially for supporting the
secretariat in Nairobi.

Following that ninth IGAD Summit, consultations
were initiated to merge the Egypt-Libya initiative on
the Sudan and the IGAD initiative. I have listened very
carefully to the statement by my colleague, the
Ambassador of Libya, and we hope that these
initiatives will be put together and will not run parallel.

While the secretariat on peace in the Sudan
continues to explore and facilitate contacts and
agreements, President Moi, at the end of December,
appointed an IGAD Special Envoy to the Sudan. On 17
January the Special Envoy delivered a special message
to President Mubarak of Egypt on the merger. The
response was extremely positive. The joint efforts that
all of us are taking are bound to yield results soon.

Consultations are actively ongoing to reconvene
negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and
the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement. We have no
doubt in our mind that the efforts that have been
expended by regional leaders and the support rendered
by the international community are bound to yield
welcome results soon and to end many years of conflict
and great loss of life and property in the Sudan.

Once again, the Government of Kenya highly
appreciates the support of the OAU, the IGAD member
States and the international community.

On the broader plane, Kenya is proud to have her
sons and daughters deployed in several United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, Europe and Asia
and will continue to discharge her duties towards the
goal of durable peace and security everywhere.

On the issue of the implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted at the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, my delegation
believes that the Programme contains recommendations
that could yield far-reaching positive results; if
implemented, these could ease persistent current
conflicts in the Great Lakes region and in the Horn of
Africa. However, as in the case of the Millennium
Declaration, time has not revealed a serious impetus to
implement it. The question of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa is at the heart of the
continent's future; without them, the fate of the
Africans looks gloomy. The United Nations, including
the Security Council, has in the past held several
meetings that issued very good recommendations. It is
time that these programmes of action were translated
into tangible results.

The world recession is biting, and the gap
between the rich and the poor is widening. Last June,
the General Assembly met in special session on
HIV/AIDS, and only last week the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on
Financing for Development worked hard as it tried to
address the serious debt issue, official development
assistance, poverty reduction and measures and targets
set in the Millennium Declaration. On top of all that is
the threat to international security, peace and order,
which is in direct proportion to the despair of the poor.
However, we have yet to translate all those declarations
and promises into action that would achieve tangible
results.

Finally, the Organization of African Unity is in
transition to the African Union and is moving towards
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. This affords a good opportunity for the
world community and for the United Nations to enter
into a new partnership with Africa in all areas which
have been weighing heavily on the continent.
Humanity demands this.

