Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I assure you of
the full support and cooperation of my delegation. I also
wish to thank the Ambassador of Oman for the efficient
manner in which he guided the work of the Council in
November.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) has made a tremendous contribution to peace

 

and stability, not only in Rwanda but in the Great Lakes
region. With respect to Rwanda itself, a country that at one
point had more than 2 million of its inhabitants outside its
borders as refugees, the presence of UNAMIR is an
important catalyst in the process of national healing and a
reassurance to the refugees that they can return to their
country safely, in honour and dignity. It is regrettable that
1.6 million of these refugees are still in camps in
neighbouring States. Their return and resettlement is a key
element in the process of national reconciliation.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates that a lot
still needs to be done before agreement can be reached on
convening a regional conference under the auspices of the
United Nations. We are of the view that the Cairo
Conference was not intended to be a substitute for the
regional conference proposed by the United Nations. While
the efforts made by President Carter have certainly
advanced the cause of peace and security in the region, as
evidenced by the results of the Cairo meeting, the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity should
continue their efforts aimed at enabling the Governments of
the region to find common ground on an agenda for the
conference. The report of the Secretary-General clearly
shows that there are issues concerning relations between
Rwanda and some neighbouring States that the Security
Council cannot afford to ignore. The Security Council is
unanimous in its recognition of the fact that Rwanda's
current difficulties have subregional dimensions that require
political and diplomatic solutions.

My delegation has carefully considered the draft
resolution contained in document S/ 1995/ 1015. The draft
has been the subject of intensive and painstaking
negotiations. We are pleased that the spirit of compromise
prevailed, and we now have a consensus text. Botswana's
preference would have been for UNAMIR's mandate to be
extended by a further six months, for the reasons stated in
paragraph 47 of the report. UNAMIR plays an important
role as the eyes and ears of the international community, as
we have stated. This is even more crucial in View of the
increased infiltration and acts of sabotage perpetrated by the
former Rwandese Government Forces.

We have noted that the Government of Rwanda had
originally requested that the mandate of UNAMIR be
terminated on 8 December 1995. However, it has
demonstrated flexibility by accepting a further three-month
extension in response to our collective View that the
continued presence of UNAMIR in Rwanda is in Rwanda's
interest.

 

The assistance of the international community will
continue to be critical in the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the socio-economic sectors of the
Rwandese national economy. The greatest challenge
facing the Government and the people of Rwanda is the
return and resettlement of the refugee population.
In the short term, it will be necessary to assist
Rwanda to develop the capacity to receive a large number
of returning refugees. In the long term, substantial
resources will be needed to embark on an accelerated
housing programme, in view of the complex problems
related to ownership of property. In all these challenges,
the international community should not abandon Rwanda.

In this respect, we have noted the Government of
Rwanda's request that it receive assistance by way of
UNAMIR's equipment and material when the mandate of
the Mission ends. The difficulties that the Government of
Rwanda is experiencing as a result of inheriting a country
which was brutally and severely looted are well known.
This has made the task of reconstruction and
rehabilitation extremely difficult. We therefore fully
support operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution and
hope that a way will be found to respond positively to the
genuine request of Rwanda.

