Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We appreciate your timely initiative, Madam President, to discuss this very important issue. I would like to put on record that my delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. At the outset, let me recall the widely recognized notion that transitional justice is composed of different sorts of regulations, including retributive justice, restorative justice, reparatory justice, administrative justice and constitutional justice - all of which shall be understood as complementary to each other. We share that vision and agree with the conclusion with regard to the lack of a coherent and comprehensive approach to the holistic implementation of all components of transitional justice, as rightly mentioned in today's concept note (S/2020/98, annex). Still, there is no doubtthat transitional justice is an important tool, which, from its inception, continues to be developed not only in the legal domain, but is also associated with complex processes involving non-judicial instruments and mechanisms employed to restore peace in post- conflict circumstances. The subject of transitional justice gained special importance for my country amid the ongoing foreign aggression - almost six years of unprecedented, in post-war Europe, violations of the basic norms and principles of international law and order, the occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and certain parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. Taking into account my limited speaking time and the late hour, I will not recall all of Ukraine's actions and judicial avenues to achieve justice in international courts and tribunals, including the International Criminal Court, and bring to account those responsible for numerous war crimes and human rights violations in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine. I will also not delve into the details of the Ukrainian proposal that dates back to early 2015 to deploy a peacekeeping operation, under the auspices of the United Nations, with a strong transitional justice component in its mandate. Instead, I will focus on the practical realization of transitional justice by the Ukrainian authorities. Before doing so, itis important to refer to the 2010 guidance note of the Secretary-General on a United Nations approach to transitional justice and touch upon the normative boundaries of the United Nations, in accordance with international standards, in particular the fact that the United Nations cannot endorse provisions in peace agreements that include amnesties for genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and gross violations of human rights. In 2019, the Legal Reform Commission was established in Ukraine by presidential decree. The Commission acts as a consultative and advisory organ for the Head of State. The body includes a Working Group on the Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories, which is tasked with the following: drafting the national transitional justice model for Ukraine, for both Crimea and Donbas, amending provisions in Ukrainian legislation with regard to the residents of temporarily occupied territories and drafting the de-occupation and reintegration strategy for Crimea and Donbas. At present, the Working Group, jointly with human rights non-governmental organizations and international experts, developed the draft concept of a State policy for the protection of human rights in the context of overcoming the consequences of international armed conflict on the territory of Ukraine. The concept is a framework document and represents an embodiment of the overall concept of transitional justice for Ukraine. Its pillars relate to access to justice and fair treatment, redress for victims of armed conflict, restoration of violated rights, ensuring the right to truth, the prosecution of perpetrators of serious crimes and measures on non-repetition. In conclusion, let me just note that almost in all cases of recent conflicts, justice has become transitional. Despite the absence of a universal solution that would fit all scenarios, the establishment of truth, justice, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence are among the preconditions for sustainable peace after wars, conflicts and occupation. The ongoing Russian- Ukrainian conflict is not an exception here. We hope that in the near future the efforts of Ukraine, supported by the international community and aimed at the peaceful settlement of the conflict and the de-occupation of Ukrainian territories, will serve as a historic example, including in the field of the effective implementation of transitional justice during ongoing conflicts, as well as post-war reintegration, reconstruction and reconciliation.
