Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia
- and the associated country Cyprus, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
underline my deep appreciation that the Security Council
has given the protection of civilians in armed conflict a
very high priority, which, as you mentioned, Mr. President,
is reflected in the three meetings held within only 30 days.
The Security Council has rightly done so. The EU believes
that the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
deserves to figure high on the international political agenda.
While we recognize that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians under all circumstances rests with States
and parties to a conflict, we must also reinvigorate
international efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council has an important responsibility in this
context. It is important that it properly coordinate its actions
with other relevant bodies.

Looking at the present global situation, one cannot but
feel profound concern. International Committee of the Red
Cross President Sommaruga asked this Council on 12
February 1999,

"Does this interest in humanitarian affairs not mask a
certain feeling of impotence at the magnitude of the
task that confronts us?" (S/PV.3977, p. 2)

He, as well as Under-Secretary-General Vieira de
Mello; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu; and my distinguished
colleagues who spoke during the recent Security Council
meetings agreed to a very large extent on the analysis of
the present, very sombre, situation. In this regard, we would
like in particular to mention the recent visit to Africa of the
European Commissioner for Humanitarian Affairs, Emma
Bonino, who described the situation in Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau as "hellish". That visit underlines the
commitment of the European Union to a continent where
conflicts, especially internal, have a particularly severe
impact on civilian populations.

Not only is there still an alarming number of
conflicts, but also their nature has changed. Most of the
conflicts that now come before the Security Council are
internal armed conflicts. The important distinctions
between combatants and non-combatants, as well as
between humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, are
often being blurred. Today 90 per cent of victims in
conflicts are civilians. Civilians have thus become the
first and main target in armed conflict. Women, children,
the elderly, the sick, refugees and internally displaced
persons have been attacked in large numbers.
International humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law are often unknown to parties to the conflict,
or they are ignored or wilfully disrespected. The gulf
between existing international norms and respect for them
on the ground has never attracted so much concern.
Genocide, so-called ethnic cleansing, increasing attacks on
humanitarian personnel and the repudiation of the
principles of humanity have become an almost general
phenomenon in today's conflicts.

While all civilians deserve and need the protection
of the international community, children deserve particular
attention. As Mr. Otunnu described in the Security
Council meeting of 12 February, in recent years more
than 2 million children have been killed in conflict
situations, more than 1 million have been orphaned, more
than 6 million have been permanently or seriously injured,
12 million have been made homeless, and more than 10
million are estimated to be suffering from grave
psychological and emotional trauma. More than 300,000
children in more than 30 conflict situations are serving as
child soldiers. These very numbers reflect the horror and
the suffering of probably the weakest group in armed
conflicts.

The collapse of law and the often anarchic nature of
contemporary conflict is a severe challenge for the state
community. It must not be a cause for gloom. What can
we do in order to improve the situation? I would like to
highlight some areas that the European Union considers
to be particularly important.

First, we have to bridge the widening gap between
existing international norms and respect for them through

 

full compliance with international law and fundamental
principles. While the existing, impressive body of
international human rights and humanitarian law might need
some elaboration, the main objective should be to ensure its
respect and full implementation. The dissemination, in clear
and simple terms, of knowledge of human rights obligations
and of international humanitarian law among security forces
and other participants in armed conflict is most important.

Second, we must ensure unimpeded access of
humanitarian workers to those in need. It is of utmost
importance to tackle the question of effective monitoring
and enforcement of human rights and humanitarian law.
The very presence of international personnel often helps
prevent the worst atrocities and contributes to implementing
international law.

Third, we need to consider what can be done to
enhance the safety of humanitarian personnel, particularly
in cases where there is limited consent from the parties to
the conflict and the security situation is unstable. The EU
welcomes the entry into force of the 1994 Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

Fourth, we have to consider more effective measures
to protect children in conflicts. We consider the raising of
the age limit for participation in armed conflicts from 15 to
18, as foreseen by the additional protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, an important step in this
direction. The United Nations has set a good example with
regard to the deployment of peacekeeping forces. We must
also ensure that children are always identified as a priority
in all efforts to build peace and resolve conflicts.

Fifthly, we must tackle the problems of anti-personnel
mines and of all small arms proliferation, since they impede
the repatriation of refugees, endanger both the dispensation
of humanitarian assistance and economic recovery and lead
to the return of violence. Sixthly, sanctions should be well
targeted on the leadership in order to have a real impact
without, as far as possible, leading to negative humanitarian
consequences for the population. Arms embargoes should
be strictly implemented so that illegal arms flows to
conflict areas can be stopped.

Seventh, we must put an end to impunity from war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The Yugoslavia and
the Rwanda Tribunals are important steps in the right
direction. The EU has warmly welcomed the adoption of
the Rome Statute and is working wholeheartedly towards an
early entry into operation of the International Criminal
Court. It is also essential for States to implement their
obligations to take action on the national level.

Eighth, we should do our utmost to prevent the
media from being used as a tool of conflict. Nationalist or
ethnic hate campaigns propagated through the mass media
prepared the way for genocide, and not only in Rwanda.
Ninth, the Security Council should as a matter of priority
seek to prevent conflicts. We must all do everything to
prevent such conflicts by promoting economic and social
development, good governance and respect for human
rights.

Tenth, coherent diplomatic, political and military
measures have to be complemented with measures related
to economic, humanitarian and development aspects of
conflict management. In that context it is important to
further develop the concept of a strategic framework to
guide the work of the various United Nations
organizations. The EU particularly welcomes the recent
Security Council decisions on the causes of conflict in
Africa and on the situation in the continent. In those
decisions the need was stressed for a comprehensive
strategy within the United Nations system, including the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
The EU is looking forward to the report requested from
the Secretary-General, which will provide a useful
framework for our future work on this important subject.

Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you for
the organization of today's meeting and for the open
briefing on 12 February, and encourage the Security
Council to struggle relentlessly for improved protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Allow me to add, in my national capacity, that the
problems we are discussing today are of concern to all
members of the international community. They should,
therefore, wherever possible, be dealt with not behind
closed doors but in open meetings.

