Ms. Mwangi (Kenya): I would like to begin
by commending the United Kingdom for initiating
today's timely and important discussion in which
we are exploring implementable actions to rally the
multilateral community around nationally-owned and
nationally-led reconciliation processes.

National reconciliation is a transitional-justice
phenomenon and a global endeavour. Countries whose
values support entrenching democracy allow spaces for
national reconciliation forums. It is therefore beneficial
to have discussions and regular exchanges that draw
on best practices and address persistent challenges
that indeed include, but also go beyond, the conflict-
affected countries. Effective national reconciliation
processes are important tools that help an entire nation
to collectively and inclusively address important
national issues, including moments of remembrance
and commemoration.

The protection of witnesses, victims and
individuals at risk against reprisal or intimidation is
crucial in order to give credibility to the process and
promote popular participation. Related legal reforms
also allow for efficiency and accountability. National
truth and reconciliation commissions play a critical
role. The diverse character of such commissions, which
involves all ethnicities, regions, religious groups and
political viewpoints, will ensure broad acceptance in
the population.

Drawing on well-established traditional mediation
and reconciliation processes ensures the acceptance
of a reconciliation process among the populace. The
identification and integration of key players, including
trusted faith leaders and community leaders, is
important in ensuring that national, traditional and
local-level reconciliation initiatives work coherently
and inclusively to ensure sustainability. It is also
important to create space and integrate other initiatives
that come from local actors, civil society and academia
in order to support national reconciliation. Schools
and universities are important partners. Given the
sensitivities surrounding national reconciliation, great
attention needs to be paid to the technical aspects
of reconciliation processes, such as the archiving
of data. We welcome the Council's initiative to have
representatives from civil society and academia as
today's key briefers.
Allow me to share a few practical lessons learned
from Kenya's experience. Following our 2017 elections,
His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta and the
leader of the opposition, The Honourable Mr. Raila
Odinga, agreed to form a national reconciliation process
referred to as "the handshake" and the Building Bridges
Initiative. That has significantly transformed Kenya's
sociopolitical and economic landscape and confirms
that effective leadership is key to exemplifying the path
to peace. The handshake has put the country on the path
to reconciliation, created space for the resumption of
daily socioeconomic activities and set us on the path to
creating a united Kenya for all generations, today and
in the future.

The Building Bridges Initiative is an ongoing
process that focuses on addressing various forms of
antagonism and competition, the challenge of ensuring
inclusivity, the devolution of Government services,
enhancing safety and security, tackling corruption,
fostering shared prosperity and guaranteeing the
protection of rights. We are hopeful that the Initiative
will translate into concrete political outcomes.

Women leaders have been both at the forefront
and working behind the scenes of peacebuilding and
bridge-building activities in Kenya. More than 200
women have also been trained and are actively engaged
in the mediation of community conflicts across various
counties, including the women-led Embrace Women
Building Bridges for Kenya movement, which is one
of the grass-roots implementation strategies of the
handshake initiative.

In conclusion, the role of the international
community should be one of support, at the request of
respective States Members of the United Nations,\ in
order to build the capacities of national and grass-roots
conflict resolution and reconciliation initiatives. We
commend the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund, as highlighted by the
various briefers, for their investments in national
reconciliation processes. Financial and technical
support gain value when approached from a national
ownership perspective. The mandates of truth and
reconciliation commissions should remain under
the purview of Member States so as to allow for a
timeline that enables a comprehensive reconciliation
process. The Security Council can systematically and
contextually integrate nationally led reconciliation
processes into its work within the broader framework
of transitional justice.
