Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, let me
join my colleagues in thanking you for organizing this
open debate.

Recurring acts of terrorism have posed one of the
greatest threats to international peace and security in
recent years. Millions of people, including women and
children, have become innocent victims of terror in our
times. We strongly condemn the unimaginably barbaric
act of terrorism targeting innocent schoolchildren in
Pakistan this week that claimed 141 innocent lives,
mostly children. Such senseless, despicable acts of
terror, as our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, rightly
observed, only enhance our resolve to fight this scourge
in a united manner, with a stronger commitment and
sincerity.

The effective countering of terrorism is a collective
endeavour. Because of the advent of technology,
terrorism and terrorist threats continue to evolve and
manifest themselves differently in different parts of
the world. Responses to terrorism need to reflect this
reality and be able to adapt constantly.

International efforts to combat terrorism must
involve addressing the root causes of terrorism.
In the process of identifying its root causes,
terrorism should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Addressing
marginalization, poverty, social exclusion and racial,
cultural and religious discrimination must be part of
the strategies to counter terrorism.

It also needs to be recognized that terrorism cannot
be defeated solely by coercive measures. We have
to engage in soft diplomacy and impart awareness,
quality education, eliminate inequalities and work
with marginalized groups of society as an effective
strategy. Similarly, inculcating tolerance, promoting a
culture of peace and dialogue among civilizations, and
interfaith and intercultural understanding are among
the most important pathways to promote cooperation
among societies and nations and to successfully combat
terrorism. To have sustainable, long-term peace and
stability, Bangladesh has been promoting a culture of
peace and trying to inculcate a mindset of tolerance,
a mindset of love and respect for others, irrespective
of ethnicity, culture, caste, religion or colour, free of
hatred and intolerance. This cannot be done only by
the Government; all institutions and organizations,
in particular the media, teachers, community leaders,
schools, parents, authors, writers, poets and singers,
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
religious leaders have to take the lead to create a
mindset of tolerance and understanding.

The nexus between terrorist networks, non-State
actors and transnational criminals poses newer
challenges to State apparatuses and traditional lines
of national defence. They compel us to devise more
innovative, well-coordinated and near-impenetrable
strategies to ensure cross-border controls against the
illicit movement of terrorists and criminals and the
transfer of weapons, ammunition and their means of
production and delivery. To be sure, the nexus between
terrorists and criminals has been greatly facilitated
by the advent and misuse of information technology
and easy access to weapons. The Internet has become
a fertile breeding ground for terrorist activities.
Subversive uses of the Internet must be identified and
obstructed. The financing of terrorism through the Web
must be halted and the online nexus of terrorist and
other organized criminal entities, including through the
use of social media, must be dismantled.

Bangladesh's position on terrorism is consistent.
We denounce it in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter why, how or where it is carried out.
Bangladesh maintains a policy of zero tolerance for all
forms of terrorism, including financing of terrorism,
radicalization and violent extremism, both nationally
and internationally. Bangladesh, as a matter of principle,
does not allow its territory to be used by any terrorist
individual, group or entity against any State or people.

We have taken commendable initiatives to end cross-
border crimes and terrorism, as well as cross-border
financing of terrorism and extremism. In addition, it
is imperative that the cross-border trafficking of illegal
weapons and ammunition be stopped in order to reduce
their supply to terrorists or terrorist networks. It is
essential that weapons producers correctly identify
every item produced, including arms and ammunition.
We recommend that the media name the producers of
killer weapons when they report on terrorist acts of
killing.

Bangladesh also maintains a strong legal,
regulatory and institutional regime countering
terrorism, including through statutory orders and by
enacting laws on anti-terrorism and the prevention
of money-laundering, as well as by implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism
and financing terrorism, including resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 2178 (2014), and
their successor resolutions.

We believe that all national, regional and
international actions against terrorism should be
conform to relevant international human rights and
humanitarian laws. We are committed to working closely
with United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and their
international partners, including at the regional level,
in order to achieve greater international cooperation
on information-sharing and capacity-building so as to
address terrorist threats to peace and security.

