Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Through you, Mr. President, we would like to express
to the other members of the Council how important we
believe today's meeting is.

For Uruguay, the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, like the creation of the
Human Rights Council, is one of the most solid and
necessary achievements in the present reform process
of this Organization. Throughout its history, the United
Nations has played an essential and irreplaceable role
for international peace and security with the goal of
facilitating peaceful solutions to conflicts, within or
between States, primarily through its peacekeeping
operations.

Other speakers today have observed that despite
those efforts, the international community has noted
with great concern two trends that have gained ground
in recent years. On the one hand, a vast number of
countries emerging from conflict lack basic State
institutions and require emergency humanitarian
assistance. On the other hand, and no less disturbing, a
great number of those countries that manage to emerge
from situations of war and violence relapse in a short
period of time. The result is well known: a resumption
of hostilities, the unleashing of violence against the
civilian population, economic and social chaos and the
collapse of the State. Perhaps one of the most telling
examples of this can be found in our own hemisphere
of the Americas.

In a few days the Security Council is to decide on
the renewal of the mandate for the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is
the fifth stabilization mission in that country, and it is
clear evidence of the high cost paid when attention and
international assistance focus on ending armed
violence without dealing with the other dimensions of
the conflict.

For Uruguay, the Peacebuilding Commission is a
direct response to the need for an institutional
mechanism within the United Nations system to deal
exclusively with meeting the special needs of countries
emerging from conflict situations. My country is firmly
committed to the consolidation of international peace
and security. The fact that it is the seventh largest troop
contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping
operations is proof of that. We are also the country
with the world's largest per capita contribution to
troops. Uruguay is presently participating in 12 of the
15 peacekeeping missions deployed in Africa, America,
Asia and Europe.

Since its first participation in peacekeeping
missions to the present time, Uruguay has gained
experience in matters related to reconstruction and the
consolidation of peace in areas devastated by conflicts.
We have made enormous efforts to put an end to
hostilities, to ensure that societies and communities
will agree to peace and to ensure national
reconciliation. Uruguayan troops have also provided
important assistance to States during elections as part
of efforts to protect the civilian population in countries
that are victims of social collapse.

We wish to express in the Security Council, as
our regional group expressed in the General Assembly,
our great concern at the lack of representation of Latin
American and Caribbean countries in the
Peacebuilding Commission. The situation is even more
evident in the category of principal troop-contributing
countries, where one single subregion is represented
with three States while the other two members belong a
single other regional group. The membership of the
Commission must reflect the participation of countries
in peacekeeping missions, experience gained in
peacebuilding and equitable geographic representation,
in order to ensure that recommendations reflect the
various points of view of the great number of actors
involved in restoring peace after conflict.

Our country renews its commitment here to
United Nations peacekeeping missions and to
peacebuilding worldwide. We reiterate our desire to be
part of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Uruguay welcomes the organizational progress
achieved so far by the Commission. In its brief
existence, it has already adopted rules of procedure and
set up the voluntary Peacebuilding Fund, which is of
particular significance given the lack of essential
financial mechanisms for peacebuilding activities once
agreements putting an end to hostilities have been
signed.

The Commission has begun to consider the
situations in Sierra Leone and Burundi. Uruguay also
took part in peacekeeping operations in both of those
countries. Our delegation continues to follow closely
the work of the Commission on Sierra Leone and on
Burundi, and we encourage the adoption of
recommendations that will make it possible to rebuild
and consolidate peace in both those nations.

The Peacebuilding Commission must be the main
focus of international efforts in defining concrete
actions to make progress towards the recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction of countries emerging
from armed conflict and thus set the foundation for
their sustainable development.

In this task, it is essential to have the active
participation of all States members of the Commission.
The Commission must have the valuable support of
those nations whose experience has been won on the
ground through a sustained commitment to world
peace. It is also essential to ensure effective
coordination with United Nations specialized agencies,
multilateral financial bodies and other actors involved.

