Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the View of the Russian delegation, the
topic for today's discussion, while in and of itself very
important, should be considered in conjunction with
other equally important tasks relating to improving the
peacekeeping potential of the United Nations.

Of particular importance is acting on the
understanding achieved at the Millennium Summit to
the effect that effective international peacekeeping
under the aegis of the United Nations, carried out in
keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Security
Council, is one of the key factors for guaranteeing
global strategic stability. It is of crucial importance that
the Millennium Summit reaffirmed the commitment of
members of the Council to strengthen the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
that the Summit took note of the need for strict
compliance with its authority in this area. The Charter
provision that the Security Council alone is entitled to
authorize such an extreme measure as the use of force
in a crisis situation remains crucial.

Improving United Nations peacekeeping,
including the definition of an exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations, requires first and foremost
the clear formulation and strict fulfilment of Security
Council mandates and timetables for the conduct of
peacekeeping operations, as well as adherence in
practice to the basic principles of peacekeeping. These
principles include the necessity that there be a real
threat to international security and consent of the
parties and that the peacekeepers be neutral and
impartial.

So that peacekeeping operations conclude
successfully, a United Nations rapid-deployment
capacity must be developed, and the effectiveness of
the planning must be enhanced and the technical and
financial resources of operations must be ensured. In
this connection it is important to strengthen the
relevant Secretariat units, including making full use of
the capacity of Military Staff Committee as an
important source of military expertise both for
preparing for the possible deployment of an operation
and for wrapping one up.

We support the useful initiatives to enhance the
practical results of United Nations peacekeeping
activities, in particular the recommendations of the
Brahimi report. We think that the outcome of their
consideration within the United Nations should be to
agree on concrete measures capable of increasing the
anti-crisis potential of the Organization on the basis of
the consent of Member States.

Peacekeeping operations, of course, are not an
end in themselves; but they are one very important
instrument for bringing about the ultimate goal, which
is a political resolution to a conflict, primarily by
creating favourable conditions for the successful
activities of international mediators and for
encouraging dialogue among the parties to the conflict
themselves. In this context, there is no doubt that there
is a need to design a well-thought-out strategy for the
conduct and termination of specific peacekeeping
operations. The importance of this is relevant from the
standpoint of ensuring the smoothest possible shift
from conflict to normality; reducing the likelihood of
the eruption of a new wave of violence and ensuring
the transition to a long-term and just settlement. We
think that a guarantee for attaining these goals should
be the main criterion in carrying out the tasks outlined
by the Security Council when setting up peacekeeping
operations, and should be a condition for exiting from a
peacekeeping operation.

One important factor for establishing and
terminating a peacekeeping operation is the material
resources of the United Nations. Unfortunately, the
peacekeeping resources of the Organization are not
limitless, and they must be apportioned in the best
possible way, in a manner commensurate with the real
danger posed by a given conflict to regional and global
stability.

As the Council knows, given the recent surge in
demand for United Nations peacekeeping, the United
Nations peacekeeping budget has grown increasingly
tight. A comprehensive approach to modern-day
peacekeeping means that there must be a smooth
transition from one phase to the next. Of great
importance here is the political support provided by the
Security Council to peacemaking efforts, which must
be carried out through the appropriate bodies of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies. We believe
that most of the economic aspects of conflicts should
be handled by the competent offices in the United
Nations system. Security Council involvement in this
process, including through the use of peacekeeping
operations, has its limits, and it should take place on an
ad hoc basis if there is still a real threat to international
or regional peace and security.

The peacekeeping efforts of the Security Council
have extinguished major regional conflagrations in
Cambodia, Mozambique and Central America. The
most recent example of such positive efforts was the
settlement achieved in Tajikistan.

Russia, as a member of the Security Council,
continues to make its contribution to the United
Nations efforts to prevent and settle crises. We are
participating in 10 of the 15 United Nations
peacekeeping operations, providing military police,
political and civilian personnel and logistical support.
We reaffirm our willingness to fully support United
Nations peacekeeping activities, which seek to achieve
final results and guarantee a dignified exit.
