Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I too wish
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for their briefings. We also thank
the representative of Afghanistan for his statement and
wish him every success in his new appointment.

The relative improvement that we have seen in a
number of areas in Afghanistan - including governance
and the fight against corruption - and the efforts being
made by the authorities to ensure security throughout
the country are positive steps in the right direction
for the development of the country. It is important,
however, to maintain the achievements made to date
and to build on them in the coming period through
the implementation of reform programmes previously
announced by the Afghan authorities. That process
must be intensified, as such reforms have a significant
impact on daily life in Afghanistan. We therefore urge
the Afghan political class to support the implementation
of the Government's reform programmes.

The upcoming parliamentary elections will be
the cornerstone of the country's political future and
stability. We urge the Afghan authorities to continue
their sound preparatory work for the elections and
to hold them as soon as possible on the basis of the
internationally accepted criteria of transparency and
democracy.

With the deteriorating security situation on the
ground and the increase in terrorist activities that have
claimed a large number of Afghan civilian victims, it
is important to strengthen the capacities of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) and to offer all
international assistance available. These needs must be
met during this important phase in order to enhance the
resilience of the ANSF, broaden their effective control
of the national territory and combat terrorism.

In tandem with the security-building process
under way, one element of critical importance to the
country's stability is support for the Afghan political
reconciliation process among all stakeholders. We call
upon those stakeholders to make greater progress in
order to overcome the existing obstacles and launch
negotiations as soon as possible.
Despite the clear progress that has been achieved,
the human rights system needs a progressive reform
strategy that addresses many aspects and covers all
areas, in particular those sectors of the population
that have been targeted and weakened. That strategy
must be accompanied by national programmes that
aim to raise citizens' awareness of their rights and the
laws in force. In that regard, we call upon the Afghan
authorities to work to ensure accountability for all
those who perpetrate crimes against human rights, in
line with international law.

The work that Afghanistan is undertaking to
promote and develop its relations with the countries of
the region, which has recently been evident through a
tangible improvement in those relations, particularly in
the economic sphere, constitutes an important change
that promotes joint work and will help to consolidate
security and stability in the region. We therefore call
upon Afghanistan's neighbouring States to support
Afghanistan and to continue their cooperation with that
country, in particular in terms of security, and to work
to revitalizejoint cooperation, especially with regard to
combating drugs.

In that context, Jordan supports the activities of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
reiterates the importance of adopting a comprehensive
approach to allow the authorities to combat that
problem and to step up awareness campaigns among the
people, as well as to address drug users. It is important
to combat all those who are fuelling that scourge and
who are preventing progress in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we appreciate the efforts being
made by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which is serving peace, and the
implementation of its mandate in a competent way and
in the very difficult conditions that Afghanistan is now
experiencing.

