Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are sure
that, through your wisdom and skill, the work of the
Council will be crowned with success as it considers the
issues before it.

I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador Merimee,
on his efforts as President of the Security Council last
month.

Allow me also to express my support for the statement
we have just heard by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Security Council is today considering the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which, having entered a new
phase, threatens both the prestige of the United Nations and
the credibility of the Security Council as the organ
responsible for the implementation of the Charter. This is
because the many resolutions adopted by the Council in
the framework of Chapter VII have not been implemented
and the Council has closed its eyes to this fact, even
though the Charter gives it the right to use force, in the
framework of collective security, in order to implement
resolutions of international legality and to ensure equal
respect for them by all States, large and small, in all parts
of the world, without distinction and on an equal footing.

In the light of the Council's earlier resolutions, the
current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires the
Council to take a strong position from which it can adopt
firm resolutions and provide answers to the following
questions.

First, have the provisions for halting the Serb
aggression against the territories of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including resolutions 757
(1992), 777 (1992) and others, been implemented?

Secondly, will the United Nations allow a State
Member of the Organization to be annihilated through the
forcible occupation of its territory by a party possessing
a military arsenal enabling it to launch a military
operation from which it continues to benefit through
aggressive territorial expansion?

Thirdly, the contingents of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) were deployed to repel
that aggression and ensure the protection of civilians.
Have we provided them with the means to attain the
noble objectives for which they were deployed?

Fourthly, the Council established the concept of
"safe areas" in order to protect the unoccupied territories
of Bosnia. Is the Council going to honour that
commitment and try to overcome the difficulties resulting
from the continued Serb occupation of these territories?

Fifthly, if the situation has worsened because of the
Serb party's rejection of all international peace efforts and
initiatives, will the international community allow the
United Nations to renounce its role of putting an end to
the crisis? Will the United Nations withdraw from the
territory and leave the strong aggressor on an equal
footing with the victim?

Sixthly, will the United Nations allow itself to turn
a blind eye to the policy of racial, religious and political
discrimination and the policy of "ethnic cleansing"?

 

The Egyptian delegation has studied with interest the
Secretary-General's report submitted to the Council and we
note that it contains a useful description of certain objective
aspects of some earlier resolutions of the Council.
However, the report also contains certain negative aspects
on which we would like to comment, the most important of
which are the following.

First of all, the Egyptian delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that we must highlight the importance of
the credibility of the United Nations. Nevertheless, we wish
to point out that in order to ensure that credibility, we must
first apply the provisions of the Charter and implement the
resolutions of the Security Council in order to force the
intransigent Serb party to respect the norms of international
legality. Thus, we shall be able to put an end to the threat
to international peace and security before dealing with
problems of development, environment and human rights,
which, as pointed out in paragraph 82 of the report, cannot
be solved unless the region enjoys peace and stability.

Secondly, to call for the demilitarization of the "safe
areas", in accordance with the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Additional Protocols of 1979, will mean that the
last remaining territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
consist of defenceless, unarmed civilian populations
subjugated under the Serb occupation. The international
community must not accept this. The purpose of the "safe
areas" is to provide international protection for the
territories and their population, but their demilitarization
will mean that they will be under the Serb forces'
domination if the international forces withdraw or are
unable to ensure their defence.

The argument that certain Government armed forces
should be included in the demilitarization process is
inadmissible. Those forces are there because the territories
are an integral part of Bosnia and Herzegovina and were so
even before the current conflict in the region began.

Thirdly, the options available to the Council must be
studied in the light of the detailed information contained in
the report on UNPROFOR's mandate, because the four
options cannot be studied in isolation from other options
and possibilities.

The third option would presuppose a strengthening of
the mandate, but it would also mean modifying that
mandate; this is not admissible because UNPROFOR's
current mandate, as established by the Security Council, is
sufficient. All that is needed is to ensure that there is a
clear framework for the mandate and that UNPROFOR is
given the operational means to accomplish its tasks.

Fourthly, Egypt supports the conclusions of the
Secretary-General in paragraph 67 of his report to the
effect that the international mediation efforts have come
to a standstill and that the Security Council should
therefore reassess the situation and adopt another initiative
to relaunch the peace process.

Egypt is participating in UNPROFOR with military
forces and also with military and police observers. We
pay tribute to the courage of those forces, which are
accomplishing noble, humanitarian tasks. None the less,
the delegation of Egypt reminds the Council and the
Secretariat that Egypt has in the past offered - and is
still prepared to provide - further contingents to
strengthen UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
help it accomplish the many urgent tasks assigned to it by
the Council: if the United Nations and the UNPROFOR
command feel that there is a need for reinforcements,
Egypt would be prepared to consider the possibility.
Egypt is gratified at NATO's initiative to establish
a rapid reaction force that would enable UNPROFOR to
defend the safe areas in particular and the population of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in general; to restore the rule of
international law; and to restore to the region the stability
to which it aspires.

In conclusion, the delegation of Egypt regrets the
fact that the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
mishandled from the outset: that mishandling is the reason
why we are now all frustrated at the doubts expressed by
many parties. That mishandling has also played into the
hands of the Serbs and has encouraged them to defy the
Security Council and its resolutions. If the Serbs keep this
up, the international order will necessarily lose credibility
and a double standard will have been established that
cannot but compromise the position of the international
community as a whole.

