Mr. Ould Abdallah: During my first presentation
on Somalia to this Council on 17 December 2007 (see S/PV.5805), I proposed three options for addressing the
situation: business as usual, a total withdrawal from
Somalia, or simultaneous action in the political,
security and development fields. I would like, in that
connection, to thank the Secretary-General and Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for their continued
understanding and support for Somalia. In particular, I
welcome their confidence that the United Nations
should and can move beyond the status quo to really
make a difference in the future of Somalia and to
strengthen the Organization's image in Africa and
beyond.
10-35930
One important example in support of the third
option is the Secretary-General's engagement with the
Government of Turkey to co-convene next week's
Istanbul conference on Somalia. Despite some
suggestions that it is either too early or too late for
such a high-level gathering, we should all recognize
that, after years of anarchy, there will never be a right
time in Somalia. We have to act now.

The Istanbul conference comes one year after the
Secretary-General convened the Brussels conference,
at which $213 million were pledged to help the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) make progress
in strengthening their security. During the Brussels
conference, the Secretary-General was able to count on
strong support from the African Union (AU), the
European Union (EU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab States,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and several
countries, in particular Japan, Norway and the United
States. Such support, and that of others, is equally
needed today for a successful Istanbul Conference.

As a follow-up to Brussels, more troops are being
trained inside and outside Somalia. The ongoing
training in Uganda is a joint operation between Africa,
the EU and the United States, with 2,000 troops being
prepared in two batches. In that context, the new
Somali Army Chief of Staff, a well-respected career
officer, needs strong and unwavering support from his
Government and must be helped to organize his work
and his forces without excessive internal or external
interference. His colleagues heading the police force
deserve similar assistance. It the context of training, I
would like to add that I am grateful to France for
having initiated the first training operation with
Djibouti last year.

Likewise, the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which now numbers just under 7,000 and still needs
many more battalions, should be strengthened and, at
the same time, helped to carry out its duties of
protecting federal institutions and assisting the needy.
Where the international community can help is in
providing equipment and salaries, at least for one year,
for those forces that have been properly trained. The
memorandum of understanding signed recently
between the African Union, IGAD and my office in
Nairobi should contribute to facilitating that
undertaking.
10-35930

On the political front, despite working under
difficult conditions, the TFG needs to show strength in
unity, determination in action and a common purpose in
its policies. It should prioritize its actions, concentrating
on those that are essential for the population and leaving
aside less urgent ones. For its part, the international
community can help by implementing its commitments,
especially in the disbursement of pledged resources.
There should be a temporary halt in the spending of
funds and energy on strategies and road maps in order to
allow a re-examination of our achievements.

The TFG has succeeded in reaching out to other
groups committed to peace and stability. An agreement
has been signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a - a key
religious and resistance movement - that could
provide a blue print for future agreements. I would like
to reiterate here that the door to peace is open to all
Somalis wishing to end the agony of their country.

A memorandum of understanding signed with
Puntland on piracy-related issues is also of significant
importance. Piracy is a criminal activity that is
increasingly being carried out far from Somalia's
coastline and is encouraged by the payment of huge
ransoms. The international maritime presence -
Operation Atalanta, NATO and other national navies -
has certainly served to deter some pirates, has succeeded
in arresting others and is most welcome. However, there
is consensus that much more could be done.

First, we need to support, strengthen and
empower the TFG and other authorities, in particular
through employment schemes for youth in affected
communities. Secondly, we should also consider a new
initiative. Those countries known to be fishing in
Somali waters should agree to pay a licensing fee, with
the revenue generated put into a form of escrow
account. The revenue collected would be used by the
authorities after clearance by the account's Somali and
international management. That approach would
certainly be better for all than the current situation, in
which licensing money is apparently paid to certain
individuals but fails to reach the legitimate authorities.
I invite serious reflection and action on this matter.

Meanwhile, inside Somalia the humanitarian
situation remains horrendous, despite the laudable
work of the World Food Programme and other
agencies, including UNICEF. It cannot and should not
be tolerated. At the same time, we should not ignore
the fact that continued impunity is fuelling this tragedy.

The humanitarian and human rights situations are part
and parcel of the same problem and should be
addressed simultaneously. Shedding more light on the
humanitarian and human rights crisis is a key
ingredient in the long march towards peace in Somalia.
With all international agencies working together,
harmonizing their thinking and actions, the
international community can integrate its policies and
strengthen its results.

Furthermore, once Governments, development
agencies, business associations and non-governmental
organizations act together, they can help to bring about
a major move away from past practices of managing
the status quo. In that context, the Istanbul Conference
comes at the right time. It shows Somalis and their
leaders that there are persons, countries and
organizations that are genuinely ready and committed
to working with them for peace and stability. Along
with the Secretary-General, I would like once more to
thank the Government of Turkey for its important
initiative.

As I indicated earlier, I have always said that the
peace process is based on three interrelated pillars:
reconciliation, security and development. They should
be addressed simultaneously. In those three areas, it is
widely recognized that one of Somalia's main assets is
its vibrant business community, both inside and outside
the country. That community can be a force for good,
and we should help it to work constructively. Istanbul
will provide an exceptional opportunity to do so.

The Conference is, first and foremost, a show of
political solidarity with the Somali people, who have
suffered so much and have been taken hostage by
various groups and individuals. The Conference is also
a message of hope to Somalis that they are not alone.
In addition to addressing security issues and global
threats, including piracy, the Conference will also
provide a platform for the Somali private sector,
international business and Governments to launch new
initiatives for reconstruction and job creation.

Those are indeed significant challenges, although
they can be overcome with adequate action. Through
public and private partnerships, we can begin to make
a difference in the international perception and image
of Somalia and, consequently, in the lives of its people.
This is the place to reiterate that if we want to make a
decisive difference, there is no alternative to moving
the international community to Mogadishu to be closer

to the victims. Remote control from Nairobi is not
leading to progress.

If we do not make the right commitments and
take the right action in Somalia now, sooner or later the
situation will force us to act, and at a much higher
price. One of the most effective actions we can take in
Somalia is to support the Government in a concrete
manner and, at the same time, ask it to deliver
effectively. On the other hand, those countries and
individuals who behave like salesmen touting peace
conferences for every country in conflict, including
Somalia, can only damage the prospects for peace and
stability by inciting extremists the world over to be
more radical and by granting them veto power over the
future of the peoples.

The Istanbul Conference will provide us with an
exceptional opportunity to show that Somalia has true
friends ready to make a difference. In this year, when
the country celebrates its fiftieth anniversary of
independence, the support of the Secretary-General, the
Government of Turkey and the entire Security Council
is much needed and is very welcome by the
Government, the Somali people and the region.

