Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome you as you
preside over the Council today, Sir. We also welcome
Ms. Karen Pierce, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, who is now here with us. We thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

The difficult humanitarian situation continues in
a number of areas in Syria. The Russian Federation
has been taking active steps to normalize things,
including within the framework of the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). While some here may not
like it, it is a fact that we are the only ones who have
been making concrete efforts to implement resolution
2401 (2018). Since we first established humanitarian
pauses, with the assistance of the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic, and the participation and oversight of the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
nearly 121,000 people have been evacuated, on a
strictly voluntarily basis - let me stress that - from
eastern Ghouta. Many of them have talked about how
difficult it has been for them to live under the repressive
regime established by the armed group militants.
Civilians continue to flee eastern Ghouta through the
Muhayam-Al-Wafedin humanitarian corridor. There is
real-time video of this running on the Russian Defence
Ministry's official website. In just the past few days
more than 520 civilians have left Douma. Russian
agencies have organized the distribution to them of
hot food, food kits and individual food rations, as well
as bottled drinking water. Yesterday alone, Russian
military doctors treated 111 civilians, including
42 children.

At the same time, the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation continues to organize the return of
residents of Saqba and Kafr Batna. On 24 March, as
a result of an agreement reached by the Centre with
leaders ofillegal armed groups, another checkpoint was
opened for fighters and their family members to leave
from Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain Terma and Jobar.
In the past few days, militias from the Ahrar Al-Sham
and Faylak Al-Rahman groups and their relatives
have been evacuated along the corridor and bused to
Idlib governorate. In three days, more than 13,000
people were evacuated from Arbin alone. However,
many have decided to remain, taking advantage of the
presidential amnesty. Incidentally, there have been
active efforts to plant stories about detentions and
torture and possibly even executions. They are lies.
The Syrian police are ensuring that these operations
are safe, under the oversight of specialists from the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation and representatives
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Yesterday 26 Syrian
soldiers and civilians who had been taken prisoner by
Faylak Al-Rahman were freed. In our view, those facts
clearly attest to the difficulty and extent of the work
being done by the Russian specialists on the ground,
in communication with the Syrian authorities and the
leaders of the armed groups. There are some members
of the Security Council who prefer wasting their time on
inflammatory speeches and letters making groundless
claims about our country, probably to conceal their own
unwillingness to do anything constructive to implement
resolution 2401 (2018) in cooperation with the groups
they sponsor.

At the same time, yesterday the fighters from Jaysh
Al-Islam who remain in Douma detonated four mines
yesterday in several districts in Damascus. Six civilians
died and another six were wounded. Al-Mazraa, a
residential neighbourhood in the capital was shelled
earlier. As a result of mine explosions around the
Al-Fayhaa sports complex, a 12-year-old boy died and
seven children were injured. Hundreds of people have
died from mine explosions in Damascus overall. This
is apparently the message that the militants are sending
every day about the willingness to implement the
ceasefire that they loudly proclaimed in their famous
letter to the Secretary-General.

I want to again point out the importance of
clarifying the data used in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/138), including on possible attacks on
civilian infrastructure and the victims of such attacks.
Where does that information come from? The February
report has a footnote that mentions various United
Nations agencies and departments of the Secretariat.
The main source cited is the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, which does not
have a staff presence on the ground. The big question,
and what we are trying to get to the bottom of, is who
is providing the United Nations staff with this kind
of information? Is it the anti-Government groups and
terrorist accomplices like the White Helmets? But they
are interested parties. So why is there only a sprinkling
of the information provided by the Syrian authorities?

We call on the United Nations, humanitarian
organizations and States to deliver urgent assistance to
help the people who are evacuating eastern Ghouta. It is
also essential to strengthen the United Nations presence
around the humanitarian corridors. The Syrians
need immediate assistance with the infrastructure
reconstruction that the Syrian Government has begun
in the liberated residential areas of eastern Ghouta.
We would like to ask Mr. Lowcock to oversee that
issue personally.

We also hope that as soon as possible the
coalition will create the conditions and provide the
necessary security guarantees enabling a United
Nations assessment mission to be sent to Raqqa and
humanitarian convoys to the Rukban camp. The Syrian
authorities gave their official consent to this some time
ago, as Mark Lowcock confirmed today. We should
note that we were shocked by the recent reports that
more than 2,000 civilians may have died during the
coalition forces' assault on Raqqa. Let me ask it once
again - where were the weeping and wailing and calls
for humanitarian aid then? We have noted the statistics
in the Secretary-General's report on the numbers of
people who have returned to Raqqa, but we would like
to see similar information on other parts of Syria and
the country as a whole. How many people are returning
to their permanent homes? We would like to propose to
the United Nations representatives that they designate
the areas where those indicators are the highest as a
priority for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
monitor how effectively it is being implemented.

We also think it would be appropriate to include
information on reconstruction assistance in the reports.
Resolution 2401 (2018) stipulates that Syrian districts,
including those that have been liberated from terrorists,
need support in restoring normal functioning and
stability. One of the key areas in that regard is mine
clearance. We get the feeling that external donors are
losing interest in delivering assistance to residents in
areas under Syrian Government control. We are seeing
signals from some capitals that only opposition-held
enclaves should be helped. Such double standards go
completely against the core principles of neutrality and
impartial humanitarian assistance. We hope that we are
wrong about this and that Mr. Lowcock will refute the
possibility of such a trend. But if our suspicions are
borne out, how does the United Nations intend to deal
with the issue? Just the other day a meeting of senior

officials was held in Oslo under the auspices of the
United Nations and the European Union to address the
humanitarian situation in Syria. No representatives
of the Syrian authorities were invited. How does
Mr. Lowcock view the prospect of another assessment
of the humanitarian situation in Syria without the
participation of its official representatives? Does he
consider that a productive format? That is a very urgent
question considering that the forthcoming second donor
conference is scheduled for the end of April in Brussels.

I would also like to ask Mr. Lowcock what is
known at the United Nations about the facts of sexual
services being provided in exchange for humanitarian
assistance in the context of cross-border operations.
There is information about that in the November report
of the United Nations Population Fund, and the BBC
did ajournalistic investigation of the issue. Ifthis issue
is known about, why is it avoided in the Secretary-
General's reports? And if it is not known about, it
should be investigated.

We hope that in close cooperation with the Syrian
authorities and consideration of their views, the United
Nations will agree on an emergency humanitarian
response plan for this year as soon as possible, with an
emphasis on the delivery of assistance to liberated areas.

