Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
While voicing, once again, our appreciation for the
tireless efforts and dedication ofhis predecessor, Mr. Jan
Kubis, I would like to wish Mr. Haysom a successful
term in office. The effective role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
his able leadership will continue to be a key element in
supporting the people and Government of Afghanistan
in the period ahead. I would also like to thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
their statements.

Afghanistan is going through a crucial phase in terms
of its political, security and economic transformation.
The year 2014 marked several milestone events in the
process of consolidating Afghanistan's sovereignty
and national unity. In this context, the outcome of
the presidential elections signified a success for all
of the Afghan people, as it demonstrated their strong
will and courage to determine their own destiny. The
decision to establish a National Unity Government has
clearly displayed the Afghan people's determination
as a whole to carry their country forward. We believe
that Afghanistan has emerged stronger from those
experiences. We welcome and support the robust agenda
the new Government of Afghanistan has embarked
upon, including in the fields of governance, the rule of
law and the fight against corruption, and its efforts for
an Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process.

It is commendable that, by the end of this year,
Afghan National Security Forces will assume full
security responsibility for their people and country.
The year 2015 will be pivotal in the consolidation ofthe
achievements reached thus far. Therefore, continued
support for the development of the Afghan National
Security Forces and wider international cooperation
with Afghanistan will still be ofthe utmost importance.
Turkey remains committed to standing by Afghanistan
in this process. The official visit of President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan to Afghanistan in October 2014,
whereby a strategic partnership and friendship
agreement was signed between the two countries,
renewing the previous agreement of 1928, is a recent
testament of that commitment.

The changing nature and scope of NATO's
engagement with Afghanistan in the period ahead was
outlined during the NATO Summit held in Wales in
September 2014. We welcome the recent adoption of
resolution 2189 (2014) on the NATO Resolute Support
Mission, which will be launched to provide training,
advice and assistance to the Afghan National Security
Forces. In addition to Turkey's financial pledges for
the funding of the Afghan National Security Forces,
Turkey will assume the framework nation role for
Kabul in the Resolute Support Mission. Turkey will
also undertake responsibility for Kabul International
Airport. As would be recalled, Mr. Ismail Aramaz,
Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey to Afghanistan,
has recently been appointed as the next NATO Senior
Civilian Representative in Afghanistan.

We deeply regret and condemn the terrorist
attacks that have been perpetrated in Afghanistan in
the reporting period, which have claimed many lives,
including those of civilians. We are confident that those
attacks will not succeed in derailing Afghanistan's
efforts to achieve a peaceful transformation.
The gains of the past 13 years in the country,
including in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, capacity- and institution-building,
economic development and human rights, have prepared
a good foundation for the country's move to the next
step. Nevertheless, the international community's
continuing support is vital for a peaceful, secure and
stable Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs
of its people. The London Conference on Afghanistan,
held on 4 December, provided a timely opportunity
for the Government of Afghanistan to set out its
vision for reform and for the international community
to demonstrate enduring solidarity and support for
Afghanistan.

At a critical juncture of political, security and
economic transformation inAfghanistan, the importance
of regional cooperation and commitment has further
increased. We welcome all bilateral and multilateral
dialogue and cooperation efforts aimed at promoting
an environment conducive to the enhancement of
regional collaboration. With that understanding, the
fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, held in Beijing, yielded a
good opportunity for furthering efforts for enhanced
regional cooperation. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/876) highlights, the continued forward
momentum of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is
indeed encouraging.

The international community's solidarity and
continued commitment will strengthen the hopes of the
Afghan people for a bright future. Turkey will continue
to contribute to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

