Ms. Callskan (Turkey): We would like to join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, and today's
briefers.

The issue of the Council's working methods is one
that has a direct impact on our Organization's most
critical undertakings. Although we consider the subject
to be one of the main components of Security Council
reform, there is still room for further improvement
before we reach general agreement on the matter. That
said, at the outset we would like to state that many of
the challenges we face daily in the Organization are
a result of a lack of transparency, accountability and
effectiveness in the Council and of its undemocratic
nature. To some degree, we can only address these
problems by increasing the number of elected members.

The use of the veto is one of the most pressing
issues we have to tackle. It is almost impossible to tell
whether a country is motivated by the desire to maintain
international peace and security or by national interest.
In any case, the result is inaction on the part of our
Organization's principal body, whose primary task is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives of France
and Mexico, as well as of Liechtenstein, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aimed at limiting the use of a negative vote
by permanent or non-permanent members in cases of
mass atrocities. We support both initiatives. However,
we do not think that the idea of a code of conduct for
non-permanent members can be meaningful unless the
permanent members also embrace it.

Our discussion of working methods also covers
the relationship between the Council and other bodies
of the United Nations. One particularly important
topic on today's agenda is the selection process of
the next Secretary-General, an issue connected to
the relationship between the Council and the General
Assembly. This year we are witnessing a thorough
discussion of the matter that includes civil society
as well as Member States. The General Assembly's
recent resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of its
work, includes landmark provisions, as others have
mentioned. However, since it includes no references to
deadlines or numbers of candidates to be recommended
by the Council, we think the current situation has a long
way to go in addressing the structural shortcomings of
the process.

Regular and more substantive interaction between
the Council and other United Nations bodies, including
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, would not
only augment the Council's transparency, openness and
inclusiveness but would also enhance the efficiency of
the United Nations system in general.

Needless to say, the dialogue between the Council
and non-Council members is one of the critical aspects
of our discussion today. Although we are cognizant of
the need for the Council to conduct its own deliberations
during its decision-making process, we think there is
much room for improvement in terms of increasing the
transparency of its work. In that regard, scheduling more
informative briefings and Arria Formula meetings,
ensuring that draft resolutions, presidential statements
and information on the work of the subsidiary bodies,
as well as their reports, are made available in a timely
manner, and, last but not least, reducing the frequency
of closed meetings are what we need if we are to have
meaningful interaction.

