Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on the
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur, held pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005), and commends Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda on her very detailed briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the political
changes that have taken place in the Sudan over the
past months and their positive impact on the entire
country, including in the Darfur region. Accordingly,
my delegation commends the efforts of the Sudanese
Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, in pursuing
peace and stability for the Sudanese people, in general,
and for the people of Darfur, in particular. My country
also welcomes the mediation and support initiatives of
the countries of the region, the African Union and the
United Nations to lead the Sudanese parties towards
reaching a political solution to this conflict, which has
claimed many victims.

Despite the progress made, the situation in Darfur
remains precarious, as demonstrated by sporadic
clashes between Government forces and elements of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel
Marra and the persistence of criminal activity in the
region. My delegation also remains concerned about
recurrent allegations of human rights violations and
sexual and gender-based violence against the people. It
is therefore important that urgently needed measures be
taken to ensure full protection for civilians and respect
for human rights and basic freedoms.

Given our firm commitment to respect human
rights and based on our own experience, Cote d'Ivoire
reaffirms that the fight against impunity and the
principle of accountability are imperative to achieving
genuine national reconciliation and the establishment
of lasting peace in Darfur. Cote d'Ivoire therefore
commends the laudable activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor in promoting justice and the fight against
impunity for crimes committed in Darfur. My country
also welcomes the commitment and determination of
the Sudanese authorities to effectively respond to the
justice needs of the victims of the crisis. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire urges the Court to support their efforts in
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

My country calls for frank cooperation between the
Court and the new Sudanese authorities through joint
measures to promote accountability and strengthen
national judicial institutions. My delegation is of the
view the that the Sudan needs multifaceted support more
than ever in order to prevent any recurrence of conflict.
The success of the political process and peacebuilding
will be achieved only through the involvement of all
subregional, regional and international actors.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call for
constructive cooperation among the ICC and the States
and actors involved in the process of resolving the
crisis in Darfur. My country reiterates its full support
for the Prosecutor and her Office in their commitment
to promoting justice.

