Mr. Favre (Switzerland): I am pleased to be taking
the floor on behalfofthe members ofthe Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group - Austria,

Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Gabon,
Ghana, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. One of the core objectives of the ACT
group is to encourage better working methods in United
Nations organs, particularly the Security Council. We
commend the efforts deployed by Kuwait to that end in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate, and we also thank today's briefers for
their statements.

The working methods of the Security Council have
been a subject of discussion almost since the creation of
the United Nations and of the Council itself. Over the
years, there has been some progress, as demonstrated
by the subsequent updates and improvements contained
in the note by the President (S/2017/507), note 507.
However, we have to acknowledge that overall progress
has been slow and the implementation of what has been
agreed on has been uneven. If we are to safeguard the
effectiveness and reputation of the Council and the
United Nations at large, as well as gain the support
of the wider United Nations membership for the
implementation of Security Council decisions, we
believe it is important to keep our attention constantly
focused on improving the Council's working methods,
implementing good practices in a consistent manner
and not backtracking from previous decisions and
commitments. Today we would like to highlight
three areas where the ACT group would like to see
specific improvements.

First, the relationship of the Council with the
membership and other organs is an area where we
have been happy to note some positive developments
over the years. There are now regular interactions, for
instance, with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission in
its role as an advisory body to the Council. We also note
a positive trend in seeking interaction with Member
States, other organs and civil-society representatives
who can provide the Council with useful advice.
This typically takes place through regular open
debates, whose raison d'etre should continue to be the
opportunities they afford the membership to inform
Security Council deliberations.

Today's open debate, with no predefined Council
product, but rather the stated intention of the
presidency to follow up on action in the framework
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, and thereby listen
to the voices of the wider United Nations membership
to inform Security Council action, constitutes a good
practice that should be replicated. Close interaction is
also necessary in situations where the Security Council
drifts away from the larger membership, and therefore
the world as a whole, including when it is unable to
take decisions due to the use of the veto. In that regard,
ACT encourages all States, members and non-members
ofthe Security Council alike, to join the 119 signatories
to the ACT code of conduct and to implement it.

More must be done to improve interaction between
the Security Council and the wider membership. For
instance, adequate consideration of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly, which
is mandated by Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, must be ensured so as to enable an inclusive
and substantial exchange of views. We call on the
Council to expedite the adoption of its 2018 annual
report and to set a date for its timely consideration
by the General Assembly, as per the presidential
notes related to this matter, including note 507. At the
informal level, wrap-up sessions constitute another
important vehicle for transparency and accountability
regarding the Security Council's work. If they are to
serve their purpose, wrap-up sessions must take place
at the end of every month, preferably in the Toledo
format so as to enhance interaction. The main purpose
of the meetings should be interaction with the wider
membership, ideally without extensive time devoted
to briefings from Council members. They should also
be announced in the monthly programme of work, or
at least with sufficient advance notice to ensure wide
participation and substantive discussions.

Secondly, the responsibilities of Council members
for Security Council matters must be more equally
shared so as to enhance the participation of all
members, including elected members. For instance,
the consultation process for selecting the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies should take place in a way that enables
balanced burden-sharing and an equal distribution of
work among all members of the Council, including its
permanent members. As a general rule, no member
should Chair more than two subsidiary bodies, unless
members choose otherwise. Enhancing the Council
members' responsibilities for drafting Council products
is another key route to greater participation by all
members in decision-making, for instance by providing
more opportunities for any member of the Council to be
a penholder and for more than one member to act as a
penholder on a single dossier.

There is a legitimate expectation that Council
members elected by the General Assembly can
meaningfully and effectively contribute to Council
products. The Chairs of subsidiary bodies should have
specific responsibilities in decision-making processes
and their expertise should be used more consistently
through formal and informal meetings of the Council.
We want to underline that issues relating to balanced
burden-sharing are particularly relevant in the light of
tomorrow's elections for non-permanent seats on the
Council, which will bring another tranche of incoming
Council members.

Thirdly and finally, we firmly believe that fairness
and clarity in sanctions processes are important factors
in the implementation and impact of United Nations
sanctions. Resolution 1904 (2009), which established
the Office of the Ombudsperson, was a significant step
forward in improving the fairness and transparency
of the sanctions regime for Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and enhancing the rule
of law in the implementation of Council decisions.
The Ombudsperson mechanism is a key element in
preserving the integrity and therefore the effectiveness
of the Security Council sanctions system. We therefore
call on the Council take all necessary measures to
further strengthen the independence and impartiality
of the Office of the Ombudsperson and expand the
Ombudsperson's mandate to other sanctions regimes.

We welcome the fact that most of the issues
highlighted today have been or are being discussed
in the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
As today's open debate demonstrates, the Security
Council's working methods are of interest to the entire
United Nations membership and improving them is
our collective responsibility. It should therefore be a
matter of concern to all that no formal progress has
been made in the framework of the Informal Working
Group since the last open debate on working methods
in the Council in February 2018 (see S/PV.8175). We
call on all Council members to engage constructively
in efforts to achieving concrete and tangible progress
on those matters. The ACT group is committed to
doing its part in this joint effort and to supporting any
initiative, particularly the efforts of elected Council
members, towards a more efficient and transparent
Security Council.

