Mr. Qazi: The Secretary-General's report before
the Security Council provides a sober and urgent
warning that Iraq stands on the brink of a civil war and
chaos. In my briefings to this Council, I have
repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that the
achievements of the political transition process in
meeting the benchmarks endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1546 (2004) have not translated
into an improved security or human rights situation.
Efforts made by the Government of Iraq and the
Multinational Force have not prevented a continuous
deterioration of the security situation, which, if not
reversed, will progressively undermine Iraq's political
prospects.

Initiatives launched during the period, such as the
2 October Ramadan declaration, the meetings
sponsored by the Ministry of National Dialogue, and
the Mecca Declaration, under the auspices of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, as yet have
had no impact on the violence and bloodshed. The
Baghdad security plan, aimed at isolating troubled
neighbourhoods and improving living conditions for
their residents, has not expanded beyond the initially
selected areas. The violence seems out of control. This
has provoked widespread concern for Iraq's future.

While 8 out of 18 governorates account for 80 per
cent of the attacks on the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I) and the Iraqi security forces (ISF), those 8
governorates account for a significant proportion of
Iraq's population. The restoration of peace and stability
in the capital and its surrounding areas is therefore
critical to the peace and stability of Iraq as a whole.

Given the current lack of political unity, the
fragmentation of Iraqi society and the paralyzing levels
of violence, it may not be realistic to expect the
Government and parliament to bring about progress
without the active cooperation of the regional and
international community. Nor in these circumstances
can multilateral partnerships, such as the International
Compact for Iraq, be expected to realize their full
potential, since they are predicated on the Iraqi
Government being able to implement the requisite
political, security, economic and social reforms. The
International Compact will itself require a viable
06-65176
security and political environment. Accordingly, it is
very encouraging to note that the Iraqi Prime Minister
and his Cabinet have indicated their full commitment
to making the Compact process a success.

Vigorous efforts are under way to build up Iraq's
armed forces and put in place effective command and
control, disciplinary and organizational structures.
Significant progress is being made in some respects.
However, even under the most propitious of
circumstances, the development of self-sufficient
security forces of the requisite professional capability
and political discipline is expected to take some years,
and may take much longer. Moreover, the key issues
confronting Iraq are not amenable to solutions based
on force alone. Excessive reliance on the use of force
could indeed preclude negotiated compromise - the
only sound basis for stability.

If Iraq is to stand any chance of avoiding a
national catastrophe, a collective sense of urgency,
resolve and compromise is essential. Zero-sum
solutions are not compatible with political stability and
national security. Accordingly, the international
community and regional States have a real stake in
assisting the Government of Iraq to overcome the
current challenges. There is no merit in arguments that
assume pessimistic outcomes in Iraq, because for the
people of Iraq, for its neighbours and for the wider
world, failure in Iraq is not an option. A collective
international and regional initiative in support of the
efforts of the Government of Iraq to reduce the current
levels of violence and resolve key issues is the only
way forward. There is no alternative.

In my discussions with Iraqi leaders from across
the spectrum and with many representatives of many of
Iraq's neighbours, I have been struck by the unanimity
with which they now recognize that Iraq's problems
cannot be addressed by concentrating exclusively on
the domestic political dynamics of Iraq alone.
Therefore, a broader and more inclusive political
approach is required that involves all the main
neighbours of Iraq, as well as the P-S countries. It must
also involve all the main political forces inside Iraq
that are prepared to foreswear violence as a political
tool and to come to the negotiating table. An
exclusionary approach, whether internal or external,
will not result in progress towards peace and stability.

None of this alters the fact that the Iraqis above
all must take responsibility for their future. Yet the
06-65176

structure of the situation in and around Iraq requires
that all regional countries see that it is in their interest
to contribute to the peace and unity of Iraq as a matter
of priority and to participate in efforts to ensure that
their contributions collectively assist the Government
and people of Iraq. In this respect, it is encouraging to
note that the Government of Iraq has decided to send
envoys to its neighbours to prepare the ground for a
possible regional conference.

To replace the current climate of fear and
mistrust, a reconciliation process should address
sensitive issues rather than postpone consideration of
them. In his report, the Secretary-General draws
attention to the way in which a genuine constitutional
review process could provide the framework for
national reconciliation. To date, the opportunity
provided by this review process has not been seized as
effectively as the United Nations had hoped and
advised. Technical revision needs to be backed by
genuine political negotiation on key issues aimed at
making the constitution a genuinely workable national
framework document.

The issues on which Iraqi consensus is urgently
needed are clear. They include a political vision for the
new Iraq, a fair sharing of oil revenues that guarantees
all the peoples of Iraq an equal share in its unity and
prosperity, a realistic sharing of powers, including
collection of taxes among the centre, the regions and
the governorates that enables the central Government
to deliver essential services, the development of Iraq's
security forces into genuine national institutions that
are trusted and respected throughout the country, the
progressive disbanding of militias and other illegal
armed groups so that the State has a monopoly over the
use of force as the guarantor of the rule of law,
ensuring effective human rights protection systems and
an effective judiciary, encouraging Iraqi civil society to
foster the emergence of issue-based, non-sectarian
politics, and finding a mutually acceptable way to
discuss the future of the MNF-I's role as a key
component of a national reconciliation process. In this
regard, it is again encouraging to note that the
Government of Iraq is actively preparing for a national
reconciliation conference on, I understand, 18
December and that progress on a draft text for a
hydrocarbon law has been made.

In his report, the Secretary-General has suggested
that a regional contact group, assisted by the United
Nations, could serve as the catalyst to bring about a
3
credible forum where such issues could be discussed
and progressively resolved. There is an urgent need to
develop a momentum for peace and stability in Iraq
through an intensive and sustained engagement with
the regional and international community in support of
the Government of Iraq's national reconciliation
efforts.

The Secretary-General has called for a negotiated
settlement to break the cycle of violence that currently
threatens to abort any political progress. This will be a
complex and difficult task, but one that is unavoidable.
The human costs of the present situation make it
mandatory upon all of us to assist the Government of
Iraq in discharging its role successfully. According to
some estimates, the humanitarian and human rights
crisis is arguably already the most compelling in the
world. According to some estimates, more than 5,000
Iraqis die violent deaths a month. Since the Samarra
incident of 22 February 2006, nearly half a million
Iraqis have been internally displaced. The exodus of
Iraqis to neighbouring countries is placing a heavy
burden on those countries. In the event of a further
deterioration of the security situation, a major
humanitarian and refugee catastrophe could ensue.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) has been repeatedly reminded of the high
expectations that Iraqis have of the United Nations in
enabling the protection of their rights and bringing an
end to their suffering by facilitating processes that can
put the promise of peace and security within their
grasp.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Security
Council for its continued support, as most recently
expressed in resolution 1700 (2006). I wish to assure
Council members that the United Nations Mission will
remain actively engaged with national, regional and
international actors to help Iraq arrest the further
deterioration of an already critical situation. That is a
moral and strategic imperative that none of us can
afford to ignore.

