Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. China
also welcomes the report of Secretary-General Guterres
(S/2018/770) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant to international peace and security.
China also paid close attention to the statement made
by Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research Fellow at the
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and
Political Violence.

The recent successful terrorist attacks that took
place in Afghanistan and Syria resulted in tremendous
harm to the countries concerned. Terrorism is the
common enemy of humankind and affects countries
beyond their national borders. It is hard for any country
to respond to it alone. Faced with such a challenge,
and bound by a shared destiny, the international
community should effectively implement a common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security
concept, effectively carry out the relevant Security
Council resolutions and strengthen cooperation to
jointly respond to the threat of terrorism in the light of
its new trend and characteristics.

First, with respect to further building international
consensus on counter-terrorism, the international
community should adhere to a unified standard
and adopt a zero-tolerance and non-discriminatory
stance in resolutely combating terrorists, regardless
of location, pretext, targeted countries or the means
used. In fighting terrorism at the international level,
we should respect the sovereignty of the countries
in question, as well as the main responsibility of the
countries concerned to fight terrorism and abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and allow the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to play its leading role.

Secondly, we must make joint efforts to address the
root causes of terrorism. The international community
should push for a political settlement ofregional issues,
assist Member States in achieving their economic and

social development and poverty reduction and alleviation
goals, refrain from linking terrorism to specific ethnic
or religious groups and promote dialogue on an equal
footing among civilizations and religions with a view to
fostering harmonious coexistence and endeavouring to
build a new type of international relations.

Thirdly, with regard to disrupting the terrorist
network of cross-border movement, terrorist
organizations have recently suffered heavy losses in
Iraq and Syria. However, terrorist fighters' movements
and returns still pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of countries of origin, transit and destination.
The countries concerned should strengthen cross-
border control and law enforcement cooperation, share
intelligence resources and strengthen capacities to
jointly deter the flow of terrorist fighters.

Fourthly, we must fight terrorist activities
conducted by terrorist organizations through the
Internet. Cyberspace and social media have become an
important means for terrorist organizations to incite
terrorist activities, recruit fighters and plan attacks. The
international community should strengthen regulations
on the Internet and block terrorist organizations from
using the Internet to spread extremist ideologies and
conduct terrorist financing. The United Nations counter-
terrorism bodies should strengthen coordination and
help the broader developing membership to strengthen
counter-terrorism capacity-building in cyberspace.

China is an important member in the international
fight against terrorism. In recent years, China has been
deeply involved in the work of multilateral cooperation
mechanisms, such as the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, actively taken
part in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review and the high-level meeting of Member
States against terrorism and assisted Members in
their counter-terrorism capacity-building through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund, thereby making an important contribution to the
international fight against terrorism.

China will continue participate in and promote
multilateral and bilateral counter-terrorism cooperation
and provide assistance to developing countries in terms
of counter-terrorism measures and capacity-building.
China wants to work together with all countries to
jointly address the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism in safeguarding world peace and stability.

