Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): In accordance with your strict
injunctions, Mr. President, I will refrain from congratulating
you sincerely on the assumption of your high office, and
from expressing my admiration for your predecessor, but
you know, Sir, that such indeed are our deeply held sentiments.

My delegation has already outlined its reading of the
underlying causes of the conflict in Afghanistan on a
number of previous occasions in statements before the
Council. I do not, therefore, intend to repeat those details,
which set out the clear background to the situation that
we are all faced with in that country and which remain as
valid today as when we made those earlier statements.

What is clear to all of us is that we have a civil war
in Afghanistan today. It is equally clear that the people of
Afghanistan themselves, brave, noble, and peace-loving as
they are, are fed up with the factional strife that has riven
that country, and they earnestly dream of resuming a
normal life in conditions of dignity and security.

It is incumbent upon all of us, observing Afghanistan
from the outside as we do, to assist the people of
Afghanistan in their quest for normalcy. This would
require a comprehensive framework for restoring peace in
Afghanistan, with the total commitment and support of
the international community. This comprehensive
framework should have political, economic and
humanitarian components and should be implemented
with vigour and determination.

Pakistan, for its part, is adhering to a policy of strict
neutrality and non-interference in Afghanistan. We do not
support a military solution, and we continue to believe
that a broad-based government is the only viable solution
for a multi-ethnic Afghanistan.

Pakistan has a deep vested interest in peace in
Afghanistan. As a consequence of the continued
instability in Afghanistan, there are more than 1.5 million
refugees even today in Pakistan. We are facing great
difficulties with the upkeep of these refugees in the face
of donor fatigue and our own limited resources. We are
also the victims of terrorism, drug trafficking and arms
smuggling as a result of conditions inside Afghanistan.
Our access to Central Asia, and the prospects of mutually
beneficial economic collaboration with that region, have
not materialized. No country in the world, therefore, has
a deeper vested interest in peace in Afghanistan than does
Pakistan.

Much has been said about the Taliban. The Taliban,
who control Kabul and two thirds of Afghanistan, are a
reality and cannot simply be wished away. Given the
support that they undoubtedly have from the population
in all the provinces that they control, it would be futile to
indulge in name-calling, wishful thinking or military
confrontation. It would be far better obviously to engage
them in constructive dialogue in an effort to get them to
moderate some of their policies.

 

We have to take serious note of the fact that the
Taliban have publicly proclaimed that they do not want to
rule Afghanistan alone. They have expressed their
willingness to include all ethnic groups in the formation of
a government in Afghanistan. We do not hold any brief for
them, but here is what we heard their representatives say
during the recently concluded meeting of the Islamic
summit in Islamabad:

"The Taliban Islamic movement has been blamed
differently. It is blamed as a movement started
just for power for the Pashtun tribe, or it is said
that this Government cannot represent the people
of the Afghan nation. To deny the above-
mentioned incorrect statements, we can say that
this movement is neither a tribal nor a national
movement, nor does it work for the advantage of
a tribe or any foreign country. The movement
does not allow others to interfere in Afghanistan.
Similarly, it does not want to interfere in others'
internal affairs. The Islamic State of Afghanistan
is in favour of good relations with all countries
of the world. To prove our claim of a broad-
based Government in Afghanistan, we present a
list of the Ministers and Governors belonging to
Tajik and Uzbek tribes."

This was followed by a list of the four Tajik and
Uzbek Ministers in the Ministries of Education, Refugees,
and Planning in the central Government in Kabul and the
three Governors of the Paktia, Parwan, and Kapisa
provinces of Afghanistan. The statement of the Taliban
went on to say:

"Keeping in mind the above facts, we request all
representatives of nations to convey these
messages and ask the Governments to reopen
their embassies in Kabul and let the Islamic State
of Afghanistan represent the Afghan nation in the
United Nations and in the Organization of the
Islamic Conference".

Compare that effort at broad-based government to the
statement made just two days ago by Commander Massoud
to journalists, in which he, for his part, threatens to
continue along the futile path of a military confrontation in
the following words: "This year we have the intention of
fighting on several fronts"; and again, "All our groups will
begin fighting from several directions simultaneously".

Should the current polarization continue, or should it
be encouraged from the outside, there is the danger of the
fragmentation of Afghanistan along ethnic fault lines. This
would have serious implications for the peace and
stability of the entire region. It is therefore imperative that
outside interference in support of one or the other of the
contending factions cease. It is important for the
international community to reiterate its total commitment
to the unity and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.

There are continuing and disturbing reports of the
provision of weapons and ammunition and the presence
of foreign military personnel in Afghanistan. We have
proposed on a number of occasions in the past that an
arms embargo should be imposed on Afghanistan. We
continue to believe that such an embargo would be
helpful in containing the incentives for conflict. It would
also have a psychological impact on the Afghans,
influencing them to agree to an intra-Afghan dialogue
with the aim of achieving a political settlement of the
problem.

Pakistan recognizes the State of Afghanistan. We
have done business with every regime in Kabul,
regardless of whether it was that of Nur Mohammad
Taraki, Hafizullah Amin, Mojadedi or Rabbani. We will
continue to adhere to that policy.

It is important not only to be equitable, but also to
be seen to be equitable towards the Afghan factions. The
previous criterion for recognition of any of the factions as
the legitimate Government of Afghanistan appears to have
been control of Kabul. The Rabbani regime was accorded
recognition when it controlled Kabul and six other
provinces. Today, it has neither de facto control of the
capital, as it holds sway over only three outlying
provinces, nor any de jure legitimacy. Yet it continues to
be tolerated as the Government of Afghanistan and
continues to occupy Afghanistan's seat in the United
Nations. This cannot be justified under any circumstances.
The United Nations should adopt the "vacant seat"
formula that was endorsed by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference in its own meetings. That would
reflect reality. More importantly, it would also encourage
the factions to move towards a broad-based dispensation
in order to secure full international legitimacy and
recognition.

In the meantime, while Pakistan welcomes this open
debate in the Security Council, it is convinced that we
have not heard the true voice of the Afghan people, who
alone can decide on their own future. Until and unless we
do so, our discussions here will continue to be ill-
informed and incomplete. It is high time that the Security

 

Council listened to the views of the Taliban in order to
have a more balanced view of the situation in Afghanistan.
This could be done under the Arria formula. We understand
that the Taliban have representatives in New York now.
The sooner the Council engages them in dialogue, the better
it will be for Afghanistan.

If the Security Council again takes a position that may
be perceived to be one-sided, and if it does so without
contacts with the Taliban or other Afghan factions, its
judgement would once again fail to reflect the true
sentiments of the Afghan people. The time has now come
for the international community to take a more balanced
and mature view of realities on the ground in Afghanistan.
There are many indications that this is the time, not least of
which is the constructive attitude that we have perceived on
the part of some interested parties in recent contacts.

There is therefore an urgent need to facilitate an
equitable settlement which takes cognizance of realities on
the ground and the ethnic and demographic spread of the
population. Any other solution that does not guarantee the
equitable representation of all ethnic groups in a future
dispensation will not bring durable peace to Afghanistan.
Pakistan is committed to supporting the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission and of the Security Council
in restoring peace in Afghanistan. We have some further
suggestions as to how this could be done.

An intra-Afghan conference, under the aegis of the
United Nations, assisted if necessary by the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, with countries having contiguous
borders with Afghanistan participating as observers, should
be convened in order to find a lasting solution to and
settlement of the Afghan problem. The agenda for such a
meeting should comprise, first, an immediate ceasefire and
the exchange of prisoners and dead bodies; secondly, the
formation of a political commission, consisting of
representatives from all the provinces, to decide on the
future dispensation and the method of its appointment; and,
thirdly, the creation of a national force, on the basis of
proportionate representation from all the provinces, to
collect heavy weapons and to provide security.

The outcome of such an intra-Afghan meeting could
then be endorsed by an international conference. In this
way the international community would not only be able to
put its weight behind the decisions taken by the Afghans
themselves, but could also promise assistance for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan, if the Afghans honour their
own decisions.

The other elements of a comprehensive approach
require equal attention. We need a generous and sustained
international commitment to the economic reconstruction
of Afghanistan, and the provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance to the people of Afghanistan. We also need
such assistance for the refugees in Pakistan and Iran, and
we need to make effective plans for their rapid
repatriation to a peaceful Afghanistan.

The time has now come for the Security Council to
act decisively for the cause of peace in Afghanistan. We
hope that this debate will prove to be a new milestone in
the international efforts towards building an international
alliance for peace in Afghanistan. Let us act in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. Let us
use our resources, both material and moral, to overcome
the apparent political impasse; and let us act now, before
it is too late.
