Mr. Corman (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Ambassador Tanin and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General De Mistura. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/381) and his Special Representative for his
insightful briefing.

We are grateful for the dedicated and outstanding
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is carrying out in fulfilment of
its mandate, under the effective leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura, in the face of very real and
serious threats, as evidenced most recently by the attack
against the UNAMA compound in Mazar-e-Sharif on
1 April. We strongly condemn and deplore this heinous
attack, and extend once again our condolences to the
bereaved families of those who lost their lives, as well
as to the UNAMA personnel and the entire United
Nations family.

We also condemn the recent spate of attacks by
insurgents against Afghan targets, which have resulted
in an increased loss of innocent civilian lives. These
attacks cannot be tolerated, and they will not deter the
Afghans and the international community from the
pursuit of a peaceful, secure and democratic
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is going through an historic period of
transformation. Afghanistan's neighbours and other
relevant actors in the region and beyond should respect
Afghanistan's sovereignty and continue making their
multidimensional contributions towards solidifying it.
The transition of security responsibilities, the peace
process and economic development are all at the core
of efforts towards realizing the ultimate goal of full
Afghan ownership. If one of these processes fails, the
overall body of work will also falter.

Afghan leadership of all processes related to
Afghanistan is a fundamental principle. Security is a
primary enabler that would facilitate development,
governance, the rule of law and institutional capacity-
building. In the past six months, military operations
have reached unprecedented levels, yet lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan can be founded only on a
political solution. Therefore, the necessary time and
space must be given to the Afghan peace process when
windows of opportunity for reconciliation arise.

The prospects for peace in Afghanistan are
stronger than ever, and let me underscore that the
durability of peace in Afghanistan requires that it
encompass all segments of society, because enhanced
national unity is the single most important basis upon
which lasting peace and stability would take hold.
While the training of the Afghan National Security
Forces is essential to fulfilling the transition by the end
of 2014, civilian capacity-building and economic
sustainability will be just as important post-2014. We
urge all donors to intensify their contributions to
civilian capacity development and economic viability.

A benign regional order is an indispensable pillar
of Afghan peace, sovereignty, development and
prosperity. In turn, Afghanistan's peace, sovereignty
and prosperity would constitute indispensable pillars of
the peace and prosperity of its neighbourhood. In this
regard, we will continue to pursue efforts in support of
the regional dimension discussed at the regional
countries' meeting, hosted by His Excellency Ahmet
Davutoglu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, in
Istanbul on 10 May, which is referenced in the
Secretary-General's report.

The preparations for the Istanbul Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Istanbul on 2 November
2011, have been launched. The meetings of the
International Contact Group's regional cooperation
working group, held respectively in Istanbul and Kabul
on 3 and 26 June under the co-chairmanship of Turkey
and UNAMA, have been useful in eliciting broad
support in the region and beyond for the upcoming
Istanbul Conference.

A set of commonalities are already emerging. The
2002 Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations (S/2002/ 1416) was a groundbreaking
document. The 2007 Istanbul Statement on Friendship
and Cooperation in the "Heart of Asia" (S/2010/70, annex) went even beyond the Kabul Declaration by
setting up a common regional vision, and constituted a
welcome milestone.

But since Istanbul last year, the regional work, as
well as circumstances and requirements, have moved
on significantly, and we hope that all of this will be put
on paper in a format that will then be undersigned by
the Istanbul Conference participants. We know that this
is what Afghanistan wants from the regional meetings.
We therefore intend the Istanbul Conference to be
a turning point in the regional dimension.

As always, we look forward to the strong support
of the international community, the importance of
which has already been emphasized in the Secretary-
General's report. We will be working closely with
Afghanistan, the United Nations and all other relevant
countries and organizations in the run-up to the
Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, which is slated to
be one of the top international events of this year.
