Ms. Sison (United States of America): We welcome
the new Deputy Secretary-General. We look forward to
working with her.

The stories and courage of the women, men and
youths we met during our trip are indelibly etched in
our minds and will continue to inspire all of us as we
work to address the urgent challenges of the people of
the Lake Chad basin. We were particularly interested
in our Lake Chad basin trip and the United Nations
approach to demobilization, reintegration and support
for the ex-Boko Haram, especially with regard to the
women and girls coming out of association with Boko
Haram, as well as the need to ensure that any identified
accountability initiatives are responsive to women
and girls and include following up on any allegations
of sexual and gender-based abuse. We also witnessed
the extent of the United Nations regular engagement
with women's civil society organizations and women's
community leaders on peace and security matters.

We note that youth and women's voices and
efforts are absolutely critical to re-establishing peace
and security in the Lake Chad basin subregion and
in creating the conditions for meaningful change,
sustainable economic development and sustainable
livelihoods - as noted by the Deputy Secretary-
General - especially for households headed by females.
Those voices and efforts are also crucial to preventing
extremism and creating more inclusive societies.

We also looked at the ongoing training of security
forces to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-
based violence. Still, the protection challenges remain
significant, especially for women and children. The
leaders of the Governments of Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria recognized that fact in their
interactions and conversations with us. Thousands of
women have been victims of abduction, sexual slavery,
forced recruitment and other terrible abuses, and we
were humbled in our meetings with the mention ofjust
a few of those acts and first-hand stories.

Furthermore, some of those victims, once out
of Boko Haram's clutches, face stigmatization in
their communities or suffer secondary or tertiary
displacement as a result of such stigma. Still, we were
encouraged during our trip by reports of defections
from Boko Haram and other extremist groups. That
trend underscores the importance of establishing
regionally coordinated disarmament, demobilization,
deradicalization and reintegration programmes.
Respect for human rights on the part of the military,
security services and Governments of the Lake Chad
basin is also key to establishing and building trust
with local communities that have been impacted by the
conflict. That was also a subject ofconversation with the
Governments and leaders, who agreed wholeheartedly
with this approach on the respect for human rights.

Finally and more broadly, the magnitude of the
humanitarian crisis, particularly the food insufficiency
challenges and the spectre offamine, is really difficult to
overstate. Enabling access for the humanitarian actors,
both from the United Nations and the implementing
partners, the non-governmental organizations in each of
the four countries we visited will be absolutely essential
to turning back famine and to improving food security,
especially for vulnerable populations such as mothers
and their young children. For all of us colleagues, I
think the resolve and energy we have voiced here in our
interventions today must be sustained if we are to make
a real difference in the lives of those we met during this
very important Security Council trip.

