Mr. Dussey (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like,
first of all, to thank the People's Republic of China,
Senegal and Angola for their initiative in organizing
this high-level open debate on the issue of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf oquinea. That reflects
the interest they attach to the promotion of peace,
security and stability wherever they are threatened,
and in Africa in particular. I would also like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing on the
issue under review.

I appreciate the opportunity afforded to me by
the Security Council to talk about this issue, which is
closely linked to the theme chosen for the Extraordinary
Summit of the African Union to be held in Lome on
15 October. I would like to begin by mentioning the
great importance of the Lome Summit following the
various other summits held on the African continent.
I assure the Security Council that, in the face of the
current concerns having to do with maritime security
and furthering development by promoting the blue
economy, the twenty-sixth Ordinary Summit of the
African Union, held in Addis Ababa, decided that the
Lome Summit should lead to the adoption and signing
of an African charter on maritime safety and security
and development.

In the face of such a serious situation, it is important
to understand what we can expect from the twenty-sixth
Summit in Lome, namely, the adoption of the draft
charter. Never in the history of the African continent,
in particular the history of the African Union, has there
been a charter of that nature. There have been several
African Union decisions, but this will be the first time
that the entire continent comes together to adopt a
draft charter for maritime security and development
in Africa.

Why does the African continent need such a
charter? There can be no doubt that maritime insecurity
in all its forms, as the Security Council has repeatedly
stated, constitutes a genuine threat to peace and
security in Africa. The problems with which Africans
are confronted with regard to the protection of maritime
space, which requires a collective and general response,
justifies the convening of the Lome meeting and the
adoption of the draft charter. The draft Lome' charter
is an instrument aimed at fighting maritime insecurity
and other reprehensible acts committed on the high seas.
After several Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 2018 (2011), 2039 (2012) and 2184 (2014),
we know that it is important that Africa, which is called
upon to implement the programme entitled 2050 African
Union Integrated Maritime Strategy, also known as the
2050 AIM. Strategy, be given an opportunity to take a
decision on its maritime future.
The draft Lome charter will also serve as an
instrument for the development of a blue economy. The
draft charter is intended to promote the development
of a flourishing blue economy that is sustainable and
environment-friendly in a well-secured space. The
proposed charter encourages the implementation
of a shared policy on fishing and aquaculture that
would promote the conservation and sustainable
management of fish stocks as well. It provides for
effective measures for tackling illegal fishing, which
has caused considerable losses for countries. Moreover,
the adoption of the draft Lome charter should enable
African countries to stimulate economic growth
through job creation along the coast of the continent of
Africa, particularly through the promotion of artisanal
fishing and the commercialization of fish products at
the national, regional and subregional levels.

I think it is also important to recognize the
importance of international trade and tourism in the
economic growth of States. The draft charter recalls
and encourages all the initiatives aimed at the goals
of protecting marine and coastal environment in
conformity with the international instruments dealing
with biodiversity and of promoting the sustainable
management of the marine population and the marine
species and their related ecosystems.

The draft charter is also a melting pot of various
normative African regulations governing the fight
for security on the high seas. It is an instrument
of consolidation and of regional and subregional
integration aimed at uniting and strengthening existing
normative frameworks, particularly those drawn from
the Djibouti Code of Conduct of 29 January 2009, as
well as the Declaration of the Yaounde Summit of
25 June 2013, referred to earlier this morning, and the
2050 AIM. Strategy, of which I spoke. Furthermore, the
draft charter seeks to pave the way for further initiatives
and actions and the marshalling of resources to enable
us to achieve our basic goals, which are essentially
to heighten awareness and ensure that we have the
necessary legal tools for all African States to be able to
tackle the phenomenon of insecurity at sea.

The Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, scheduled
to take place on 15 October in Lome, will no doubt
mark an important milestone in the existence and the
implementation of the objectives of the pan-African
organization - the African Union - which is fully
committed to the process of a renaissance of the
entire African continent. What we are working for is
an Africa that is free and responsible and willing and
able to take advantage of all its resources and to act
so as to develop its potential, particularly that which is
represented by maritime space and to harness that so as
to deliver development and well-being for our peoples.
That is the essential purpose, as it were, of the Lome
Summit scheduled for 15 October.

