Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for the eighteenth
report to the Council and for her briefing today.

The ICC is called upon to make an important
contribution to efforts to bring to justice those involved
in the gravest crimes committed during the Darfur
conflict. Their efforts in that regard complement the
work of national legal institutions in combatting
impunity. The Court needs to render an objective
assessment of the acts committed by all parties involved
in various situations. The Court's effectiveness in
meeting that challenge will decide its reputation and
thereby how seriously States take the Court. With
regard to the situation in Darfur, that means that a
careful, unbiased investigation must be conducted into
the cases ofboth Sudanese officials and leaders of rebel
groups, who also have serious violations to answer for,
which deserve the Court's attention. We are satisfied
with the balanced approach of the Prosecutor in that
regard.

In the eight years since the Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), the ICC has achieved some
success in investigating Sudanese cases. Some
have reached the stage where further legal action is
impossible without the presence of the accused in The
Hague. That situation requires further steps by the
Court in the context of seeking optimal approaches to
the problem of combating impunity in the framework
of the Rome Statute. In that connection, we note the
importance of States discharging their corresponding
obligations to cooperate with the Court under the norms
of immunities for senior Government officials.

We welcome the Prosecutor's steps in bringing
to justice the perpetrators of the attacks on African
Union peacekeepers in Haskanita in 2007. A significant
amount of work has been done on the cases of the
rebel leaders Banda and Jerbo. We have taken note of
information on the closure of the Jerbo case, due to the
death of the accused. Nevertheless, it is important not
to lose the momentum achieved in the Banda trial and
to avoid delays for reasons of a non-objective nature.

We expect that the Court's discharge ofits functions
in the delivery of justice regarding the situation in
Darfur will continue to be harmoniously integrated into
the peace settlement and post-conflict reconstruction
process.

