Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in French): I
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We appreciate your
delegation's intelligence and temperance - qualities
that are crucial for guiding the work of the Security
Council.

Iwould also like to express my warm congratulations
to all the peoples, including Haiti, who this week are
celebrating La semaine de la langue francaise et de la
Francophonie.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra
Honore, for introducing the report (S/2015/157) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to recognize her
tireless work as Head of the Mission. Let me also
acknowledge in particular the valuable intervention
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Mr. Denis
Regis.

In September 2014, when the Security Council
considered the situation in Haiti, the prospect of
holding partial legislative and local elections seemed
hard to envision (see S/PV.7262). At that time we also
welcomed the fact that Haiti had taken decisive steps
towards the holding of such elections. Today we are
seeing the results of that. Haiti has taking decisive
steps towards holding elections thanks to the efforts,
dialogue and joint work of Haitian political actors and
the Haitian people. I want to underscore the decisive
participation of women's groups in building greater
democracy, peace and security in Haiti.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/157), I would like to make two comments.

First, I reiterate the importance of the full
participation of the Haitian Government in taking
decisions regarding the presence of the United Nations
in its country. We believe that we must never overlook
the concerns of the Haitian Government and the Haitian
electoral authorities regarding the absence of troops in
six of the ten regions as a result of the implementation of
the Council's decision to reduce the size of the military
contingent. Both have made public statements in that
regard and have requested MINUSTAH's support in
logistics and security issues. In that regard, President
Martelly stated in his letter to the Secretary-General
of 9 March, which was cited by other colleagues, that
he would like the United Nations to put the process of
military withdrawal on hold and strengthen the police
capacity and MINUSTAH's presence in the field.

Secondly, we are concerned about reports ofa recent
increase in violence among armed gangs, which has
complicated the security situation in the country. As we
explained after the adoption of resolution 2180 (2014),
in our view security has not improved sufficiently to
draw down the MINUSTAH force strength so rapidly
and abruptly.

Together with other countries of our region in
September 2014 and during the negotiation of resolution
2180 (2014), Argentina emphasized the importance of
maintainingthemandate andconfigurationMINUSTAH
and to consider options for its reconfiguration only from
2015. We did so out of our concern to maintain stability
during the electoral process and the need to strengthen
the operational capabilities and resources of the Haitian
National Police, which is the force that ultimately will
be responsible for security after the withdrawal of the
international community.

In 2015, according to the electoral calendar, the
country will hold three rounds of elections, over a
period stretching almost six months. At the same time,
despite the significant progress made, the Haitian
National Police still lacks the resources to take full
responsibility for security, especially during the
elections. We therefore remain concerned about the
sudden and rapid reduction of the military contingent,
preventing the provision of the necessary logistics and
security support.

In particular, we are concerned that the military
component, after being reducing by 53 per cent, will
no longer be able to carry out the important deterrence
and prevention tasks and patrols they have carried out
to date. Moreover, as the report acknowledges, the
force strength of the police component authorized by
the Security Council has not been reached, meaning
that the reduction will not necessarily be offset by
a strengthening of police capacity. We are further
concerned by the recent increase in violence that was
mentioned in the report, particularly given that the
drawdown of the military contingent is not yet complete.

Finally, I should like to make three short comments
on issues that, while not at the heart of the Council's
agenda, have been mentioned in some statements.

With respect to the demonstrations and social
protests taking place, all of our countries - developed
and developing alike - have seen their people
protesting and demanding greater democracy, rights
and freedoms. However, that is not an indication that
international peace and security are at risk, or that a
given country is facing a critical situation. We must
ensure - to wit, MINUSTAH and the international
community - that the demonstrations, those legitimate
social protests taking place in all of our countries, take
place within a framework of law and democracy and the
absence of violence.

As to the second matter, references have been
made to prisons. I believe that the fact that more than
10 million people are incarcerated around the world is
an issue that one day will require serious consideration
in an appropriate body of the United Nations. The
numbers vary greatly by country, however, it bears
mentioning that some 40 or 50 per cent of them have
not been convicted. Should Haiti therefore be without
blame? No. I simply wish to note that Haiti is not the
only country dealing with the issue.

I would like to recognize the tremendous work
carried out by the international community in the camps
for internally displaced persons, nearly 300,000 of
whom were displaced by the earthquake. MINUSTAH
has experienced two major events in the past 10 years:
the catastrophic earthquake and the cholera outbreak.
As Ms. Honore informed us today, ofthe nearly 300,000
internally displaced persons in 2012, about 70,000 to
80,000 remain in camps presently. Nevertheless, there
must be a focus on the living conditions in the camps.

Argentina, along with many other countries of
the region, has made significant efforts to support
the Haitian people and Government in their efforts to
bolster the democratic process, security, human rights
and economic and social development. That is why we
believe that the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti should remain in the country for as long as
necessary, to show that it is possisble to work with the
people and the Government of a country to achieve the
goals all of us need so much, namely, democracy, human
rights and peace. It is not about MINUSTAH's presence
in perpetuity; it is about moving from assistance and
security to cooperation for development.

A leader of our time, who will speak for the first
time before the General Assembly in September, has
said that solidarity is a means of making history. It is
our hope that it is the path that the Council will choose
for the beloved people and the Government of Haiti.
May solidarity become a means of making history.

