Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for inviting us to today's
open debate, and for the concept paper (S/2017/692, annex), which provides the background for today's
important discussion.

My country shares the vision surrounding the
need to adjust the structure of peacekeeping missions
to ensure that they are effective and can provide an
appropriate response to the current dynamics of armed
conflicts. The majority of conflicts are no longer
international; they now have diverse origins and
connotations, as outlined by resolution 2282 (2016).

Like those who spoke before me, in particular
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, I would like to reiterate
our belief that we are moving in the right direction in
the crucial task of pooling our efforts to contribute
to international peacebuilding and security. In a very
different and specific context and with the support of
the Security Council and of the entire Organization, my
country has focused all of the Government's political
will on achieving sustainable and lasting peace. The
lessons learned in brokering the peace agreement and
from its first special political mission, now nearing
completion, which the Security Council approved in
January 2016, allow us to categorically state that the
success of such a major undertaking depends on a
mission whose concept, structure and development
consistently responds to the political and social situation
on the ground, and not on predetermined formulas to
which everyone must conform.

We also believe that, in our case, national ownership
has been a determining factor in achieving success,
which today's concept paper deems to be essential.
As mentioned on other occasions at the Security
Council and in other forums, the process conducted
in Colombia, through a new tripartite mechanism
with regional support from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the United Nations,
the guerrilla armed forces and the Government, along
with participation of communities, victims, young
people and women, provides lessons that we believe
can be analysed and considered in other contexts with
complexities that require bold structures, which are
underpinned by greater national capacities, possess a
clear exit strategy, involve all stakeholders concerned
and demand that a more relevant and effective role
be played by the Peacebuilding Commission, which
requires the tools necessary to carry out such a
critical mission. Only in this way will their design not
be reduced to the containment of conflicts but to the
prevention of their recurrence.

As Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has
repeatedly said, conflict prevention must be one of the
fundamental pillars of the work of the United Nations,
and it is essential to incorporate aspects of economic
development, social cohesion, gender equality and
human rights, among others, in such a way that they
translate into a culture of conflict prevention, based on
risk management, to achieve sustainable peace.

In conclusion, the work of prevention and
sustainable peace, which are two principles that we
have been able to take from the three reports; the joint
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262; as well as the Secretary-
General's proposals for reform should result in a
strengthened budget that provides the necessary tools
to execute this task to which we are all committed.

