Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/128) and welcome his Special Representative,
Mr. Mariano Fernandez, to New York. We commend
him for his endeavours.

For many years, we have followed the evolving
situation in Haiti and have been a formal stakeholder,
given our participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) as a troop
contributor. However, this is our first statement on the
matter as a member of the Security Council.

Haiti, of course, faces many challenges, which
were only compounded by the legacy of the horrific
earthquake of January 2010. Addressing those
challenges requires a comprehensive approach, but
today I would like to focus on three areas of special
concern.

First is the matter of political stability. The year
2012 began with promise. On 9 January, we were
encouraged by President Martelly's pledge before
Parliament, as he announced his priorities for the year,
to seek close coordination with all branches of
Government. Of particular importance was an
agreement with the filegislative branch regarding,
among other aspects, the appointment of a Prime
Minister.

Unfortunately, our optimism of some months ago
has been mitigated by the recent resignation of the
Prime Minister and the mounting tensions between the
legislative and the executive branches. We therefore
meet today as events continue to unfold in a context of
greater political uncertainty, as outlined in paragraph
55 of the Secretary-General's report. Some slightly
more encouraging aspects were indicated by
Mr. Fernandez.

Obviously, the absence of a duly constituted
Government adversely impacts decision-making on key
issues. At the same time, the experience of recent
decades in Haiti has shown that the holding of
elections and democratic governance, in accordance
with the Constitution, are the only way to achieve
long-term stability. Municipal elections and the

renewal of one-third of the Senate are now overdue,
although we note the President's recent remarks that
these elections are of high priority to his
Administration. We trust that these will take place as
soon as possible, especially since the Secretary-
General's report reminds us that the outgoing Senators'
terms expire in May.

I would also like to take a moment to comment
on the status of the Provisional Electoral Council. Its
temporary nature should not prevent the preservation
of the know-how and technical capacity for future
elections. In that respect, it would be worth considering
the establishment of a permanent support office to this
effect. On the other hand, if the idea of a permanent
electoral council evolves, it is of utmost importance to
guarantee its independence. At the same time, we
invite the Government to begin engaging with
MINUSTAH to take the logistical, operational and
concrete measures necessary for the preparation for
holding these elections.

The second area of concern is recovery and
reconstruction efforts. I stress the importance of
renewing the mandate of the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission that expired last October. We believe that
the added value of that mechanism is unique, not only
for the donor community but in particular for Haiti.
The Government is an essential player in attempts to
rebuild a country. The Commission makes it easier to
take the Haitian view as the basis of its proposals. We
further believe that the public sector must be
strengthened and that international assistance should
take that carefully into account. The Commission
offers a practical, transparent and inclusive solution to
closing the gap between existing capacities and the
unmet needs of the Haitian people. Although it is
currently intended to be an interim commission, its
establishment as a long-term institution should be
considered so that the country has a national focal
point through which to channel international
assistance.

This brings me to the matter of the remaining
internally displaced persons camps. We appreciate the
19 per cent reduction of the total number of persons in
camps cited in the report. We also support enhanced
efforts to protect vulnerable groups exposed to the
cholera epidemic, food insecurity and gender-based
violence, among other threats. However, we believe
that more must be done to adopt a comprehensive camp
closure plan and to find alternative long-term housing
and sites. We note that, on average, displaced persons
in Africa spend well over a decade in temporary
settlements. Unless this remains a priority, we risk
replicating that distressing situation in Haiti.

The third concern is security, a subject to which
my previous remarks were also related. It is now
broadly acknowledged that security gains could be
undermined by weak socio-economic development and
governance and that, consequently, there is a need for a
balanced approach to security and non-security
considerations. The report before us reminds us of the
important role that MINUSTAH fulfils in Haiti,
particularly on the security front. It is understood that
peacekeepers cannot remain in Haiti in perpetuity, but
it is equally important not to abandon Haiti
prematurely.

We look forward in the following months to
receiving detailed information on the request made to
the Secretary-General in paragraph 24 of resolution
2012 (2011) concerning a comprehensive assessment
of threats to security in Haiti, including options, as
appropriate, to reconfigure the composition of
MINUSTAH.

Finally, we take note of paragraph 56 of the
report and of the initial steps taken by the Government
to contain the emergence of uniformed militias that are
organized without official approval. These
observations are also based on our recent visit to Haiti
in February.

The international community, in particular the
countries of Latin America and from the Caribbean,
have a clear stake in Haiti's success and we fully
commit to continuing to support the process of
political, economic and social development. I recall
that, while the international community is willing to
play a supporting role, the primary responsibility rests
first and foremost with the Haitians themselves.

