Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Poland for having organized
this informational meeting on developments of the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel):

I also thank the briefers - Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We also
thank Ms. Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, whose
statement on behalf of the African Union we support,
and Mr. Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for the relevance of his briefing.

From the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/432),
we note the progress made in operationalizing the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It also updates us on the many
challenges that persist, including the mobilization of
international assistance, the implementation of the
technical agreement and human rights compliance
framework, adopted by the G-5 Sahel countries. Despite
those difficulties, the unity of action of the Security
Council and the unwavering commitment of State
and institutional actors have provided for the robust
implementation of the recommendations of resolutions
2391 (2017) regarding logistical and operational support
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the Joint
Force. Cote d'Ivoire encourages all actors concerned, in
particular the States of the G-5 Sahel, to continue their
efforts to strengthen the Joint Force, which illustrates
the willingness of African countries to take ownership
of their collective security.
Cote d'Ivoire endorses the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General regarding the deterioration
of the security situation in the Sahel region and the
challenges to the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. Progress in force generation, with the
Joint Force initially scheduled to reach full operational
capacity in March 2018, continues, according to
the report, to fall short of the expectations of the
international community. Cote d'Ivoire therefore
echoes the Secretary-General's call to the G-5 Sahel
States to step up dialogue with international partners to
strengthen and better coordinate multifaceted support
for the operationalization of the Joint Force. Rapid
deployment capabilities and a strong grasp of the socio-
cultural environment are comparative advantages in
combating the spread of terrorism and cross-border
crime in the Sahel.

MINUSMA's logistical and operational support to
the Joint Force, as defined by resolution 2391 (2017), is
a good example of cooperation between United Nations
and African peace operations. Cote d'Ivoire therefore
welcomes the signing of the technical agreement
among the United Nations, the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel countries, and hopes that funding pledges
will be honoured, thereby advancing the process of the
operationalization of the Joint Force.

We also welcome the adoption by the G-5 Sahel
States of a compliance framework intended to ensure
strict respect for human rights by the Joint Force, whose
operational success will depend on the buy-in and
cooperation of local communities. The implementation
of this compliance framework will require targeted
training on respect for basic human rights for Joint
Force military components and punishments that make
an example of those who violate human rights.

Moreover, even if it reaches full operational
capacity, the effectiveness ofthe Joint Force will remain
dependent on current efforts to stabilize the regional
political environment. The Joint Force must therefore
serve as just one component of a political solution,
going beyond security alone, to the ongoing crises in
the Sahel.

In the same spirit, my delegation urges parties to
seek a political solution to the Malian crisis via the
implementation without delay by all signatories of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, signed at
the end of the Algiers process in 2015. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore reiterates its call on those involved in the
Malian crisis to translate the commitments undertaken
in the Peace Agreement into concrete actions. The
success of the Agreement is the cornerstone for the
restoration of lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.

The responses provided by the Joint Force in
terms of security must also be supported by strategies
aimed at eradicating regional vulnerabilities and
enhancing the resilience of States and local populations
to crises, including measures to counter poverty and
unemployment, and to improve access to basic social
services such as education and health. In that regard,
my country welcomes the launch, in July 2017, of
the Alliance for the Sahel mechanism to strengthen
coordination among donors for rapid-impact projects
targeting populations in the most vulnerable areas. It
is important to ensure the necessary complementarity
between the initiatives of the Alliance for the Sahel
and the Priority Investment Programme. With
better coordination, the two programmes will help
reduce poverty.

Cote d'Ivoire expresses its appreciation for the
financial support of bilateral and multilateral partners
to the Joint Force. However, my country remains
concerned about the long-term financial sustainability
ofthe Joint Force, given the scale ofneed and the delays
in the provision of the funds pledged.

My country also believes that, in addition to
sustainable financing, it is important to ensure proper
coordination of the Joint Force with regional security
initiatives in order to best manage resources.

The consequences of insecurity and instability,
exacerbated by the actions of numerous armed jihadist
groups and cross-border criminal networks, extend
far beyond the borders of the Sahel. They pose a
significant threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, calling for urgent coordinated and
effective responses to provide for the stability and
development of the local populations. Cote d'Ivoire
urges all stakeholders, including the United Nations,
the European Union, the African Union and the States
of the G-5 for the-Sahel, to continue their cooperation
so as to operationalize the Joint Force sufficiently to
meet the security challenges in the Sahel.

