I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting, and Under- Secretary-General Lacroix for his introductory remarks. I also wish to thank the Force Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force for their briefings. We marked the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers just last week. Today, through the Commanders, I wish to once again pay tribute to all military personnel deployed in the 13 United Nations peacekeeping missions for their efforts, sacrifice and contribution. United Nations peacekeeping is an important instrument for maintaining international peace and security. It plays an irreplaceable role in helping to stabilize the situation in host countries and create the conditions for a political settlement. Therefore, peacekeeping operations overall have been given positive recognition and been supported by Member States. Meanwhile, we must acknowledge the challenges they face. At present, being deployed in conflict areas, peacekeepers bear the brunt of wars and conflicts. They have a stronger yearning for peace, higher hopes for the United Nations and greater expectations for peacekeeping operations. At the same time, peacekeeping operations are faced with threats such as the escalation of violence, terrorism and disease. Since peacekeepers carry out their missions, implement their mandates and face dangers on behalf of the United Nations, the Security Council should do its utmost to help resolve the problems they face. The safety and security of peacekeepers should be addressed with greater urgency. Under the special circumstances surrounding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, United Nations peacekeepers are fighting shoulder to shoulder with local peoples against the pandemic. It is a difficult time for United Nations peacekeepers. Indeed, peacekeepers in countries such as Mali and South Sudan have been infected. China stands with the United Nations and its Member States to jointly tackle the impact of COVID-19 on peacekeeping operations and advance the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. I wish to make the following points. First, we should keep peacekeeping operations moving in the right direction. We should adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the fundamental principles for peacekeeping operations, as well as respect the ownership of host countries. That is key to the success of peacekeeping operations. The Charter of the United Nations explicitly calls for the political settlement of disputes, which is the ultimate goal of United Nations peacekeeping. The primacy of a political settlement should be reflected in every aspect of such operations. They should ensure smooth communication with host countries at all stages of deployment. The relevant issues must be addressed through timely consultations, and the sovereignty of host countries must be respected. This is conducive to the implementation of mandates and the safety and security of peacekeepers. Secondly, the impact of COVID-19 on peacekeeping operations should be properly addressed. The pandemic is a major test for peacekeeping operations. The Secretariat and peacekeeping missions should take the measures necessary to formulate epidemic-response policies, regulate the activities of peacekeepers and increase medical-support facilities, adjust the rotation policy in the light of the development of the pandemic and enhance the anti-epidemic capability of the missions. We commend the measures proposed by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in this regard and believe that, through our joint efforts, we can fundamentally reduce the risk of transmission in peacekeeping missions. Thirdly, the utmost efforts should be made to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. Peacekeeping operations are now faced with even more complex and dangerous environments and challenges. It is our shared responsibility to improve their safety and security. The Security Council should continue to attach great importance to this issue, formulate mandates based on the situation on the ground and ensure resources for peacekeeping missions that are adequate to their mandates. Member States and the Secretariat should fully implement resolution 2518 (2020); help troop-contributing countries and peacekeeping missions enhance their early-warning capability, health support and critical medical capacities; and improve the relevant training. We should improve the system of medical support and casualty evacuation for injured peacekeepers and ensure that adequate medical facilities and qualified personnel are deployed in the field, in full accordance with resolution 2518 (2020). China is the second-largest financial contributor and a major troop contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations; indeed, 2,500 peacekeepers from China are currently serving in nine mission areas. Peacekeeping carries forward the mission of peace. China will continue to take concrete action to honour its commitment to multilateralism and world peace and to contribute even further to United Nations peacekeeping.
