Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United
Nations World Food Programme (WFP), for their
detailed briefings on the latest developments in Yemen.

As the Security Council extends the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA), my country notes with regret
that the peace process in Yemen has struggled to make
the expected progress in the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Stockholm Agreement. C6te
d'Ivoire urges all Yemeni actors to seize the opportunity
ofthis mandate renewal to resolutely engage in dialogue,
as recommended by the Stockholm Agreement.

With regard to the Al-Hudaydah agreement,
my delegation believes that it is essential that all
parties scrupulously comply with the ceasefire and
pursue the redeployment of military forces, including
the withdrawal of the Houthis from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, under the auspices
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC).

While contributing to the establishment of an
environment oftrust, compliance with the ceasefire will
undoubtedly promote the full resumption of the WFP's
activities and the deployment of the inspectors of the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism

in Yemen, with a view to assisting port authorities in
increasing port capacities and generating resources.
My country also believes that it is urgent to implement
the provisions of the Stockholm Agreement relating to
the exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening of
humanitarian corridors.

Despite the complexity of the current challenges,
my country reaffirms its conviction that a return to
lasting peace and stability in Yemen remains possible
through dialogue and courageous compromises among
all actors in the crisis. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the ongoing mediation efforts of Mr. Martin
Griffiths that enabled the warring parties, on 15 July,
to commit themselves to honouring the ceasefire and
facilitating the redeployment of forces from the port
of Al-Hudaydah. My country calls on regional actors
to participate in constructive efforts to support the
ongoing mediation efforts and the commitment of the
Yemeni parties to achieving meaningful results.

After several years of conflict, Yemen is now a
devastated country where, according to United Nations
agencies, 24 million people face a humanitarian
emergency, 14 million suffer from food insecurity and
3.3 million are internally displaced. This situation is
all the more worrying for my country, as deliberate
and unacceptable obstacles to the delivery of food
aid are abundant and led to the partial suspension of
humanitarian aid on 20 June. We hope for a quick
conclusion of the agreement announced by Mr. Beasley
so that the WFP can fully resume its provision of aid to
affected populations.

My delegation therefore urgently appeals to the
Yemeni parties to refrain from any instrumentalization
and manipulation of humanitarian assistance, which
constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). It also calls
on them to respect the obligation to protect civilians
and to put an end to the recruitment of child soldiers.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the tireless efforts of Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley to reach a political settlement ofthe Yemeni
conflict and to mobilize the necessary resources to
mitigate the negative effects of the humanitarian crisis.
My country also commends the RCC and UNMHA
observation teams, led by Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard, for their determination to create the
environment necessary to a definitive and sustainable
settlement of the crisis in Yemen.

