Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), I
have the honour to brief the Council on the topic of
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

I wish to thank the Ethiopian presidency and the
Russian Federation for supporting the inclusion of this
item on the Council's agenda. I also wish to welcome the
Secretary-General's recent counter-terrorism reforms,
including his establishment of the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, led by the Under-Secretary-General. I
believe that those reforms will greatly enhance the
coordination of counter-terrorism activities, both
within and outside the United Nations system.

This month marks the sixteenth anniversary of
the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 against the
United States and the Council's adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), which also established the CTC to monitor
the implementation of its provisions. Since 2005, the
CTC has been supported by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
works to implement the Committee's policy decisions,
coordinate the monitoring of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), and assess Member States'
implementation efforts.

Acting on behalf ofthe Committee, CTED conducts
assessment visits to Member States, with the consent
of the host Government. The assessment visits enable
the CTC and CTED to engage in constructive dialogue
with the visited State; gather an accurate picture of
its overall counter-terrorism capacity; and identify
gaps, challenges, trends, good practices, and technical
assistance needs. An essential part of the assessment
process is to identify priority areas for further action,
as well as priority technical assistance requirements.
The information gathered during the visits is also
used to produce global implementation surveys of the
efforts of all Member States to implement not only
resolution 1373 (2001), but also resolution 1624 (2005),
on preventing incitement to commit terrorist acts.

Regarded as the most comprehensive analytical
documents on counter-terrorism in the United Nations
system, the surveys identify where gaps remain, where
the international community might most usefully
focus its efforts, and where progress has been made.
And Member States have made significant progress
in many areas, assisted by an international counter-
terrorism legal framework that has itself developed
considerably - especially over the past decade - in
response to the constantly evolving terrorist threat.

However, many States continue to face significant
challenges. Some States do not yet have all the
necessary counter-terrorism measures in place. States
also face challenges in their efforts to ensure that the
measures that are in place are constantly reviewed
and amended as terrorists develop new operational
methods and techniques. In order to ensure that our
assessments continue to serve a useful purpose, we
must continue to build upon the dialogue that has been
developed between the Council and Member States,
through the CTC and CTED. Member States should
be encouraged to strengthen their efforts to implement
the Council's resolutions on terrorism, as well as the
recommendations emanating from the Committee's
assessment Visits.

Our assessments and analysis show that many States
lack the necessary capacity and resources to comply
effectively with the Council's resolutions. Moreover,
our follow-up assessments show uneven progress in
implementing our recommendations. It is vital that our
recommendations be taken up by our implementing
partners and integrated into their work and technical
assistance programmes.

In order to be successful, the follow-up process must
receive strong support from our implementing partners,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism. At the
political level, successful follow-up depends in part on
the Council's consideration of States' non-compliance
with its counter-terrorism resolutions.

With respect to practical follow-up action, I would
recall that our visit assessments are shared with the
visited State. CTED may also share the recommendations
for further action with its implementing partners and
share the assessment itself, in full or in part, with third
parties, with the consent of the visited State. Member
States are encouraged to give that consent, as it greatly
enhances our ability to identify potential donors and
technical assistance providers. Member States should
also be reminded of their obligation to meet their
international counter-terrorism obligations, for it is in
their primary interest to protect their citizens' lives,
their borders, and their institutions.

Over the past decade, in response to the rapidly
evolving terrorist threat and operational landscape, the
Committee's country visits have become considerably
more demanding and complex. As States increasingly
request more focused assessments and follow-up visits,
the Committee and the CTC must be able to provide
needs-based and flexible responses. Within a relatively
short time period, the Council has adopted six new
resolutions on counter-terrorism, addressing issues
as diverse as strengthening international judicial and
law enforcement cooperation, countering terrorist
narratives, countering the use of information and
communications technology for terrorist purposes,
human trafficking for terrorism-financing purposes,
terrorist threats to civil aviation, protecting critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks, building public-
private partnerships and preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons.

All those resolutions require the CTC and CTED
to assist in their implementation and promotion,
including through special meetings on themes, such as
international cooperation and civil aviation security.
The role ofCTED thus continues to expand thematically.
With respect to international cooperation, for example,
its mandate has expanded through the requirements to
address biometrics and the downgrading of intelligence
threat data.

The addition of new tasks has also brought
horizontal and conceptual expansion. In addition to its
work of identifying gaps and challenges, CTED is also
required to support the work of its key partners in many
areas. Through its work on those issues, CTED supports
the policy development of the CTC and the Council,
assists the CTC in defining its priorities and promotes
the Security Council global counter-terrorism policy.

I wish to commend CTED for its readiness to
engage proactively in those areas. I also wish to stress
the need for CTED to be provided with the necessary
resources, both human and financial, to effectively
assist the Committee to monitor, promote and facilitate
Member States' implementation of all relevant
Council resolutions.

In accordance with the relevant Council resolutions,
the Committee and CTED will continue to cooperate
closely with their key partners, including the Expert
Group of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, through regular exchange of
information, sharing of reports and the preparation of
joint documents and joint statements of the three Chairs
to the Council.

The CTC and CTED will also cooperate closely
with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and will continue
to promote the best international codes and standards,
best practices and recommendations for countering
terrorism and the violent extremism that can lead to
terrorism. We hope that the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and our other implementing partners will make full use
of our assessments, analysis, recommendations and
expertise in their work, including where the facilitation
of technical assistance is concerned.

