Mr. Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): First of all,
allow me to express my condolences to the
Government and people of the Republic of Korea over
the tragic death of five soldiers in Timor-Leste.

Thank you for convening this open meeting of the
Security Council to examine the quarterly special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2003/243). The report allows Member States to
follow recent developments closely and to remain
informed of progress in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1410 (2002).

Thus far, Timor-Leste has been a success story
for the United Nations and for the international
community. In the past three years, we have witnessed
a dramatic change in the country, and the devastation
produced by conflict has given way to peace, to
institution-building and to the laying of the foundations
for future prosperity. Timor-Leste is now a proud
member of the United Nations, after having benefited
from its support for nation-building.

It was never envisioned that that support would
be of unlimited duration. On the contrary, it was
intended from the beginning that the United Nations
would perform within a reasonable time frame the tasks
that it assumed in the country. We are glad that the
Secretary-General, in his report, considers that the
mission can be completed within the period of time
envisaged. It is a welcome confirmation that, despite
all of the unforeseen circumstances - which no
amount of planning can ever completely cover - the
considerable international effort deployed so far is
producing the expected results.

But this encouraging conclusion of the Secretary-
General, based on a careful examination of the
country's evolution, should lead us to pay attention to
all of his recommendations. However successful its
story, Timor-Leste is still fragile, and unfortunately we
see a sharp increase in the frequency and the magnitude
of security-related incidents, some of them of a
terrorist nature. That was not originally foreseen, and
the proposed downsizing planned for UNMISET did
not take such developments into account. Keeping the
envisioned handover date of May 2004 in place, the
Secretary-General now proposes a reconfiguration of
the military component and adoption of a revised
phased approach to prepare the new country to better
face existing threats. He also proposes enhancement of
the operational capability of the international police
component. These are short-term measures to promote
security and, simultaneously, to increase the
effectiveness and speed of the training of the Timorese
police.

As a country that is a major troop contributor to
UNMISET, we support these recommendations, which
seem entirely reasonable to us in the light of a changed
situation. We also support them because they aim at
preventing any backward movement away from a
positive trend of which we are proud and in the
conviction that, if we were to lose momentum, it would
be costly for the country and for the United Nations to
restore the situation. Finally, we must note that the
additional financial resources required are quite modest
compared with the large-scale investment that we have
all made over the past few years.

As in the past, Portugal will remain committed to
the consolidation and development of Timor-Leste and
to United Nations efforts towards that end. I am
confident that the Security Council will not hesitate, in
this final stage, to ensure through its decisions a happy
end for this story, which has been one of success so far.

