Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Government of Belgium for the initiative to organize this debate, as well as for the special emphasis placed on addressing the issue of transitional justice using an approach that takes into account its four components: truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-repetition - one based on the premise that there can be no single transition justice model that is applicable to all cases. According to the guidance note, transitional justice is considered from a rights-based perspective and provides three ways to continue strengthening the activities of the United Nations in this area. First, we must seek to take into account the root causes of a repressive conflict or Government and combat violations of all rights, including economic, social and cultural rights. Secondly, it is important to take into account human rights and transitional justice aspects in peace processes. And, thirdly, it is crucial to coordinate disarmament, demobilization and reintegration initiatives with the processes and mechanisms of transitional justice, so that they can positively reinforce one another. Within the framework of this open debate, we would like to briefly share some aspects of the Argentine transitional justice experience, which is the result of a post-dictatorial process and not of a post-conflict context. We consider it important to issue that disclaimer. What happened in my country's recent past was not an armed conflict. Serious human rights violations against society were committed through the repressive actions of the armed and security forces, within the framework of a de facto dictatorial Government.Since constitutional order was restored in December 1983, the Argentine State has carried out ongoing work to comply with its international obligations in the area of human rights. One of the first decisions of the democratic Government was the establishment of the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons, which that took concrete measures to recognize the right to the truth in order to clarify the facts related to the forced disappearance of persons. The following year, the National Court of Appeals in Federal Criminal and Correctional Matters handed down a sentence in December 1985 condemning the members of the military boards that ruled the country to life imprisonment. The passing of the due obedience and full stop laws in 1987 and the pardons issued in the 1990s to those who had been convicted made it impossible to continue with the ongoing trials regarding serious violations of human rights. In parallel, the so-called trials for truth took place, which were judicial proceedings initiated with the objective of determining the fate or whereabouts of missing persons. The inter-American human rights system played a central role in strengthening the right to the truth in our country and in the region. Many relatives, unable to obtain justice in local courts, went to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which ruled on the obligation of the State to punish those responsible. A decade later, the National Congress declared the due obedience and full stop laws null and void, and the Supreme Court of Justice declared them unconstitutional, which led to the formal reopening of more than 1,000 legal cases. According to information provided by the Prosecutor's Office for Crimes against Humanity, from 2006 to 2019 238 sentences were handed down for acts committed during the last civilian-military dictatorship. There are currently 21 cases in oral proceedings; 70 cases are scheduled for oral proceedings; and 260 cases are before the court of first instance. As the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence has pointed out, in order to provide effective reparation to victims it is essential to establish appropriate systems of redress. In that regard, the National Commission on the Enforced Disappearance of Persons has recommended the adoption of the necessary laws so that the relatives of disappeared persons may receive economic assistance. At present, a set of laws is in force that provides for economic reparation for the serious violations committed during the dictatorship. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Argentina provides important assistance to those applying for benefits under those laws in completing the necessary formalities at consular offices. To conclude, I would like to emphasize the central role of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Indeed, the Convention provides all States with a basis for the establishment of a solid legal framework in the areas of prevention, punishment, reparation and non-repetition of enforced disappearances and provides for mutual legal assistance mechanisms between States. It should be noted that the Convention is still young, with 62 States parties and 98 signatories to date. Therefore, we invite States to cooperate on moving towards its universalization.
