I thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. I also warmly welcome the representative of Syria. The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire, and actions need to be stepped up to alleviate the hardship that millions of Syrians have been enduring for almost 10 years now. A decade of war, the collapse of the economy and the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have further complicated the already precarious living conditions of many Syrians. In this respect, allow me to touch upon the following points. First, we commend the efforts of the Syrian Government in continuing its collaboration with the United Nations and other organizations in the fight against the spread of the pandemic and in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance. My delegation echoes the call of the Secretary-General on the parties to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial humanitarian relief for all civilians in need, wherever they are located. Secondly, my delegation remains concerned about the recent increase in hostilities in spite of the Turkish and Russian ceasefire agreement. We reiterate the call of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for an immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria and an all-out effort to combat the pandemic. However, my delegation would like to stress that the call for a ceasefire and the need for a common and collective effort in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic should not distract us from the fight against terrorism, especially as evidence shows that terrorist groups are trying to take advantage of the current situation. Whether in Syria or in the Sahel, Governments, in partnership with the international community, should have the right to continue the fight against terrorism on their territories, in compliance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law, especially with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. Thirdly, in an effort to build confidence, the Niger calls for a large-scale and unilateral release of detainees, as well as more meaningful action in the cases of missing persons, by all belligerents. Additionally, ensuring that all detainees get necessary medical care and that deserved clarification be given to the families of missing persons will be another step to that end. Fourthly, we condemn the repeated disruption of the Allouk water station, which serves Syrians in Hasakah governorate, including internally displaced persons who are already living in hardship conditions, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. In conclusion, according to Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, about 30 per cent of Syrian food transits through the port of Beirut. With the blast of 4 August, and as the humanitarian crisis deepens in Syria and the region, there is an urgent need to take the necessary steps to guarantee access to food, essential medical supplies and medical assistance around the country, in keeping with resolution 2533 (2020). Hence, we also reiterate our call for humanitarian relief from all unilateral economic measures that may hinder the Government's ability to effectively fight this pandemic and which will complicate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
