Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to address the Council on behalf of the
member States of the Rio Group - Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
Uruguay, Venezuela and my own country, Peru.

The Rio Group welcomes this open debate in the
Security Council to consider the quarterly programme
of work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and reiterates its resolute rejection of terrorism and its
determined support for the very positive work of the
CTC, chaired by Ambassador Inocencio Arias of Spain.

Since the most recent open debate, held on 23
July, an unprecedented and outrageous event befell the
international community: the terrorist attack against the
United Nations, which we deeply deplore and strongly
condemn. The criminal terrorist act in Baghdad that
ended the lives of distinguished officials of our
Organization - including that of Sergio Vieira de
Mello and others from the four corners of the world -
remind us that no one is safe from the ravages of
terrorist acts perpetrated against innocent people,
including officials who were carrying out humanitarian
work aimed at alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi
people. The entire international community, including
its humanitarian activities, is vulnerable to this
scourge, as demonstrated, tragically, every day.

But since the Council's last open meeting, on 23
July, there have been some positive events in the fight
against terrorism. There is the meeting last week at the
headquarters of the Organization of American States in
Washington held by this Committee and the Inter-
American Committee Against Terrorism with
international regional and subregional organizations.
That meeting dealt with the distribution of information
by all participating organizations, building operative
capacities and the implementation of a joint
programme. All that has been mutually beneficial and
has strengthened the collective effort to advance
practical ways of increasing the means and capacities
of States in the fight against terrorism.

The member States of the Rio Group reiterate our
conviction of the need to define and execute a global
strategy against terrorism. In this globalized world, the
fight against terrorism is not just a national matter. The
means and procedures to confront it must also be
global and integral, having as their basis the shared
responsibility of all States. Each State bears a specific
responsibility. The international community must
cooperate with regard to legal activities, policing,
equipment, technology, exchange of information,
intelligence activities and budgets, inter alia, within the
context of full respect for human rights, the United
Nations Charter and international law.

Furthermore, to combat terrorism effectively it is
necessary, as the Secretary-General has reminded us
recently, to fight its deepest roots and identify means of
tackling them. The authority of our Organization, its
scope, its legitimacy and, most importantly, the way it
represents the desire of all of its Members for
cooperation constitute the best guarantee for leading
and promoting action in this area.

In this regard, we are concerned at the lack of
political will to achieve substantive progress towards
framing a general convention against terrorism and a
convention to eliminate acts of nuclear terrorism. We
believe it is necessary to redouble our efforts in order
to resolve in a constructive manner the few outstanding
questions that have so far been impeding the
finalization of these negotiations.

Regarding the Committee's programme of work
for this ninth session, we are pleased that it is
continuing to work in a matrix that connects the aid
and cooperation needed by countries with the offers
extended for such assistance and that continues to
develop a global counter-terrorism information
network, to modernize the web site of the Committee
and to promote the universal participation in the 12
international agreements and protocols on counter-
terrorism.
Moreover, we appreciate the constructive
proposals of the Chairman of the Committee to assess
the difficulties encountered by States in their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as well as
the structure and functioning of the Committee itself.

The member States of the Rio Group will
continue to submit our reports and to cooperate so that
the work of the Committee - to harmonize the
implementation of measures against terrorism and to
put into operation mechanisms for international
cooperation at various levels - contributes to devising
and implementing a global strategy in the struggle
against this criminal activity.

