Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset we would like
to express our regrets for the air accidents yesterday in
the Russian Federation. Please convey to your
Government and to the relatives of the victims the
condolences of the Angolan delegation.

We thank you, Sir, for convening this public
meeting to consider the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security. We also thank
Mr. Jean Arnault, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his update of the report with the
latest developments in the electoral process in
Afghanistan.

We praise his efforts and those of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in the building of a nation free from scourges of
extremist violence, factionalism and a narcotics
industry. We have to acknowledge our great concern
over the ongoing situation in Afghanistan. The report
presents a mixed picture, with important achievements
in a number of areas, as well as serious problems
against a background of a "tenuous security situation
that threatens the gains of the Bonn process"
(S/2004/634, summary).

The report states a number of instances,
particularly in the security sector, which are cause of
great concern. The deteriorating security situation in
areas of the country previously secured should be
addressed resolutely as the report states. NATO's
recent decision to deploy extra troops is a clear and
welcome response to this challenge which represents
the international community's renewed willingness for
a firmer commitment to Afghanistan.

As portrayed in the report, it is praiseworthy to
note the significant progress in reforms carried through
in the area of public administration, fiscal management
and in economic and social development. Serious
domestic political commitment and coordinated
international support have yielded impressive results.
The other side of the coin is quite different and
worrisome indeed. The report portrays slow progress in
the development of the Afghan National Army, with a
little of over 10 per cent of the targets met, which
shows the need for a long-term sustained presence of
international security forces in the country.

It portrays insufficient progress in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), with some 20
per cent of the target having been attained; this
evidences the need to put an end to the military
factions, which are the main factors standing in the
way of a comprehensive programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

The report also mentions the acute need for
Afghanistan to have a trained and properly equipped
national police force. The force at present stands at less
than 50 per cent of the target strength, which highlights
the need to accelerate international support for the
Afghan police.

The report further notes slow progress in justice-
sector reform; a human rights situation which is a
continuing source of serious concern; forced land
evictions and illegal occupation of land; and the threat
of Afghanistan becoming a narco-State in the "worst-
case scenario", as the report puts it (S/2004/634, para. 40), with a dramatic upsurge in narcotics
cultivation, processing and trafficking. All of this
requires a very determined fight against entrenched
informal actors, whose existence is a threat and an
obstacle to the full exercise of sovereignty by the
Afghan State.
In the coming months, Afghanistan will face
decisive challenges. It is our belief that, if these are
overcome successfully, the whole process of nation-
building will be energized. The electoral process,
which will take place after October, might have an
enormous political and psychological impact on
Afghan life and might make a decisive contribution to
accelerating and correcting the course of the choices
taken by the Afghan authorities and by the
international community. It is my delegation's View
that the international community, in stepping up its
efforts in this most important endeavour, should
concentrate all available resources in order to
guarantee an orderly, fair and just electoral process;
this would make a decisive contribution to the
devolution of sovereignty to the Afghan people and to
the strengthening of that people's fundamental rights
and freedoms.

The voter registration programme has already
scored impressive success. Above all, the great
participation of women is a beacon of hope, showing a
will for the deliverance of the most oppressed citizens
of Afghanistan. We are aware that the security situation
could negatively affect the electoral process. The
forces of reaction to the positive things that have taken
place in Afghanistan will most probably step up their
efforts to disrupt the process and try to prevent the
Afghan people from determining its future in freedom
and in peace.

We consider that the recent response of NATO to
the strenuous and repeated appeals by the Secretary-
General for more international forces in Afghanistan
and the decision to deploy extra troops to support the
upcoming elections are welcome developments that
reflect an increasingly good understanding by the
international community of what is at stake in
Afghanistan. With the success of the future ballot
ensured, decisive action will be taken, with far-
reaching consequences for the future of the Afghan
people.

