Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Council on the situation in Darfur. The Council
has before it the report of the Secretary-General of
15 January (S/20l4/26), and I would like to give the
Council some additional information on the most recent
developments with regard to the peace process, security
and the humanitarian situation.

At the outset, in a context in which the peace
process is making only limited progress, the security
situation in Darfur remains unstable, particularly in
terms of intercommunal violence. That, of course,
has a major impact on civilians, especially given the
limited access of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to vulnerable
populations. Moreover, we have noted a continued
increase in attacks by armed assailants on UNAMID
and humanitarian workers, which is a cause of serious
concern. Unfortunately, it must be said that to date the
Government has not prosecuted the perpetrators, despite
the Sudanese Government's promises to investigate and
arrest those involved.
In addition to the armed clashes described in the
report before the Council, I would also like to cite
two additional recent examples, beginning with an
incident that occurred on 9 January, involving clashes
between the Karbino and Abu Bashir militia groups,
which originally belonged to the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi, in Khor Abeche in
Southern Darfur, which dominates that region. The
fighting erupted during a meeting at which operations
were being discussed. Ten members of the Abu Bashir
militia, including its leaders, were killed, while there
were three dead and 11 injured on the Karbino side.
During the fighting, a fire broke out in the nearby
internally displaced persons (IDP) camp and destroyed
100 shelters. Therefore, the affected displaced persons
had to seek shelter on UNAMID's base.

Another incident erupted on 12 January. UNAMID
sent reinforcements from Labado in eastern Darfur to
Khor Abeche to strengthen security in the IDP camp,
which was under serious threat. The situation is now
calm.

As the Council is aware, Darfur has been
the scene of an increasing number of attacks on
Government personnel and civilians by armed
elements - gangs - that generally seek to steal
vehicles and various resources. This occurred on
7 January, when a commercial convoy of 300 vehicles
carrying supplies to the Sudanese Armed Forces, near
Nertiti in central Darfur, was ambushed by elements of
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. Six vehicles
with their drivers were seized by the attackers. An
operation carried out immediately thereafter by the
Sudanese Armed Forces recovered the stolen vehicles,
and resulted in the death of 12 militia members and
nine arrests.

Looking at the situation overall and in the light
of all the serious threats faced by UNAMID and
humanitarian workers as a result of all the targeted
armed attacks and carjackings, robberies and banditry,
it is with great sadness that I must say that no fewer
than 16 peacekeepers were killed as a result of hostile
acts in 2013. That is a 50 per cent increase over the
previous year, which brings to 57 the number of
peacekeepers killed since the Mission was deployed six
years ago. Clearly, we must offer our condolences to the
Government and families ofthe members ofthe military
and police personnel who have been killed. I believe
that also we must condemn in the strongest terms those
responsible for the attacks. The Government of the
Sudan must investigate and bring the perpetrators to
justice expeditiously.
On 29 December 2013, the most recent attack took
place in which a Senegalese and a Jordanian policemen
were killed. Since then, we have been informed that
the attacker had been arrested at the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europene of the crime but
was freed on bail. I think it is only right to expect the
Government of the Sudan to complete the investigation
as swiftly as possible, share its conclusions with
UNAMID and bring the parties to justice.

The last time I was personally in Darfur, in July,
there was an extremely serious attack in the Jebel
Marra area of southern Sudan. Three Nigerian soldiers
were seriously injured. I visited them in hospital. We
know that three of the attackers were killed because
our Nigerian soldiers put up a good fight. However, we
never determined anything with regard to where they
had come from, who they represented, or to which group
they may have belonged. We expect the Government of
the Sudan to devote due diligence to that inquiry.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, with regard to the peace process, it must
be said that the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur has progressed very slowly. While
I can report that the signatories have achieved some
limited progress, primarily in the areas of planning
and administration, that success, if one can call it
that, did not result in direct and significant benefits to
the general population of Darfur. It seems clear that
the parties must accelerate the implementation of the
outstanding provisions of the agreement and place
increased focus on the dividends of peace - tangible
benefits to local communities, which must of course
include the displaced persons, who now number close
to 2 million.

The African Union and United Nations Joint
Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mohamed ibn Chambas, continues to work
with the parties to the conflict and the countries of
the region to reach a cessation of hostilities so as to
enable humanitarian access and continue progress
towards an inclusive peace agreement. In December
2013, Mr. Chambas held, in collaboration with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
a technical workshop on peace and security for
representatives of the SLA-Minni Minawi and the
Justice and Equality Movement-Jibril Ibrahim in Addis
Ababa. The movements expressed their readiness,
under the umbrella of the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front, to engage in negotiations with the Government
on a cessation of hostilities. They also pledged their
commitment to providing unrestricted access for
humanitarian and development personnel to areas under
their control. Further engagement with the movements
still holding out, which hitherto have been unmoved
towards joining the peace process, is planned for early
2014.

Turning now to the humanitarian situation, it
must be concluded that during 2013 it deteriorated
significantly. An estimated 400,000 additional people
were forced to flee new outbreaks of conflict. That
figure represents more than the combined number of
displacements that occurred during 2011 and 2012.
The total number of internally displaced people has
now increased to almost 2 million. It is clear that
protracted displacement, food insecurity and a lack of
basic services drive chronic vulnerability in the region.
Malnutrition rates are above emergency thresholds in
all five of the states of Darfur, and less than 10 per cent
of the population has access to both clean water and
improved sanitation. High levels of humanitarian need
are expected to persist in 2014. A total of 3.5 million
people - approximately 30 per cent of the population
of Darfur - currently receive humanitarian assistance
from the international community.

Turning to the prospects, the overall security
situation in Darfur obviously remains volatile and,
in fact, deteriorated over the course of 2013. In this
regard, and as requested in resolution 2113 (2013), a
strategic review was conducted by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the African Union, UNAMID
and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
to look at ways to improve UNAMID's impact on the
ground. The review assessed the implications for the
Mission of emerging conflict dynamics, analysed the
Mission's ability to address the drivers of conflict, and
set out recommendations for improving the Mission's
effectiveness.

Several key challenges were identified by the
review, including the cooperation of the Government
in the implementation of the mandate, UNAMID's
internal management, including coordination with the
country team, and the capacities of its troop and police
components. We are now working on developing a
concrete plan to address these challenges. The complete
findings and recommendations of the review will be
communicated to the Council, as requested, by the end
of February.

As Council members are aware, the current crisis
in South Sudan has had an impact on Darfur, with a
reported influx of South Sudanese into eastern Darfur
and other parts of the Sudan. Darfur armed movements
have reportedly taken part in the fighting in South
Sudan, and nomadic communities are unable to pass
into South Sudan on their seasonal migration. One must
commend the approach taken by President Al-Bashir
in this regard, but I would like to point out that this
crisis has the potential to draw in many of the Sudanese
rebel movements and to unravel the efforts not only to
resolve the crisis in Darfur, but also the conflict in the
Southern Kordofan/Blue Nile area and, more broadly,
the efforts to normalize Sudan/South Sudan relations.

To conclude, let me say again that the security
situation in Darfur continues to be unstable and
the protection needs of the local population remain
considerable. Efforts must continue to address the
associated challenges facing humanitarian and
protection actors in the short term, including through
the increased support of UNAMID to local mediation
efforts. But at the same time, it is clear that finding
lasting solutions for the affected local population in
Darfur lies inherently in the larger political context
of Darfur. That means the need for a ceasefire and a
comprehensive peace agreement.

At the same time, there is a need to address better,
with the Government, the issue of improved access to
populations affected by conflict. I strongly urge the
Government to observe the terms of the status-of-
forces agreement and to ensure that Mission personnel
have full and unhindered freedom of movement for the
substantive implementation of the mandate throughout
Darfur.

