Mr. Estreme' (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Argentine delegation, I
wish to thank Mr. Qazi for his presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Iraq
(S/2006/945). In general, my delegation is in
agreement with the main comments and
recommendations of that report. I also thank
Ambassador Wolcott Sanders for her presentation on
behalf of the Multinational Force.

Bearing in mind that this is probably the last time
my country will have the opportunity to take the floor
on this subject as part of its current mandate as a
member of the Security Council, I wish to present
some comments concerning recent developments in the
situation in Iraq, and future prospects based on that
difficult situation.

Over the past two years, the Argentine delegation
has sought to support the approach proposed for the
normalization of the situation in Iraq, according to
which, as the political process advanced and Iraqi
sovereignty was restored, the level of violence would
decrease and Iraq would stabilize as a sovereign
country. As part of that process, democratic institutions
would be consolidated, responsibility for security
would be transferred from the Multinational Force to
Iraqi forces and the extremist elements who supposedly
were the main causes of the violence would be
isolated.

The current situation in Iraq shows that that
approach has not been effective and that a new strategy
must be considered - both internally and
internationally - in order to normalize the situation in
the country and to avoid a civil war which would have
devastating consequences for the entire region.

Argentina cannot fail to express its alarm at the
suffering of the Iraqi civilian population. Quite apart
from the statistics, which vary in terms of the number
of civilians who have died or have been displaced as a
result of the violence since March 2003, it is evident
that the Iraqi people are suffering a crisis of great
proportions. The humanitarian situation involving
human rights is extremely serious in Iraq.

At this stage of events, it is clear that the
deterioration in the security situation has not resulted
exclusively from the actions of extremist or terrorist
groups. That analysis has been shown to be superficial
and ignores a much deeper reality: a sectarian conflict
that has been complicated by the actions of sectarian
militias and death squads which, in some cases, are
connected with Iraqi political parties. The high daily
number of victims of the conflict not only contributes
to the increasing feeling of insecurity, but also
generates a massive displacement of people and feeds
into Iraqi society's pessimism about the future.

The political and constitutional process,
unfortunately, has not had the positive effect we would
have liked to see and has not contributed to creating a
climate of reconciliation and harmony among all Iraqi
communities, as had been predicted. Despite the efforts
made over the last three and a half years, it has not
been possible to build Iraqi security forces capable of
meeting the challenges that Iraq continues to face.
Hence, thus the presence of international forces
continues to be necessary. We remind all forces that are
working to maintain security in Iraq - whether Iraqi
or international - of their obligation to respect, under
all circumstances, human rights and the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

The deterioration of human development
indicators in Iraq in recent times is an additional sign
of the long-term effects of the situation and of its
extremely negative effects on health, education and
social services, the economic situation and
unemployment. At stake is the future and viability of
Iraq as an independent and united State.

That gloomy picture indicates that if the situation
is not reversed, Iraq will continue to descend into civil
war. In order to avoid that situation, a new strategy
must be urgently designed for Iraq that will include
complementary elements at the local, regional and
international levels. The Iraqi Government has the
primary responsibility to move that process forward
and should promote an inclusive political process
encompassing all communities. In order to do that, key
decisions must be taken with regard to the distribution
of natural resources to benefit all sectors of Iraqi
society and to develop genuinely representative
political institutions.

Recently, some positive initial measures have
been taken. These should be strengthened through a
genuine process of constitutional reform which after
significant delay has recently been launched.
Additional efforts should also be made to promote
reconciliation. In that regard, there exist some national
and regional initiatives such as that of the League of
Arab States, and they should be explored in all their
aspects. All national strategies should be
complemented by additional measures on a regional
level. Without an active participation of countries in
the region in the process of normalization of the
situation in Iraq, all efforts at the national and
international level will be in vain.

At this level, there are already some concrete
initiatives that show some possibilities and they should
be studied by this Council. On the international level,
we should sustain and support the efforts being carried
out on the other two levels. Within this framework, the
hosting of an international conference on Iraq could be
a useful mechanism to demonstrate the support of the
international community for the future of Iraq. We
believe that all interested parties should be invited to
participate in this conference, including all of Iraq's
neighbours.

In parallel, we should continue with our efforts to
launch the International Compact with Iraq, which will
establish a framework for cooperation in the medium
and long term between the international community
and Iraq.

The role of the United Nations in these three
areas is crucial. While we are grateful for efforts
undertaken up until now and we would like to
acknowledge the work that has been done by Special
Representative Qazi, we believe that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) must
provide active support to the work being done in the
three areas that we have mentioned in order to
harmonize the work in all of these three areas.

In the current difficult circumstances, the options
facing Iraq are clear. Either the country continues
along the path of sectarian violence and civil war, or it
reverses this trend, favouring harmony and unity.
Argentina hopes that, in the end, the people and the
leaders of Iraq will choose the second option and that
this Council will support this strategic decision.

