Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia thanks the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his clear and
detailed briefing on recent developments regarding the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Similarly, we
would like to express our support for his work relating
to annex 10 of the Agreement.

We would like once again to reiterate our support
for the Dayton Peace Agreement and its annexes,
which we believe paved the way for peace and
coexistence in that important part of the world. We
note with satisfaction that out of this has evolved a
political dialogue among the parties, and progress has
been made in areas such as the appointment of the
Council of Ministers by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Representatives on 10 February. That is the
spirit that we believe marks the path of reconciliation
and lasting peace.

We are aware that progress still has to be made on
other issues in order to achieve the five objectives and
two conditions necessary for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. One step in that direction
is the agreement on the principles to be used to resolve
the issues of ownership and use of defence and State
property, signed on 9 March by the leaders of the six
political parties that make up the State-level governing
coalition and ratified by the Council of Ministers on
21 March. The implementation of the agreement on
defence property constitutes another step in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's progress towards full participation in
the membership action plan of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, which is unquestionably a very
important goal.

It is regrettable, however, that after several years
have gone by, and despite the support that the
international community has provided throughout the
process, political actions and legal measures are still
being put forward by regional entities that defy
institutions and undermine the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. It is a matter of concern that the
constitutional order is contested by actions such as
those seeking to repeal laws on the Court and the
Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We therefore urge the parties to commit
politically to ensuring that their administrative and
legislative acts align with the State institutions
established under the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and to end those that might weaken,
duplicate or take over the competencies of State-level
institutions, taking into account that strengthening
institutions and peacebuilding are responsibilities that
belong to the people and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a whole.

No less prejudicial is the nationalistic rhetoric
employed by some senior officials of those same
entities, challenging the territorial integrity and unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and alluding to the possible
dissolution of the State. Once again, we call for the
avoidance of any aggressive rhetoric and urge the
parties to work to strengthen institutions and achieve a
political solution to such differences, preserving the
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

There are other issues, such as macroeconomic
affairs, that while not peculiar to Bosnia and
Herzegovina nonetheless require special attention in
View of the deterioration of the country's financial
situation, poor prospects for growth, unemployment
levels and social problems associated with a difficult
economic situation. One step towards dealing with
such challenges has been taken with the Fiscal
Council's progress on adopting a global fiscal
framework for 2012-2014 for its budget. We are
convinced that through hard work and leadership the
authorities can overcome these and the other
challenges I have mentioned. Colombia is determined
to lend every support, in a spirit of cooperation and
friendship, to their just desires for the peace and
prosperity they deserve.

