Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
extend the warmest welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Anibal Antonio Cavaco Silva, President of the
Republic of Portugal, and thank him for participating
in the work of the Council earlier today. I also thank
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Ms. Catherine Bragg and
Mr. Philip Spoerri for their important briefings and
contributions to help us consider and analyse the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

We would also like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Portugal for having convened this meeting
and organized, together with the Office for the
Coordinator of Humanitarian Affairs, last week's
workshop, which furnished valuable elements for
addressing the topic at hand.

Colombia reiterates its commitment to respecting
and protecting civilians in armed conflict. In this
regard, our Government has made every possible
effort. The consolidation of the rule of law is the most
solid foundation for creating conditions to protect
individuals and guarantee the full enjoyment of their
personal rights.

The fact that the topic of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict has remained on the agenda
of the Security Council for more than a decade
suggests that there is a need for this executive organ of
the Organization to play a bigger role in protecting
civilian populations when they fall victim to violent
and systematic repression by their own authorities, as
was the case in Libya. Furthermore, these activities are
a valuable complement to contributions and
developments originating in other bodies, such as the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

The General Assembly in particular, through its
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
recognizes in its report A/65/19 that the mandates of
several United Nations peacekeeping missions
currently include a civilian protection component. That
document establishes the guidelines to be followed in
order to appropriately accomplish those tasks, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

With respect to the adoption of mandates related
to the protection of civilians in situations on the
Council's agenda, we stress the importance of taking
into consideration the strengthening of national
capacities. The report of the Special Committee of
Peacekeeping Operations itself stresses that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost the
responsibility of the host State. Therefore,
peacekeeping missions entrusted with that mandate
should carry out their work without undermining the
responsibility of the host Government to protect its
civilian population. The strength of the State as an
institution and support for the actions of national
authorities are the bases for guaranteeing the effective
protection of civilians in contexts of violence.

In the search for lasting peace and stability that
can make a long-term difference, the Security Council
should enhance its coordination with other bodies and
agencies of the system. In this context, it would be
wise to undertake sustained efforts and to adopt
comprehensive approaches that offer possibilities for
cooperation to meet problems that at times represent
highly complex challenges. The specific measures
adopted by the Security Council in situations submitted
for its consideration lead to precise actions that are
adapted to the context and circumstances of each
situation.

It goes without saying that these considerations
are all the more relevant when the Council considers
reports on situations other than those already on its
agenda. Colombia wishes to stress that, when
considering this point, the Council needs to maintain a
clear distinction between situations that are included
on its agenda and those that are not. In this sense, it is
advisable that, when addressing the protection of
civilians in specific situations, the Council act to
strengthen national institutions.

