Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine.

Civilians continue to pay the highest price.
More than 3,300 civilians have been killed and up to
9,000 injured since the conflict began in 2014. Some
1.5 million people have been internally displaced.
The humanitarian consequences are severe. In 2019,
3.5 million people - many of whom are elderly, women
and children - will need humanitarian assistance and
protection service. For most of them, the impact of the
conflict has deepened. They have lost their livelihoods
and their limited resources have been exhausted by
now. They rely on humanitarian assistance to meet their
most basic needs.

Critical civilian infrastructure continues to be
damaged or disrupted, compounding people's struggle.
In 2018 alone, 89 incidents affected water and sanitation
facilities and, in the past 12 months, 12 water workers
have been injured due to hostilities and landmine
explosions. They were simply trying to do their work,
ensuring that water continues to flow to millions of
people on both sides of the contact line.

The parties to the conflict must take all feasible
precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize civilian
harm. International humanitarian law must be upheld
to protect civilians and critical civilian infrastructure
at all times, everywhere and by all parties.

In the Security Council last October (see S/PV.8386),
I welcomed the efforts of the Government of Ukraine
to improve crossing conditions at the checkpoints.
While there has been progress, I appeal once again for
more to be done on both sides. In the entire Luhansk
oblast, civilians can cross the contact line through only
one checkpoint - the pedestrian bridge of Stanytsia
Luhanska. This is simply not enough. With freezing
temperatures during Ukraine's winter, it is critical
that essential services at crossing points be improved
as people continue to wait several hours to cross the
contact line. Already this year, 10 people - most of
them elderly - have died at the checkpoints. Elderly
people account for more than half of the crossings and
face long-standing barriers to access their pensions.

I have also called on the Government of Ukraine
to adopt a national mine-action framework. Today
I am pleased to report that a mine-action law was
recently adopted. That now needs to pave the way for
urgently scaling up mine-action efforts. Landmine and
explosive-hazard explosions caused approximately
43 per cent of all civilian casualties in 2018. I implore
all parties to immediately cease using landmines.

While humanitarians today have slightly more
access to civilians in need than a year ago, particularly
in areas beyond Government control, humanitarian
access is often unpredictable. As the Council will
recall, on 6 June 2018 the Council welcomed the work
of United Nations agencies (see S/PRST/2018/12) in
order to address the tragic humanitarian situation in
eastern Ukraine and emphasized the need to scale up
efforts to alleviate the suffering of civilians affected
by the conflict. Unimpeded and sustained access for
humanitarian organizations is key.

But, despite access challenges, a complex operating
environment and limited funding, humanitarians are
making a real difference by providing aid on both
sides of the contact line. They continue to be guided
by the universally recognized principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence. In 2018
alone, humanitarians reached some 1.3 million of the
most vulnerable people with critical assistance.

We are establishing an innovative funding
mechanism to support the 2019 humanitarian response
plan efforts - the Ukraine Humanitarian Pooled
Fund - to address acute needs that are least funded. I
welcome the contributions made by donors to the Fund.
I urge others to join. The Emergency Relief Coordinator
approved a $6 million allocation last month from
the Central Emergency Response Fund, as part of an
envelope for underfunded crises.

Over 60 per cent of last year's humanitarian
response plan was not funded. As a consequence,
some civilians who desperately needed assistance were
unable to receive food, water and sanitation, healthcare
and medicines, as well as protection services. This year
we require $162 million to provide aid to 2.3 million
people through the 2019 humanitarian response plan.
The plan focuses on protecting affected people and
restoring their access to livelihoods, essential services
and critical structures. While humanitarian assistance
continues to be critical as a result of conflict, we
aim to meet people's needs through more sustainable
efforts, linking with recovery and development action
where possible.

Civilians along the contact line have suffered the
physical and emotional consequences of repeated, often
intense, hostilities. Shelling, sniper-fire and landmines
have become a daily reality for millions. Letus remember
that behind the figures mentioned are families - men,
women and children e who have suffered every day for
over five years. Many are struggling to access schools,
hospitals and other essential services. Many have lost
theirjobs, homes, family members and friends. We can,
and we must, do more for those people.

To the resilient people of Ukraine, I wish to say
that we have not forgotten them. We will continue to do
everything we can to alleviate their daily suffering, and
to call for lasting peace.

