Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): As
we have stated on various occasions, Chile gives priority to
regional action in order to deal with regional issues. In the
case of Africa, together with reiterating that it is essential
to know the position of the Organization of African Unity
on a given conflict, we have supported the processes and
agreements entered into by the countries of the various
subregions to tackle any crises that may arise on the
territory of a State in that same subregion.

We believe that this means of action has functioned
appropriately and that it should be supported by the
international community.

The Bangui Agreements address the state of affairs,
and therefore we welcome them. The Inter-African Mission
to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) also addresses the situation and fulfills a vital
function in the implementation of the agreements. For these
reasons, we commend President Bongo of Gabon for his
political leadership of MISAB and the Governments of
Burkina Faso, Mali, Senegal, Chad and Togo for their
participation in that Mission. We also want to recognize the
logistical support that France is providing to this inter-
African operation.

The President of the Central African Republic has
addressed the Security Council, stating that he wants
MISAB's activities to take place in an appropriate political
and legal framework. He has requested the Council's
authorization so that the Member States can conduct the
necessary operations to obtain MISAB's objectives and so
that they will be authorized under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of the personnel of the Mission and
of the States that are providing logistical support. President
Bongo of Gabon has addressed the Security Council along
the same lines.

In addition to affirming that Chile supports the
request of Presidents Patasse and Bongo, our delegation
will be voting in favour of the draft resolution. We
believe that it is necessary to provide the aforementioned
appropriate legal and political framework to the operation
in the Central African Republic. In addition, my
delegation considers it a very important principle that
such multinational-force operations be conducted under
the umbrella of the United Nations and that there be some
form of international monitoring of the operations.

In conclusion, we would like to tell the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic that we
hope that the crisis confronting the country can be
overcome as soon as possible, in accordance with the
Bangui Agreements.

