Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for the valuable
information he has provided.

It is concerning to note that the situation in
Afghanistan remains one of the most complex issues
on the Security Council's agenda. We have welcomed
the convening and outcome of the Paris Conference,
which laid the groundwork for a political and financial
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community to rebuild the country. If such a partnership
is to produce the desired results, political and security
conditions must be established to provide for a calmer
climate.

Unfortunately, we must note that fighting has
increased recently between the insurgents, on the one
hand, and the Afghan forces and the international
security forces, on the other, claiming numerous
victims among the civilian population and
humanitarian personnel, while a high level of
insecurity continues to reign. The resolve of the
insurgents, even in provinces that have been relatively
calm until recently, is complicating the task of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which must expand its provincial offices
and, above all, be able to make full use of its means
and capacities to fulfil its mandate effectively.

Burkina Faso believes that it is highly urgent to
identify the best possible strategy for resolving the
crisis, in particular through negotiation and the
strengthening of political dialogue. That would allow
for the creation of conditions most conducive to
ensuring, in the short term, the organization of
presidential elections in 2009 and legislative elections
in 2010, and, in the longer term, the establishment of a
lasting and definitive peace throughout the country,
including the effective resolution of the thorny issue of
drug trafficking.
We remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. While we welcome the
measures undertaken to meet that challenge and the
United Nations appeals to that end, we urge the
international community to remain vigilant as it helps
the Afghan people to mitigate their own suffering. We
make the same appeal for an effective approach to
addressing the fate of refugees and displaced persons.
In that regard, we welcome the convening on
19 November, at the initiative of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Afghan Government, of an international conference
on the timetable for their return and reintegration.

Another major source of concern are the ongoing
human rights violations - in particular summary
executions and sexual or gender-based violence,
including against children - committed in conditions
of impunity. We call for vigorous and courageous
measures to be taken along the lines of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan of 19 May
2008.

My delegation welcomes the political progress
achieved despite everything, including the adoption of
important legislation. Although political differences do
not yet allow for the adoption of an electoral law, the
adoption of draft legislation on the Independent
Election Commission represents a significant milestone
in the framework of the electoral process under way.
Moreover, given the extreme sensitivity of the pending
deadlines, every effort must be made to strengthen
security, along the lines of measures already taken by
the United Nations forces currently on the ground and
the Organization as a whole in support of the National
Police. We also note the adoption of an anti-corruption
law, the establishment of the High Office of Oversight,
and the improved performance of public
administration, local governance and the
administration of justice. We warmly encourage the
authorities to pursue and intensify such efforts.

A definitive solution to the Afghan problem will
also hinge on strengthened regional and international
cooperation. We are gratified by the numerous signs of
reviving relations between Afghanistan and other
countries of the region, which augurs well for
subregional and regional stability. As to international
cooperation, I note once again the current and future
importance of the contribution of the international
community, including the United Nations, to peace,
economic recovery and national reconstruction in
Afghanistan.

UNAMA should be able to rely on the support of
the Security Council in fulfilling its mandate, which we
have just renewed.

