Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by expressing our gratitude for the
briefing made today by Ms. Kang. The team coordinated
by Stephen O'Brien is carrying out excellent work in
Syria under very difficult circumstances. I would also
like to thank France and the United Kingdom for their
initiative, to which Spain subscribes.

While we thought that we had seen it all - or
almost - in Syria, appalling images have now reached
us through the media. Over the past month, six children
under the age of 1 died in Madaya. The use of hunger as
a tactic is a war crime according to the most elementary
standards of international humanitarian law. Spain
categorically condemns the deliberate obstruction of
assistance to besieged populations in various areas
in Syria. We are already too late, not only for those
who have suffered from that latest episode of the war
in Syria, but for the quarter of a million persons who
lost their lives over the last five years. Our obligation
therefore is to look ahead and to attempt to answer the
following two questions: what can we do to improve the
humanitarian situation and what can we do to help put
an end to the conflict?

First of all, we must continue to closely follow
the developments in Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya. As
co-penholder on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we have been in daily contact with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
throughout the entire assistance distribution effort,
both here in New York and through the Amman
regional office of the Spanish Agency for International
Development Cooperation. Our obligation - and here
I am no longer referring to my country, but to the
Security Council - is to ensure full compliance with
resolution 2258 (2015), which we adopted unanimously
on 22 December 2015. That was an initiative from
Spain, Jordan and New Zealand. The first paragraph 1
ofthe resolution demands that all parties - I emphasize
"all parties" - in particular the Syrian authorities,
immediately comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. In the event that the
delivery of assistance is interrupted in coming weeks,
we will work with all Council members to adopt
measures that will seek, first and foremost, to make
that resolution more effective.

Secondly, we must address the growing number
of unsuccessful requests for access in 2015. There is
something amiss when OCHA can reach only 4 per
cent of the population in besieged areas in Syria, as
Mr. O'Brian informed us last Monday. Of the 133
requests submitted by the United Nations, almost
80 remain unanswered. We are not demanding that
Syrian authorities accept just any request submitted
by the United Nations. We are aware that there may be
legitimate reasons to refuse a request. However, we do
ask that they provide an affirmative reply in due time
and form and without delay so that OCHA can react
and take the measures that are appropriate in each case.
Such a simple step can have a very positive impact on
the ground.

Thirdly, Madaya accounts for only 10 per cent of
the Syrian population under siege. To give just one
example, approximately 200,000 people are still under
siege by Daesh in Dayr al-Zawr. For that reason, we
have asked OCHA to identify other at-risk areas
and to deliver its analysis to the Security Council on
27 January. We would also suggest that the World Food
Programme, together with OCHA, provide the Council
with an oral briefing. Our main objective is to avoid a
reoccurrence of what we have seen in Madaya, Fu'ah
and Kafraya over the past few days.

Lastly, with regard to the political situation in
Syria, we are at a critical juncture, with the prospect
of a negotiation process within reach. Over the next
few days there will be a series of steps that could be
decisive. First of all, once again, the parties to the
conflict, starting with the Syrian authorities, must
fulfil their obligations in accordance with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, I am referring to
putting an end to the indiscriminate attacks against
the civilian population, in particular the use of barrel
bombs, and ensuring sustained and unconditional
humanitarian access. Within the next three days, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria will
present confidence-building options to the Security
Council with the ultimate aim of reaching a ceasefire.
Although I do not wish to prejudge the response,
there are a wide array of measures, such as prisoner
exchanges, that can bring some rapprochement on the
ground with a view to the next round of negotiations in
Geneva.

Resolution 2254 (2015) affords us a genuine
opportunity to begin a new stage of dialogue between
the regime and the opposition. The international
community is prepared to support a political process in
Syria. We trust that the parties to the conflict in Syria
will not fail to take advantage of this opportunity. I
conclude by once again expressing Spain's confidence
in, and support to, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.

