Ms. Wronecka (Poland): 1 would like to thank
Special Representative David Shearer for his very
informative presentation. Allow me to complement
today's briefing with some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

Poland welcomes last week's meeting between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, which we
see as an important step towards the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We consider
those face-to-face meetings to be an extremely valuable
confidence-building measure, but they cannot replace
genuine implementation of the provisions of the
peace accord, in particular with regard to security
arrangements and the number of states and their
boundaries. It is our firm belief that a functioning,
inclusive transitional Government is what the citizens
of South Sudan both expect and deserve. We call on all
signatories to the peace agreement to work together in a
spirit of goodwill and compromise so as not to fail their
citizens any longer.

We took note of another extension of the
pre-transitional period, but we remain deeply concerned
with the pace of putting the necessary arrangements in
place. We are also increasingly worried that there is not
enough political will among the signatories to step up
efforts in preparation for a successful transition and the
formation of the transitional Government. Nevertheless,
we welcome the decision of the Government of South
Sudan to allocate funds for the implementation of
security arrangements to speed up the necessary
processes in the pre-transitional period to ensure a
unity Government is formed in February 2020.

We remain convinced that there is no durable peace
without inclusiveness. We call on all South Sudanese
political actors to put into practice the provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan with regard to women's
representation in the pre-transition, transitional and
other decision-making bodies and institutions. We
believe that the participation of women in the political
process in South Sudan is indispensable. Only by
ensuring inclusive implementation does the Revitalized
Peace Agreement stand a chance of being durable.

While we take it as a good sign that the permanent
ceasefire has been largely respected across South
Sudan, we are concerned about the clashes in Central
and Western Equatoria and their consequences on
the civilian population. We remain deeply concerned
about the cumulative effects of years of prolonged
conflict, persisting humanitarian crisis and levels of
intercommunal violence, as well as serious human
rights violations and abuses, which include grave
violations against children and incidents of conflict-
related sexual violence. We call on the Government to
spare no effort in bringing the perpetrators to justice
and to fulfil its obligations with regard to protection
of civilians.

Another important factor, crucial for the
sustainability of peace in South Sudan, is regional
engagement. We commend the involvement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its member States and continue to believe that the
region's role in ensuring the implementation of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement and holding the parties
to it accountable cannot be overestimated. We are
also convinced that the issue of the status of Mr. Riek
Machar should be resolved as soon as possible.

Since it is most probably my last chance to speak
in the Chamber on issues related to South Sudan, allow
me to conclude by expressing Poland's appreciation and
gratitude for Special Representative David Shearer and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, as well as the
United Nations country team and humanitarian actors
in South Sudan, for their dedication, professionalism
and tireless efforts in supporting peace and stability in
South Sudan.

