Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): As it did on 8 November 2002 at the time of
the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), Cameroon
would like to begin by welcoming the presence among
us of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.

We have just unanimously adopted resolution
1483 (2003), on the post-conflict management of Iraq.
Cameroon welcomes that event.

This is a great moment for the Council, which has
returned to the path of reconciliation. The resolution
sends a message of confidence in the Iraqi people, who
today deserve to freely take charge of their economic
and social affairs, as well as their political future. I will
return to that point later.

From the outset, Cameroon supported the ideas
and basic principles of resolution 1483 (2003).
Cameroon believed from the beginning that the
situation no longer justified the maintenance of
economic sanctions against Iraq. Cameroon was
convinced of the need for the United Nations again to
play a role in the situation in Iraq. Finally, Cameroon
believed that it was for the Iraqis themselves to define
the type of Government they wanted and to choose
their own leaders. All of those concerns have been
taken into account in the resolution, and we welcome
that.

As we said earlier, the Council has returned to the
path of dialogue, consultation and unity. Given its
unique role in the maintenance of peace and security,
that has sent a very strong signal to the international
community. We hope that the women and men who will
be working to implement the provisions of this historic
text will do so in a coordinated and complementary
fashion, in the sole interests of the Iraqi people. Such is
Cameroon's appeal to the coalition Authority, the
Secretary-General and the Member States, which, in
the near future, will be involved in rebuilding that great
country.

As we said earlier, resolution 1483 (2003) sends a
twofold message. It is an expression of confidence in
the women and men of Iraq, whose qualities are
recognized by all. We have every confidence that the
Iraqi people will be able to draw on their thousands of
years of history to find the necessary moral resources
to heal the wounds resulting from the tragic past 30
years. We have every confidence that they will build a
new Iraq - no longer a country of arms and tears, but
one that is faithful to its destiny and to its name, which
means "country of waters", and, therefore, "country of
life".

Resolution 1483 (2003) thus sends a message of
confidence. It also sends a message of active solidarity
on the part of the international community. The
Council has been unanimous in telling the Iraqis,
forcefully and unequivocally, that the international
community will work side by side with them in support
of them - not in place of them. At the same time, in
order to ensure the effectiveness of this support, the
Council calls upon all external actors - the coalition,
the United Nations, Member States and non-
governmental organizations - to coordinate their
activities, to complement each other and to avoid any
kind of competition among themselves, which would
definitely be counterproductive.

In that regard, the need for transparency and
effectiveness is for us absolutely essential. The
guarantee of our collective credibility is at stake.

