Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have familiarized ourselves with the
twenty-sixth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur and
would like to begin by addressing some of the facts and
figures in the report. In particular, it notes a continued
reduction in armed clashes between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces. In actual fact, it appears
that if there were any clashes at all, they took place only
at the very beginning of the reporting period, during
the first half of June. As the August report (S/2017/746)
of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
underscores, they were residual. We therefore believe
that it might behoove the Prosecutor to reflect that
trend more accurately.

Regrettably, there is no mention in the report of the
measures taken by Khartoum to implement the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, to which there is still
no alternative, or of the beginning steps to implement
the decisions of the National Dialogue Conference
of October 2016. Another positive was the recent
extension by the Government and the movements that
are non-signatories to the Doha Document of their
obligations under the ceasefire.

With regard to cooperation between Khartoum and
the international community, we should note the progress
in the Government's efforts to solve the obstacles
that have been hindering UNAMID, including the
granting of visas and customs clearance for contingent-
owned equipment, while flight authorizations are now
also in good shape. The Sudanese forces have been
working constructively with the mission to protect its
equipment and personnel. There is also clear progress
in the provision of humanitarian access, where the
new directives and procedures for humanitarian
assistance and the transfer of humanitarian personnel
are proving effective. We welcome the measures taken
by the Government of the Sudan to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. The authors
of the report clearly thought these facts were not worth
mentioning, despite the fact that the report is stuffed
with selective references to resolution 2363 (2017), on
the extension of the UNAMID mandate.

I would now like to consider the Prosecutor's
activities in the context of criminal justice procedure.
Going on the report, there have been no developments
in the Sudanese dossier for the past six months. As in
other cases, the Court has nothing to brag about as far as
making progress in the genuine fight against impunity
is concerned, an objective that our delegation shares,
needless to say. Instead of conducting an objective,
independent investigation of the crimes allegedly
committed by all parties to the conflict, the Prosecutor
continues to exaggerate the issue of immunity for senior
Sudanese officials. It would appear that the main aim is
to attempt to justify the absence of immunity for the
President of the Sudan. As the report emphasizes, the
States that he has visited, including those that are party
to the Rome Statute, have no intention of going along
with the ICC's thinking and interpretation with regard
to questions of immunity. The African Union's position
on the issue is also well known.

For our part, we reiterate that resolution 1593 (2005)
does not render invalid the norms of international law
on immunity for senior officials of States that are not
party to the Rome Statute. They still apply, and no
decisions by the ICC can change that. Any reference
in the Prosecutor's report to the recent visit of the
President of the Sudan to our country is completely
inappropriate. The issue does not come within her
purview. We have no intention of accounting for our
bilateral contacts with the Government of the Sudan to
anyone, especially since resolution 1593 (2005) does
not apply that obligation to States that are not party to
the Rome Statute, as is clearly reflected in its text.

In conclusion, I want to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that the current report, like those
on the situation in Libya, once again brings up the issue
ofthe provision ofresources to the ICC from the United
Nations budget and follow-up action by the Security
Council. Our position on those issues is well known
and we will not reiterate it. We hope that such passages
will stop migrating from one report of the International
Criminal Court to the next.

