Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarIo for her briefing.

(spoke in English)

I am honoured to again address the Security
Council today on behalf of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as the
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and His Excellency Mr. Karel van
Oosterom, Ambassador of the Netherlands, who is
serving as the Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the excellent cooperation
throughout the year. Let me also express my gratitude
to our colleagues in the Secretariat for their unwavering
support and their excellent cooperation, in particular
regarding the running of the procurement channel. I
would also like to note my appreciation for their work
in the preparation of the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/1089) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

As we approach the third year after implementation
day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, we
should remind ourselves ofthe essence and scope ofthat
agreement. The JCPOA is a nuclear agreement - one
that is working and delivering on its goal, which is no
other than ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme. This third anniversary
should also remind us that diplomacy does work,
and that international agreements can deliver results,
even on the most sensitive issues. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has confirmed in 13
consecutive reports that Iran continues to implement its
nuclear-related commitments.

On that issue, our position remains unchanged.
As long as Iran continues to implement its nuclear-
related commitments in full, the European Union
(EU) will remain committed to the continued full and
effective implementation of the agreement. For us, the
non-proliferation benefits of the JCPOA are clear and
based on comprehensive scientific analysis and breakout
time calculations. The JCPOA has significantly rolled
back the Iranian nuclear programme and ensures that
Iran does not acquire material or equipment to develop
a nuclear weapon. That is why the JCPOA continues
to enjoy the wide and full support of the broader
international community.

However, the JCPOA faces considerable challenges
following the withdrawal of the United States and the
reimposition of sanctions against Iran. The EU and all
28 member States deeply regretted those decisions made
by the United States. At their last Council meeting on
10 December, the 28 EU Foreign Ministers reiterated
their full commitment to the continued implementation
of the deal as long as Iran continues to implement its
commitments in full. The EU also does not see any
other credible, peaceful alternative. Dismantling the
agreement would not only destroy years of diplomatic
efforts, endorsed by this very organ in resolution 2231
(2015), but would also undermine other key multilateral
negotiations in the nuclear field and beyond.
While the EU strongly welcomes Iran's continued
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments,
it is essential that the agreement continue to work for
all its participants, including by delivering tangible
economic benefits to the people of Iran. That has also
been echoed by the other remaining participants in the
JCPOA, and I would like to express sincere thanks for
their unwavering commitment to the nuclear deal.

It is in that spirit that the JCPOA participants
acknowledged, at the recent ministerial Joint
Commission meetings, on 6 July in Vienna and
24 September in New York, that sanctions-lifting is
an essential part of the deal, and they reiterated their
commitment to the preservation and maintenance
of effective financial channels with Iran and the
continuation of Iran's export of oil and gas.

The EU is very concerned about the deteriorated
economic situation of the people of Iran. The Iranian
economy is facing strong challenges. We are also
concerned about the challenges that the Iranian people
face in terms of access to basic goods, including vital
medicines. We are also fully cognizant of the fact that
this situation may lead to a difficult domestic debate in
Iran on the JCPOA and its future.

In that context, EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini and the Foreign Affairs and Finance
Ministers of Germany, the United Kingdom and France
(E3) stated their commitment in their joint statement
of 2 November to advance the intensive work led by
the E3, with the support of the EU, to set up a special
purpose vehicle. The aim of that initiative is to facilitate
trade payment and provide the necessary sovereign
reassurances to the market participants engaged in
legitimate business with Iran. That is in addition to
a number of EU measures that were taken in August
regarding the update of the Blocking Statute and the
lending mandate of the European Investment Bank. I
want to be very clear that the European initiative to
set up a special purpose vehicle is about respecting the
nuclear deal's commitments, including on sanctions-
lifting, in full accordance with resolution 2231 (2015)
and European law. It is not directed against any State or
meant to circumvent unilateral measures.

While the JCPOA deals with nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a number of serious issues
outside of the deal continue to cast a shadow. The
EU notes with concern the findings of the Secretary-
General's report regarding Iranian activities in relation
to the restrictive measures contained in annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), and in particular restrictions on
ballistic missile-related activities and transfers. Those
actions feed regional tensions and threaten safety and
stability in the region.

As members of the Council know, the EU has a long-
standing track record of expressing its concern over
the regional military build-up, including Iran's missile
programme. The EU has repeatedly called upon Iran to
refrain from activities that may deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015), and the statements associated
with them. The situation in the region, including the
proliferation of ballistic missiles, needs to be addressed
as a priority, and the EU welcomes the Secretariat's
further examinations. The EU still has restrictive
measures in place to that effect, but those issues are
distinct from the JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear deal
that is working would certainly not put us in a better
position to discuss other issues or provide an immediate
solution. The EU also strongly believes that addressing
those difficult issues can be done in a more effective
manner through dialogue.

The EU hostedthe fourth round ofEU/E4 discussions
on regional issues with Iran on 10 December. The main
focus was Yemen and Syria, with both sides publicly
acknowledging the importance of the United Nations-
facilitated talks in Sweden and agreeing to work on
confidence-building measures in support of the United
Nations Special Envoy. That indicates that our dialogue
with Iran is yielding concrete results.

Annex III of the JCPOA addresses civil nuclear
cooperation with Iran. That annex was carefully
crafted and it plays a key role in the overall balance
of the agreement. The JCPOA is not just about
constraints on Iran's nuclear programme. It is also
about cooperation - broader long-term re-engagement
with Iran - through which we can understand Iran's
civil nuclear needs better and gradually increase our
confidence in Iran's nuclear programme. That makes
the agreement more durable in time.

Cooperation is the right path for us, and for that
reason, every step in the implementation of annex III
is a positive one. The EU has launched several projects
and actions in support of annex III since implementation
day. To that effect, we recently organized the third
EU-Iran high-level seminar on international nuclear
cooperation. The objective of the seminar was to
build on previous discussions and the understanding
that international nuclear cooperation and nuclear
governance are mutually reinforcing.

Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurement channel remains a unique non-proliferation
and confidence-building instrument. It can help prevent
the misuse of nuclear or dual-use items and ensures that
exports of such items are consistent with the JCPOA.
We expect that all Security Council members will
continue to support the preservation of that channel, in
line with resolution 2231 (2015). It is a positive signal
that the channel has also received proposals after the
reimposition of United States sanctions.

Transparency remains a guiding principle and
cornerstone of the JCPOA. According to paragraph
6.10 of the JCPOA annex IV, the Joint Commission
reports to the Security Council every six months on the
status of the Procurement Working Group's decisions
and on any implementation issue. In that context, on
30 November, the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf
of the Joint Commission, its sixth biannual report. The
report has been circulated as a document of the Security
Council (S/2018/1070).

An impressive amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the channel's procedures.
We will continue our outreach efforts, together with
colleagues from the Security Council secretariat and
the Facilitator.

As I already said, we should not forget that the
JCPOA is a nuclear agreement. It is working and
delivering on its intended goal. That is why the EU is
united with so many countries in support of this deal
and calls once again on the international community
to continue to support this internationally endorsed
agreement.

