Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity for
stocktaking and to brief the Council as Chair of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, and
resolution 1518 (2003), concerning Iraq.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) convened twice in informal consultations
to exchange views on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
Most recently, it was briefed on the findings and
recommendations contained in the report (S/2015/619)
of Secretary-General on the progress made with regard
to the stabilization and restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau. That has been the fulcrum of
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

I believe that the implementation of the sanctions
regime, despite its limited scope, has indeed contributed
to the achievement of the desired objective, namely, the
pursuit and achievement of a lasting political solution
in Guinea-Bissau. In my view, continuous monitoring
will remain necessary in the short run to accurately
assess the journey towards stability and development.

I believe that giving consideration to the
recommendations ofthe Secretary-General will enhance
the effectiveness of the Council in administering the
sanctions regime in Guinea-Bissau. Maintaining the
sanctions regime will send a clear message to the
people of Guinea-Bissau that those who impede the
process ofpeace and security will be held accountable,
without exception - not only for their actions, but the
Council stands ready to adopt additional measures and
designations as and when required.

We observe a yawning gap in the Committe, namely,
the absence of a panel of experts. We believe that the
establishment of a panel of experts will go a long way
to support the work of the Committee and enhance its
effectiveness. That would not only ease the monitoring
of established benchmarks, but also facilitate the
surveillance of threats to stability and reconciliation.
Clear benchmarks that would determine readiness for
the lifting of sanctions should include the completion of
the retirement and demobilization processes for military
personnel; the full re-establishment of civilian control
over the military; the completion of the reconciliation
process; and the establishment of an effective and
efficient judicial system. Those are all components of
security sector reform.

We also believe that the time has come for the
Council to review the situation with respect to the
11 sanctioned individuals to determine if they still
meet the listing criteria. In the same vein, a periodic
review of the sanctions regime should be undertaken to
determine its effectiveness.

There is no doubt that the continued engagement
of the international community will remain vital not
only during, but especially in the aftermath of the
recovery period. Concerted action by the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union, the European Union, the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries will
also be vital during this time.

Concerning the 1518 Committee, we have a spate
of communications in connection with the sanctions
list, which currently stands at 86 individuals and 208
entities. That is the second largest list of all Security
Council sanctions regimes, after the Al-Qaida sanctions
list.

Unlike my other colleagues, my burden has been
lighter. And that explains the brevity of my report.
Nevertheless, I want to take this opportunity to convey
my immense gratitude to all the members of both
Committees for their assistance and their cooperation
during the course of our stewardship. I would also like
to acknowledge the sustained support of the Secretariat.
The officials who worked with us consistently
demonstrated a high level of professionalism and
were always available to facilitate the activities of the
Committees. We are greatly indebted to all of them.

