Mr. Ngoubeyou (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
It is a genuine pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over
our work today. My country is proud of the spirit with
which your country, Guinea, is guiding the Council's
work in the particularly sensitive international
environment of March 2003 that is known to us all.
Also allow me to congratulate the Council through you,
Sir, for taking this initiative.

Holding a public debate on the question of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
mercenary activities: threats to peace and security in
West Africa should be placed within a larger context
that began in the decade of the 1990s. In its debate on
disarmament and micro-disarmament, the international
community has given top priority to the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and related phenomenon.

This awareness of the danger represented by
portable arms led to the holding here in New York in
July 2001 of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Lights Weapons in All
Its Aspects. During that Conference, we all noted that
the manufacture, transfer and illicit circulation of those
weapons, as well as their excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation, in numerous regions of the
world, particularly in West Africa, constituted a grave
threat to peace, security, stability, reconciliation and
sustainable development at the individual, local,
national, regional and international levels.

At the end of that meeting, we jointly adopted a
plan of action to establish concrete measures at the
national, regional and international levels to prevent,
control and eliminate the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.

I felt compelled to make this digression to
emphasize that this debate should not be considered a
spontaneous occurrence, an act without precedence, but
rather a significant moment, one stage of a dynamic,
future-oriented and standard-setting process that has
long been under way. We believe that this meeting is
yet another opportunity for us to place particular
emphasis on this issue and to reaffirm the role of the
United Nations in collecting, classifying, sharing and
disseminating information on illicit traffic in light
weapons. In that context, the Council should take the
necessary measures to provide assistance to States and
subregional organizations, particularly African ones, to
ensure that all African countries will rise to the same
level of political awareness as nations of other regions

in the area of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

Furthermore, by insisting on the elaboration of an
international instrument against the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, in accordance with the above-
mentioned plan of action, I would like once again to
highlight that that is a strong recommendation, the
immediate and effective implementation of which will
undoubtedly constitute a decisive phase in our struggle
against this scourge.

Last October, under the presidency of Cameroon,
the Council had organized a day of discussion devoted
to the issue of small arms. On that occasion, several
delegations recognized that the Security Council
should play a greater role to ensure better control of the
circulation of light weapons by establishing a
permanent monitoring mechanism to follow up on
embargoes and other sanctions regarding those
weapons. Organizing the collection of light weapons
and setting up small economic projects for groups and
communities concerned could also be very useful if the
international community were to support them.

There is also a need to strengthen legislation at
the national level with regard to firearms and the
prohibition and use of firearms by security companies
that are now proliferating in our countries. Robust
measures need to be taken against the home
manufacture of firearms. What worries us today is the
linkage between trade and other prohibited phenomena
such as terrorism, organized crime, drug traffic, large-
scale banditry in our cities and road blocks that are set
up in some regions. More comprehensively, I wish to
emphasize the need at the national, and possibly the
subregional level, to adopt measures aimed at
preventing conflict, because we know that disputes
leading to civil wars or to similar situations are
important factors in the proliferation and illicit
circulation of light weapons.

Despite the entry into force in 2001 of the United
Nations convention on this matter, the use of
mercenaries is one of the major concerns of most
African States and of other areas of the globe. At the
behest of local powers, mercenaries continue to fuel
conflict in Africa, contributing to the pillage of natural
resources and the destabilization of power in the area.
There are flagrant human rights violations, particularly
of the right of peoples to self-determination. In that
regard, we believe that our priorities for action should
emphasize a redefinition of mercenary activity, a study
on how mercenaries are used in terrorist attacks and
how to strengthen the roles of the United Nations and
the Security Council in the fight against the
phenomenon of mercenarism.

