The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Malaysia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore and South Africa in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, Under-Secretary-General and Chef de Cabinet
of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Malloch Brown to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members

of the Council to the following documents: S/2006/85
and S/2006/lll, which contain letters dated 3 and
15 February 2006, respectively, from the representative
of Malaysia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2006/ 113, which contains a letter dated
17 February 2006 from the representative of South
Africa addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and photocopies of a letter dated 20 February
2006 from the representative of Sierra Leone addressed
to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/2006/ll7.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, Under-
Secretary-General and Chef de Cabinet of the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General.

I now give the floor to Mr. Malloch Brown.


