Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Argentina for organizing, under its
presidency of the Council, this debate on Haiti, which is
elevated by your presence, Mr. President. I would also
like to congratulate the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honore, on her appointment, and I would
like to thank her for her very thorough briefing. We
wish her every success in carrying out her functions.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

Like Ms. Honore, we believe that Haiti is at a critical
turning point. We recognize the significant progress
that has been made in Haiti since the earthquake that
struck the country in January 2010. However, we are
also aware of the many difficulties that the stabilization
process continues to face.

In order to remedy that, priority must be given
to holding, as soon as possible, free, regular, credible
elections that are open to everyone. The establishment
of the transitional college of the Permanent Electoral
Council on 19 April was a step in the right direction.
We also welcome the establishment, on 24 June, of
a joint taskforce made up of representatives of the
transitional college, MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and of various ministries that
have been charged by the Prime Minister to accelerate
preparations for elections. We welcome the fact that the
path towards elections and the draft law was submitted
yesterday by President Martelly to the Parliament. That
action must be followed up by determined action on
behalf of all political actors to see that elections are
held as soon as possible.

Luxembourg supports the efforts of MINUSTAH to
assist with the electoral process, including the goal of
greater participation by women in the electoral process.

Given the scale of the challenges that need to be
confronted, it is essential that Haiti, with the support
of the international community, create a system of
governance that is effective and inclusive and capable of
meeting the needs of Haitians. The stalemate between
the executive and legislative branches cannot continue.
We fully support the assertion made by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2013/493) that any consensus
on the issue of elections must be accompanied by the
identification of major legislative priorities to promote
the strengthening of institutions, protect investments
and ensure respect for human rights.

The establishment of the rule of law has only been
moving forward slowly, and the system of justice lacks
independence from political power. In his report, the
Secretary-General rightly mentions the need to bring
an end to the climate of impunity. The case that is
under way against former President Jean-Claude
Duvalier represents an important test in that regard.
It is also necessary to strengthen respect for human
rights, specifically by protecting as well as possible
vulnerable groups. In spite of the commendable efforts
of MINUSTAH's group on the protection of children,
much violence, including sexual Violence, is still being
committed against children. We noted with concern the
mention in the Secretary-General's report of cases of
child slavery.

On a more positive note, we would like to note that
the security situation has remained relatively stable.
We can see a reduction in civil unrest and major crime.
The Haitian National Police is growing stronger, and
the police force has improved its services, specifically
in terms of ensuring security in the four departments
that MINUSTAH military forces have now left. We
should also welcome the more effective recruitment of
cadets in order to achieve the goal of recruiting 15,000
police officers by 2016. Of course, strengthening the
Haitian National Police must go hand in hand with
professionalism. In that regard, we are worried by cases
of the police resorting to excessive force.

The humanitarian situation in the country also
remains worrying. One and a half million people are
suffering from severe food insecurity, including a
significant number of children under 5. The cholera
epidemic, which has cost more than 8,000 lives, is
continuing to ravage the country. We welcome the
initiative launched last December by the Secretary-
General aimed at eliminating cholera in Haiti.

The international community must assist the
affected populations. For its part, Luxembourg remains
actively committed to helping Haiti overcome the
challenges of the humanitarian situation and those
associated with rebuilding the country.

To conclude, Luxembourg reaffirms its support
for MINUSTAH's adaptable consolidation plan for the
stabilization of Haiti, which has been developed jointly
with Haitian authorities for the period 2013-2016. It is
important for MINUSTAH to focus its attention on the
main tasks that can be achieved within a reasonable
amount of time. We welcome the ideas and thought
processes under way to pursue MINUSTAH's mid-term
reconfiguration. While we wait for the proposals that
will appear on that subject in the next report of the
Secretary-General, my country remains in favour of
renewing the mandate of MINUSTAH for one year,
until 15 October 2014.

