Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent Observer of the European Union. At the recent conference on mental health and psychosocial well-being in Amsterdam, Abdelkarim, a young Syrian refugee, said, "To the people who see me as a traumatized refugee, I tell them: Look at me now; I am no longer a victim; instead, I am a person with skills and expertise to support my community". That quotation underscores three points that the Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to contribute to today's important open debate - for which we thank the Belgian presidency - concerning, first, victim- centredness; secondly, meaningful participation; and, thirdly, the importance of mental health and psychosocial support. Transitional justice is critical to sustainable peace, breaking cycles of violence and preventing future conflicts in order to build more just, peaceful and inclusive societies, as well as preventing conflicts from reappearing on the agenda of the Security Council, which, like other parts of the United Nations system, has an important role to play in transitional justice. To that end, first and foremost, the victims of massive human rights violations should remain at the centre of transitional justice processes. In order to move forward, transitional justice processes should acknowledge their experiences, need for justice, need to recognize their rights and need to restore their dignity. There are good recent examples in which victims have been actively involved in conflict and post- conflict situations, such as in Colombia, where they were heard directly during the peace process in Havana. Their involvement showed that peace and justice are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they run in parallel. In future peace processes, victims' voices also need to be heard. That will also help avoid blanket amnesties that violate international law. Secondly, meaningful victim participation throughout the entire process is essential. Delivering effective transitional justice means that it is locally owned and carefully crafted in relation to the context. It should be experienced by victims and the affected populations as truly transformative, as was the case in South Africa. Civil society is often the driver of the process, contributing directly through documentation, mobilization and support for victims. International mechanisms, such as international tribunals, have a role to play, mainly ina complementary capacity when local institutions fail to provide victims with genuine justice. Victims and survivors have a diversity of needs and perspectives, such as those of child soldiers, women forced into marriage or their children born from conflict. The Security Council should listen more to their voices and the plight andviews of women, children and youth and should do its utmost to incorporate their needs into relevant mandates. Thirdly, we urgently call for mental health not to be neglected. Transitional justice takes place in a context in which people, communities and whole societies have gone through highly traumatic events. It is meant to enable them to come to terms with the past in order to restore trust and dignity. Mental wounds need to be healed. Yet, in crisis situations, they are too often disregarded. We call for structurally integrating mental health and psychosocial support into our responses. They should be part and parcel of any effort towards peace and reconciliation from the start, thereby enabling people like Abdelkarim to move beyond their victimhood. In that way, societies can move beyond their troubled past and consign their conflicts to memory and history. Only recently, we have seen hopeful signals coming out of the Sudan with regard to transitional justice and perhaps one day the same will happen for Syria and other countries that are desperately in need of transitional justice processes. Let me reiterate our gratitude to Belgium for its outstanding effort and leadership in organizing this open debate.
