Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Barely one
month ago, this Council, following the adoption of
resolution 1004 (1995), expressed grave concern at the
plight of the civilian population in Srebrenica as a result
of Bosnian Serb attacks, and demanded unimpeded access
to the area for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
international humanitarian agencies. The Council's
adoption today of a further resolution underlines the
international community's continuing concern about
increasing reports that atrocities have taken place in and
around Srebrenica and Zepa following the Bosnian Serb
military offensive. It is particularly worrying that the
whereabouts of so many inhabitants of Srebrenica are still
unknown; the evidence provided to Council members
today by the United States delegation was particularly
disturbing.

 

The British Government therefore joins with others in
demanding that the Bosnian Serb authorities give immediate
access to the international humanitarian agencies, and
cooperate fully and unreservedly with the efforts of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
others to determine the whereabouts of those still
unaccounted for. We look for the early release of those who
are still detained, and we remind the Bosnian Serb
authorities of their obligation under international
humanitarian law to ensure the safety and well-being of
those who are under their control.

The focus of events in the former Yugoslavia has
already shifted elsewhere since the attacks last month on
Srebrenica and Zepa. But it is imperative that the
international community should not forget or lose sight of
those civilians still suffering from the consequences of
those attacks. By the beginning of next month, the
Secretary-General will report back to the Council on
progress in respect of implementation of the resolution that
we have just adopted. The British Government looks
forward to that report. The onus is now on the Bosnian
Serb authorities to demonstrate whether or not they are
prepared to cooperate constructively.

