Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2211 (2015) and thanks
France for its constructive and inclusive leadership,
which secured agreement on the text.

New Zealand strongly supports the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force
Intervention Brigade, as well as the role MONUSCO
continues to play in supporting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as it hopefully enters a period of stability,
lasting peace, increased prosperity and security.

The inclusion of the Force Intervention Brigade
in the MONUSCO mandate makes this a special and
unusually complex operation. In the context of this
latest mandate renewal, it was with those special
characteristics in mind that New Zealand proposed
a strengthened oversight mechanism in respect of
MONUSCO's operations to neutralize armed groups.
We therefore welcome what has now been agreed in
that regard - more targeted 90-day reporting, together
with a new commitment from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to provide regular informal
briefings on MONUSCO's operations to Council
members and troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
alike.

Once it has performed its Charter function of
mandating any peacekeeping operation, the Council
must then perform an oversight role in respect of those
operations. It is crucial that, in that role, itbe both engaged
and responsive. We seek to make the right decisions in
the Council Chamber, but it is equally important that,
having made those decisions, we then follow through
on how they are being implemented in practice. We
owe that to the troops charged with implementing such
mandates, and we owe it to the civilian populations
they are tasked to protect. It is crucial that we approach
that oversight with a supportive and proactive mindset.
New Zealand will therefore actively participate in these
Council briefings, and if the better flow of information
identifies significant risks to civilians or MONUSCO
troops, will stand ready to promote any necessary
Council action in response.

MONUSCO's very existence, let alone its ability to
perform its tasks, is dependent on the willingness and
the generosity of those countries that contribute their
troops - the TCCs. We truly value the contribution of
the TCCs, and we acknowledge the sacrifices they make

in the full delivery of a mission's mandate and, in this
case, in carrying out MONUSCO's top priority - the
protection of civilians. We are therefore very pleased
that we now have two new mechanisms that will more
effectively monitor MONUSCO's distinct mandate. We
will be active in assessing the effectiveness ofthose new
mechanisms, and we commit to seeking out any other
measures that might be required to enhance further the
Council's very important oversight role.

