We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive update on the situation on the ground in the light of the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234). At the outset, we reaffirm that respect for human rights, international law, the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations continue to be the main guidelines of the Dominican Republic in addressing the issue before us today. Like everyone here, we call for the pursuit of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution that will address the legitimate concerns of both parties to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We therefore reaffirm our full support for a two-State solution, as set out in the various United Nations resolutions. We note with dismay the continued expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, referred to in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234), with the advancement, approval or tendering of more than 28,000 units since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). We also reiterate that any movement towards annexation in the occupied Palestinian territory not only contravenes international law but also has serious implications for the security and stability of, and a future negotiated peace between, the two countries. Today we wish to refer to a pressing situation that requires our full attention and was extensively addressed by the Secretary-General in his report. For a long time, violations of children's rights have been part of our discussions. However, the current pandemic, which has clearly worsened the overall situation, has exacerbated the already difficult circumstances in which the children of Gaza live, with difficulties in accessing essential services, including limited access to health, water and electricity. Palestinian children's access to education is particularly hampered. Schools continue to be demolished and students are harassed, subjected to the indiscriminate use of force or simply caught in the middle of fighting on their way to and from school. Children need stability and the ability to live without fear of war, arrest, dispossession or homelessness. Every child has the right to childhood and to be protected from all forms of violence. We urge all parties to fully respect, protect and fulfil the rights of all children and to refrain from using violence against them, in accordance with international law. We welcome the announcements of the readiness of the Palestinian Authority and Israel to restore coordination of public security and resume the receipt of tax revenues. That openness, together with the current momentum presented by the normalization agreements between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, should be used to promote and strengthen direct dialogue between the parties - a genuine dialogue that addresses the aspirations and concerns of both parties - with a view to building a viable peace for the entire Middle East region. Finally, it is the Dominican Republic's most sincere aspiration that this forthcoming period, which is already beginning to show signs of real rapprochement between the Arab world and Israel, should be the gateway for Palestinians and Israelis to resume dialogue and, on the basis of justice and mutual respect, build a future free of war, confrontation, violence, terror and mutual hatred between their peoples, who should be able to live side by side in peace and security.
