Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): In
the event I cannot return this afternoon, I do want to
express my appreciation for the remarks of all the
representatives who have spoken so far- Norway,
Bangladesh, Tunisia, the United Kingdom, Jamaica and
France - and I know that Colombia, Ireland, Ukraine
and Mauritius are still to speak, in addition to the
outside speakers.

I am deeply touched. I hope that the Under-
Secretary-General and Dr. Piot will understand that my
comments, while they may not agree with every aspect
of them, are intended to help the situation. We are not
here to worry about ourselves, but about the people
who are affected.

I should like to make two comments. First, it
seems to me that the public nature of this meeting and
its value, in contrast to the informal private meeting,
have been proven by the dramatic statements today, by
the public attention they have received and by the new
agreements between DPKO and UNAIDS. I hope this
will usher in a new era of close cooperation. Again - I
say this particularly in the presence of those not
members of the Security Council - this kind of
discussion should always be conducted in public, so the
world knows we are concerned and so other nations
can participate.

Secondly, on a personal note once more, I am
deeply honoured to be part of this discussion. I am
profoundly moved by the expressions of support. There
is not much more to say, except to thank my friends
around this table and my colleagues in the red chairs.

When I leave here at noon tomorrow, I leave the
Mission in the hands of a very good team. I am
particularly pleased that Secretary-designate Powell
has asked Ambassador Cunningham to remain as the
Deputy Permanent Representative and has already said
that he wants to have a direct working relationship with
Ambassador Cunningham until my successor is chosen.
Everything you have said in praise of our efforts was
not addressed simply to me, in my View, but to an
entire team. R.P. Eddy, whom you all know, has
worked tirelessly on this issue and deserves great
credit. He has worked very closely with DPKO and
UNAIDS and others in this room.

My entire team has all been terrific. Ambassador
Soderberg will stay for a limited period, and
Ambassador King has been asked to stay until a
successor is named, which could be some time. We are
all fortunate she will do that. I wanted to stress that
even though Ambassador Levitte's resolution would be
rejected by my Government I can assure him and his
colleagues that the United States representation will
continue to be ably led by Ambassador Cunningham.

