Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me at the outset, Mr. President, to express my
appreciation for your country's interest in holding this
open debate on the issue of small arms, which affect
the daily lives of millions of persons. Permit me also to
thank, through you, Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, for his
detailed presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/69), and to congratulate Ms. Yoriko
Kawaguchi on her excellent statement.

The issue of small arms is a complex problem,
given its dimensions of public safety, armed conflict
and humanitarian issues, depending on the region or
subregion concerned. The very nature of the problems
caused by small arms thus requires a coordinated and
complementary focus among the various organs of the
system. That is why, when we were discussing the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
debate, Argentina made sure that the focus was on two
areas of the Security Council's primary competence:
arms embargoes and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants.

With regard to arms embargoes, we fully support
recommendations 5 and 9 of the Secretary-General's
report: to encourage Member States to enforce all
Council resolutions on sanctions, including those
imposing arms embargoes, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and to adopt national
legislation in that regard, including the use of end-user
certificates.

Concerning the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, that process is of
unquestionable importance as an essential component
of peacekeeping operations if we are to avoid the
recurrence of armed conflict. Our own experience in
many peacekeeping operations has convinced us of the
need to address the economic and social aspects of the
process if we truly intend to eradicate the underlying
causes of conflicts.

As regards the Council's competence in the area
of small arms, we cannot fail to mention the risk
represented by the diversion of such arms -
particularly man-portable air defence systems - to
terrorist groups. In that connection, we note with
satisfaction the decision to broaden the scope of the
Register of Conventional Arms as a measure to
promote transparency and confidence throughout the
world. We encourage weapons-exporting countries to
be as responsible as possible in their transactions and
to prevent the flow of arms and munitions to areas of
instability.

This open debate is an excellent opportunity for
the Council to support and encourage the work of the
General Assembly aimed at implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Argentina is committed to
the full implementation of the Programme and is
participating, together with our partners in the
Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) and
associated States, in the Open-ended Working Group
charged with negotiating an instrument to enable States
to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner,
illicit small arms and light weapons. We hope that that
instrument will be legally binding and that it will cover
illicit ammunition. The Biennial Meeting on the
Programme of Action to be held next June will be a
decisive step in preparing for the 2006 review
conference, and we are fully committed to ensuring the
success of both meetings.

Finally, another step in the right direction would
be to establish a group of governmental experts to
strengthen cooperation in preventing, combating and
eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

