Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their very important briefings today. We are pleased that the Special Envoy and the parties concerned are working tirelessly to resume the peace talks and to hear that there has been no major act of military provocation recently. We hope that this will continue, and, most importantly, that there are no setbacks from the existing agreed upon commitments. In response to the briefings, Indonesia would like to underscore the following points. First, we reiterate our full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy to bring the parties towards the resumption of peace talks, including the plan of the Special Envoy to reconvene the prisoner-exchange committee in the coming days. It is critical that Yemenis own the process and the outcome. To that end, Indonesia advocates an inclusive process, facilitated by the United Nations, with the participation of women and youth. We also support the visit to Yemen, which we hope could bring positive momentum towards the peace process. We are also happy to observe some progress in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, and that key countries of the region are playing a pivotal role towards the peace process, resulting in some encouraging tangible progress. Secondly, we remain deeply concerned, however, about the humanitarian situation in Yemen. In that regard, we condemn the attacks on 21 and 22 December in Al-Dhale'e, which targeted the premises of the United Nations and international humanitarian organizations, posing a security risk to humanitarian workers. The attacks violated international humanitarian law and resulted in the suspension of some aid programmes. Indonesia calls on all to respect international humanitarian law. Given that more than 12 million people rely on that assistance every month, we also call on the authorities to ensure safe and unhindered access for humanitarian workers across the country. Thirdly, my delegation stresses the critical importance of the implementation of previously agreed upon commitments, as that is key to broader progress in the political process. We will therefore continue to monitor the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, moving in parallel with the resumption of the political process. As we have repeatedly mentioned, we also expect progress on the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, maintaining the ceasefire and demilitarizing the area and the ports. Any setback in the implementation of that Agreement is dangerous, as it constitutes the lifeline for humanitarian assistance. It is a source of hope for millions of Yemenis. As a result, Indonesia welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Supportthe Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) for another six months to enable the monitoring of and support for the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We reiterate our call for unhindered access for UNMHA personnel to conduct patrols and effectively monitor the ceasefire. As the Secretary-General has said, the Mission brings calm to the people in Al-Hudaydah. In closing, my delegation urges harder work and commitment in 2020 to ensure a monumental year for peace and stability for all Yemenis.
