Mr. J enie (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf of
my delegation, I would like to extend our appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate.
My delegation also appreciates the presence of
Mr. Tanaka, Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament
Affairs, as well as that of the high-level representatives
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the World Customs Organization.
It is a fact the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means
of delivery is very real. That threat is magnified by the
fact that WMD could fall into the hands of non-State
actors, including terrorist groups. The continued
existence of such weapons could contribute to the
illicit acquisition of, and trafficking in, WMD.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) took
place against the backdrop of the fact that previous
WMD treaty regimes lacked universality and had been
designed to deal only with State entities. They were
therefore seen by some as ineffective in tackling the
challenge posed by non-State actors. The mission of
resolution 1540 (2004) was therefore to address that
gap. As reflected its paragraphs 5 and 8, resolution
1540 (2004) was intended only to complement and
reinforce, rather than replace or subvert, multilaterally
negotiated treaties.

We are reminded that, during the process of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), concerns were
expressed that the Security Council had taken on a
legislative role through which it dictated domestic law
to Member States and enforced non-proliferation
obligations outside the traditional multilateral
negotiating process. We must therefore work towards
establishing a multilaterally negotiated international
legal instrument that will permanently address the gap
being temporarily filled by the resolution.

One of the key challenges before us pertains to
the ability of Member States to fulfil the central
provisions of the resolution, for which national
legislation may need to be enacted and enforcement
measures put in place. For the majority of States, a
certain degree of technical and legal expertise is also
required, as is capacity in general. With reference to
that point, it must also be borne in mind that a State's
capacity to meet its obligations is not just a matter of
overall State capability, but also one of national
priority. For almost three years, the focus of the
Committee has mainly been on encouraging the
reporting requirement. While noting that reporting is
indeed important, as it provides a baseline for analysis,
it is not the objective of the resolution. The key point is
the implementation of the provisions of the resolution.

For developing countries with limited resources
and many other equally pressing priorities, the
increasing burden of reporting in its various forms can
be overwhelming. It is therefore timely for the
Committee to focus more on the implementation phase.
Cooperation between the Council and its Committee
with specialized international organizations should be
framed within the context of assisting States to build
their capacity to implement their obligations in a
sustainable manner.

The problems associated with implementation lie
at the national level. In most cases, those problems
derive from technical difficulties faced by Member
States. The Committee should therefore focus on
programmes that enhance the national capabilities of
such countries, in collaboration with existing
international organizations in the field of the
prohibition of WMD.

The full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term objective and an ongoing
process. It will require continuous efforts, patience,
dialogue, cooperation and assistance. As a result, it is
our belief that sustained international cooperation is
essential to achieve the objectives and purposes of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which is tasked
with ensuring the implementation of the resolution, is
well placed to mobilize and coordinate an effective
non-proliferation effort by garnering the support and
assistance of various specialized international
organizations in the execution of its mandate. While
there are currently no substantive partnerships between
those organizations and the Committee, this possibility
could be explored in the future.

In that regard, the Security Council and the
Committee should optimize the comparative
advantages of specialized international organizations.
That partnership should strengthen practical
cooperation, avoid duplication, promote cost
effectiveness, strengthen synergy of efforts and
increase the effective use of resources and expertise.

In the areas of nuclear weapons, chemical
weapons and their related materials, the Committee
should continue its cooperation with the secretariats of
the IAEA and the OPCW. Both organizations have,
within their respective fields and mandates,
programmes for State capacity-building that are
directly relevant to resolution 1540 (2004). For
instance, they maintain records of the status of the
national implementation measures of States parties to
their respective regimes. It is regrettable, however, that
in the area of the control of dangerous biological
agents we do not have similar organizations, since
there is not yet agreement on a verification regime for
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC).

For our part, in implementing obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), Indonesia continues to
strengthen its national implementation measures,
including its national legislation and enhanced
cooperation, both bilateral and multilateral. We are also
working closely with international organizations such
as the IAEA and the OPCW. Together with the OPCW,
Indonesia last year held meetings of national
authorities in Asia. Bilaterally, Indonesia and the
OPCW have undertaken a series of training exercises
on our emergency response system in the event of the
intentional or accidental release of dangerous chemical
agents. In addition, Indonesia continues to cooperate
with the IAEA in the field of nuclear safety and
security safeguards. In the absence of an international
verification regime for the BWC, Indonesia and
Australia have conducted annual regional workshops,
with a view to strengthen regional cooperation and an
exchange of best practices in implementing the
provisions of BWC.

Finally, as we pursue the non-proliferation
initiative, we should not lose sight of the question of
disarmament. It is our conviction that, in the end, the
only guarantee for eliminating the fear caused by the
possible use or threat of use of WMD is their total
elimination, because that is the only sure way of
preventing non-State actors from acquiring them. We
therefore reiterate our call on all States to work
towards that fundamental goal.

