Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the Plurinational State of Bolivia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council, and
to express our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President,
presiding over the Council for the month of October.
I would also like to recognize your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, and to thank her for her masterly leadership
of the Council last month. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to my country and for his reports on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2018/882 and S/2018/886), which the Council has
before it today.

First of all, I would like to convey to the Council
the apologies of Mr. Ignace Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta,
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the United Nations, who wanted to
participate in this morning's meeting in person but
was unfortunately prevented from doing so by some
urgent business that came up during the Security
Council delegation's recent visit to our country, which
he accompanied.

The Security Council has just heard the briefing
by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO), on the report ofthe
Secretary-General (S/2018/882), and Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region. On behalf of my delegation, I would
like not only to congratulate them on their excellent
briefings but also to say how much the Democratic
Republic of the Congo appreciates their tireless efforts
to carry out their mandates as well as possible.

While we appreciate the thoroughness of the
Secretary-General's report, I would still like to address
some concerns raised in the report and in some Council
members' statements regarding the areas of the electoral
process; the political agreement of 31 December 2016
and measures for reducing tensions; MONUSCO and
the Intervention Brigade in the electoral context; the
security and humanitarian situation; and, lastly, peace,
cooperation and stability in the Great Lakes region.

As we heard in many statements today, the
electoral process has made a great deal of progress
and is proceeding properly in accordance with the
electoral calendar published by the Independent
National Electoral Commission on 5 November 2017.
As President Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has affirmed, our course towards
elections on 23 December is irreversible. Following
the publication on 19 September of the final list of
candidates, and with less than 75 days to go before the
elections are held, the Independent National Electoral
Commission has been diligently pursuing a campaign
to raise voters' awareness about the voting machines
and how to use them, as well as recruiting polling
officers and publishing the provisional voting rolls.

In order to enable voters from all social sectors
to familiarize themselves with the machines that will
be used for voting on election day on 23 December,
the Electoral Commission has set them up in public
places such as schools, ports, airports and villages, and
in its local branches. The Commission is taking very
seriously the concerns, fears and difficulties about the
electoral process that have been raised by politicians
and partners, particularly those related to the use of the
voting machines, the transparency and credibility of
the elections, logistics and inclusiveness.

Regarding the voting machine problem, we dare
to hope that Council members' recent discussions in
Kinshasa with the President of the Independent National
Electoral Commission gave them a better understanding
of this tool, which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be using for the first time. However, I want
to point out that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had already provided the Council with explanations of
its reasons for advocating the use of this technology,
which are about saving money and time. Regardless
of that, it has been certified that the machine merely
prints out the ballot papers, and besides that, it prints
only the choice made by the voter and nothing else.
That was confirmed by the electoral assessment
mission conducted in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo between 5 and 7 September by the Electoral
Commissions Forum of the countries of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), which
noted that

"the voting machine helps to overcome the real
challenges the country faces in terms of the
logistical organization of the elections, including
cost and timeliness".

The Forum also commended the Electoral Commission
and encouraged it to continue its efforts to explain the
voting machines and raise awareness about them among
the population and the political stakeholders in order to
prevent any false information in that regard. Moreover,
for greater transparency, the machines were analysed and
approved by experts from the British organization that
was mentioned just now, the Westminster Foundation
for Democracy, which made some recommendations
for measures for practical support. In the same effort
to ensure transparency, the Electoral Commission
is now working in collaboration with more than 130
international experts from MONUSCO as advisers.

With regard to the concerns about the elections'
transparency and credibility, it should be pointed out
that the International Organization of la Francophonie
verified the electoral rolls between 6 and 26 May in
Kinshasa, and the audit concluded that the electoral roll
was by and large entirely inclusive, exhaustive, reliable
and up-to-date. As is clearly noted in paragraph 6 of
the report under consideration (S/2018/882), with the
cleanup of the voter register, the Electoral Commission
has removed from the rolls as many as 5,381,763 voters,
in addition to 472,000 minors who will not be of voting
age by the time of the elections on 23 December. From
an initial figure of 46,057,894, therefore, the provisional
electoral register now contains 40,287,385 voters.

With regard to logistics, we should emphasize
that elections are matters of State sovereignty, and in
that regard, the Congolese Government confirms its
commitment to financing those elections with its own
funds, taking into account the disbursement plan agreed

with the Electoral Commission and specific needs. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has therefore opted not to request any financial and
logistical support from partners. While we remain open
on the issue, we would request support from partners
only if absolutely necessary.

Based on all of this, we would like to reiterate the
determination ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
to hold, free, fair and credible elections in a peaceful
atmosphere, using voting machines for simple, rapid
and reliable voting.

In the view of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, some concerns that have been raised should
cease to be of concern, as they no longer have any
substance. That is especially the case with regard to
worries about the elections" inclusiveness in the wake of
announcements of the ineligibility of some candidates
and about our measures for reducing tensions. As
we have informed the Council more than once, the
Congolese Government has established measures for
building confidence and easing political tensions,
as outlined in the 31 December 2016 agreement. In
accordance with our laws, several prisoners, described
as political prisoners, some of whom had been arrested
for participating in insurrectionist movements, have
been released by the justice system. A number of
political actors who wished to do so have been able to
return to the country, while others have freely chosen
to remain abroad. Several television channels and radio
stations that are in legal proceedings, some of which
belong to the opposition, have reopened. In cases of
individuals who have committed common law offences,
they have been convicted in accordance with the law,
following fair trials. That is the case with the so-called
emblematic prisoners.

In paragraph 28 of resolution 2277 (2016), the
Security Council rightly recalled that

"future reconfigurations of MONUSCO and its
mandate should be determined in consultation with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the basis of the evolution of the situation
on the ground".

With that in mind, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
considers that MONUSCO's specific role in support
of security in the ongoing electoral process should be
provided at the formal request of the Government and
based on the priorities assigned to it in that regard. For
its part, the Government has decided to establish a team
of experts to develop an election security map. It also
decided on security for the presidential candidates.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo also
supports the principle of increasing the operational
capacity of the Intervention Brigade. It continues
to believe that the drawdown of MONUSCO troops
should begin with the troops deemed non-essential and
that the Intervention Brigade contingent should be the
last to leave Congolese territory. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo would like to
reaffirm the position of SADC, according to which,
when the forces deployed within MONUSCO are drawn
down, it is important not to affect the capacity of the
Rapid Intervention Brigade.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
again expresses its regret to note that the programme
is still not among the strategic priorities of the current
mandate of MONUSCO and, as a result, suffers from a
lack of funding by partners.

Respect for, and the protection of, human rights
and public freedoms are also a clear concern of the
Government during the electoral period. The media
space is open to all. Subject to respect for the laws and
regulations of the country, public demonstrations have
resumed throughout the territory. In that context, we
must underline the successful holding of a meeting of
the political opposition on Boulevard Triomphal in the
municipality of Kasa-Vubu on Saturday, 29 September,
during which no major incident was recorded. Congolese
National Police officers supervised the demonstration
with professionalism. In the interest of transparency, the
Government, with the participation of civil society and
the National Human Rights Commission, established
two joint commissions of inquiry to identify human
rights violations and breaches committed in the context
of public demonstrations.

Regarding the case of the killing of two United
Nations experts, the Government would like to note
that, with the arrest in December 2017 of the alleged
sponsor, Constantin Bulabula, it expects to be
provided with additional elements by the team of the
Special Prosecutor, Robert Petit, and the international
commission of inquiry, in order to enable the Congolese
judiciary to establish responsibility and punish
the perpetrators.

The security situation is generally calm throughout
the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 145 territories
are under Government control, despite pockets of
insecurity in some areas ofNorth Kivu and South Kivu.
The Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du
Congo (FARDC) continue their operations against
all entrenched groups until their eradication, while,
for its part, the National Police undertakes actions to
fight against all forms of crime in the large cities. For
now, the FARDC continues its offensive to neutralize
the sporadic and asymmetrical terrorist attacks of the
Allied Democratic Forces, as well as those of local
armed groups known as the Mayi-Mayi. We would like
to point out that the FARDC alone is fighting against all
the armed groups without the support of MONUSCO.

Regarding stability in the Great Lakes region, in
my delegation's view, in order for it to be sustainable,
such stability must be dependent on respect for the
commitments made under the various agreements to
restore peace and security in that region, in particular,
first, the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and its various protocols;
secondly, the 2013 Addis Ababa Framework agreement;
and, thirdly, the decisions ofthe eighth meeting ofHeads
of State and Government of the signatory countries
of the Framework agreement, held in Brazzaville on
19 October 2017. For its part, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has always done its utmost to implement
all the commitments that it made under those various
agreements, including the recent decisions taken by
the Heads of State of the region at the eighth high-
level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Framework agreement, which ordered the
simultaneous and unconditional repatriation of fighters
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and former combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), stationed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, respectively. In addition,
my country calls for due diligence in upholding
their commitments on the part of the other States in the
region, in particular certain neighbouring countries,
with the support of the partners and guarantors of the
Addis Ababa Framework agreement.

With regard to the specific situation of former M-23
combatants, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
regrets that, in Ngoma, Rwanda, on 13 September, the
leadership of the former M-23 combatants, in particular
Pastor Runiga, openly and violently attacked those to
be repatriated to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in front of representatives of the guarantors, namely,
SADC, the United Nations and the ICGLR, including
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, thereby obstructing the
implementation of the decisions of the Heads of State
taken on 19 October 2017.
The Government remains mobilized on the issue
of sexual violence and the recruitment of children.
During the first half of this year, following the joint
communique of 30 March 2013 signed between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations, the Government implemented a certain number
of measures to prevent and combat sexual violence. Such
measures related to training recruitment officers of the
FARDC, the Congolese National Police and military
judges on proficiency in the operational standards with
regard to age assessment and a plan of action to combat
sexual violence of the FARDC, as well as raising
awareness among the population. In implementation
of the 2014 FARDC plan of action to combat sexual
violence, the FARDC commission organized four
workshops in several cities in the country, including
Goma, Kananga, Tshikapa and Lubumbashi, on the
operational standards for evaluating age and combating
sexual violence. Those training sessions were geared
towards the recruitment officers of the FARDC and
the Congolese National Police. There were a total of
40 participants at each site. The training courses had a
twofold objective, namely, to avoid the recruitment of
anyone under 18 years of age within the FARDC and to
prevent the commission of any act of sexual violence,
by providing recruitment officers with the capacity to
train recruits and other soldiers. The training courses
took place between February and July. A similar
training course will soon take place in other cities,
including Kinshasa and Kalemie.

It should be noted that the Operational Military
Court is preparing to convene the Walikale trial, which
will involve 380 people who were victims of direct or
indirect rape by the militia leaders Se'raphin Nzitonda,
known as Lionceau, and Ntabo Taberi, known as Cheka,
as well as their men. With the support of our partners,
the construction of a courtroom and a fortified detention
facility have already been completed. We are waiting
only for the transfer of the defendants to begin the trial.
It should also be noted that the bill on responsibility
for victims of sexual violence was adopted by the
sociocultural committee of the Senate on 14 June,
on the eve of the closure of the March parliamentary
session, and should be adopted by the plenary at the
current session.

The humanitarian situation in the Kasai provinces
following the disturbances of public order and abuses
perpetrated by the Kamuina Nsapu militia has improved
significantly. There are some repercussions from the
meeting on peace, reconciliation and development, held
by the Government in Kasai in September 2017 and
presided over by the Head of State, Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange. That respite allowed for the reopening of the
borders with Angola for a voluntary and peaceful return
of Congolese nationals who had found refuge in that
neighbouring country. Such improvement is affirmed
by the July report of the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With regard to the Ebola virus haemorrhagic fever,
it must be said that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has experienced two simultaneous epidemics
of that haemorrhagic fever since April. We note that
thanks to national expertise and with the support of
international partners, represented by the World Health
Organization, the African Union, the United Nations
and non-governmental health organizations, the
Government response made it possible to contain and
control the disease and the humanitarian situation of
affected persons.

To date, the chain of transmission in Mandima has
been completely brought under control in less than four
weeks, with 4,207 people vaccinated in Mabalako. All
the new cases reported since the end of August are the
result of resistance in the Ndindi neighbourhood of
Beni. Despite the persistent elevated risk, the situation
in Butembo is under control. The city of Beni, however,
continues to be the main centre of the epidemic so
far, where the situation remains worrisome due to the
security situation. Due to that security emergency, a
new strategy has been adopted to contain the epidemic
in Beni. Nevertheless, if people fully collaborate
with the response teams, we can project an end to the
epidemic by the end of October.

Still on the Ebola epidemic, we note the holding of
a meeting of East African Sates in Entebbe, Uganda,
from 2 to 4 October, with most participants attending
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Burundi, South Sudan, Tanzania, Kenya and Rwanda.
The goal of the meeting was to improve cross-border
collaboration in monitoring the virus and in preparing
for, and responding to, emergency situations in East
Africa. The discussions focussed mainly on the
measures to be taken in order to avoid the spread of
the Ebola pandemic, which is currently raging in
the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri. Participating
countries worked on developing an action plan to bolster
their cross-border monitoring activities, preparation for
emergencies and a response mechanism for combating
the disease by defining clear roles and responsibilities
for the various participants. In order to keep the
people and partners better informed on Ebola-related
developments, the Ministry of Public Health provides a
daily epidemiological update on the virus.

I would be remiss ifI did not thank all who have
committed to be at our side in ensuring lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to
thank in particular the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the African Union for their essential
role in maintaining peace in our region. I salute and
pay tribute to the memory of all the Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives so that peace can return to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Finally, I thank
the United Nations, and especially the members of
the Security Council for their ongoing attention to the
situation in my country and for visiting my country in
a show of solidarity at this critical time in its history in
order to experience at first-hand the deep-seated reality
taking place ahead of the 23 December elections.

