Ms. Modi (spoke in French): On behalf of
Congolese women, I thank the Council for giving me
the opportunity to brief it on the situation of women
and girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I also thank the members of the Security Council for
their commitment and for recognizing and highlighting
the leadership of African women in the area of peace
and security last month by adopting resolution 2457
(2019). That resolution clearly acknowledges the
platform of the African Women Leaders Network, in
which I participate as a member of the Young Women
Leaders Caucus and FemWise, which champion the
revolution in conflict prevention and mediation.

First of all, we welcome the civic maturity of
the Congolese people, who have managed to ensure
a peaceful turnover of power at the pinnacle of State
authority, including by making the ultimate sacrifice.
We dedicate our thoughts to all those, including
women, who lost their lives in the period leading up to
the elections held on 30 December 2018.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, as a
Member of the United Nations, has signed a number
of legal human rights and international humanitarian
law instruments, including resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2250 (2015). In that regard, we welcome encouraging
signs that spaces, such as media outlets, are beginning
to reopen, as well as the release of prisoners. My
briefing today will focus on the electoral process under
way, an overview of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the importance of the participation of
women, including young women, in efforts to build
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
provide a few recommendations.

The electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been marked by a political and security
crisis, with electoral disputes and the organization
of public demonstrations. Government authorities
have worked, among other things, to restrict public
freedoms by considering draft freedom-destroying
laws for adoption by Parliament. That situation has
led to a stalemate in the political process. That is why
two dialogues - the first facilitated by the African
Union and the second by the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo - were held in 2016 with a View to
identifying a mechanism that would bring together the
various stakeholders around the same table to reach a
political consensus by easing tensions and implementing
practical methods for organizing elections.

The Commission electorale nationale independante
(CENI) was made responsible for the practical aspects
of organizing the elections. In that regard, it used
election technology * voting machines - which
reignited the debate because there was no consensus
in their regard. The organization of the elections was
not perfect. Certain shortcomings led to contestations,
which raised several challenges. CENI used only
one channel of the two recognized by law - USB
flash drives but not the hard copy of minutes - for
announcing the election results.

Civil society organizations, in particular women's
organizations, were barely involved in observation
missions. Political parties did not prepare the observers
and the people had not been sufficiently educated about
the electoral process. The failure to consider gender
parity remains an obstacle to the effective participation
of women. The delivery of materials to polling stations
presented another challenge.

Notwithstanding such shortcomings, the elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo provide a
reference point for the rest of the region. The country
is at a historic and decisive juncture. However, with
regard to the 2006, 2011 and 2018 election cycles, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not made rapid
progress. Fears persist with respect to local elections,
which could spark inter-ethnic conflicts, similar to
those that occurred during the senate elections, if the
process is not monitored and supported.

Resolution 1925 (2010) conferred a new mandate
on MONUSCO by replacing the previous peacekeeping
mission. The new MONUSCO mandate seeks to support
the efforts made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including with respect to the
protection of civilians; humanitarian workers and
human rights defenders threatened by violence; efforts
to end impunity; support for the political process so as
to ensure stability and peacebuilding; and ending the
conflict by restoring the rule of law. To that end, the
participation of women, including young women, in
peacebuilding efforts is crucial.
With regard to the protection of civilians, it should
be noted that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made useful arrangements to ensure that women
are represented in the security sector, in particular
the army and police force, through the reform process
under way.

The new functions of the Police nationale
congolaise, operating in the community-based policing
mode, focus on combatting reprehensible behaviour,
including gender-based violence. This has led to the
establishment of a special unit to address gender issues
and gender-based violence. The executive secretariat of
the Monitoring Committee for Police Reform - through
its technical sub-working groups on the legal and
regulatory framework and on gender, sexual violence,
the rights of the child and human rights - has
produced several draft laws and regulations promoting
gender parity and eradicating gender-based violence
within the national police. The list is not exhaustive.
It includes the establishment of a national secretariat
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the adoption in 2018 of a national action plan for the
second-generation implementation of the resolution.
Women and young women are engaging in community
work, advocacy and mentoring to promote the further
participation of young women.

I would like to share some recommendations with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We needto raise awareness among men in Parliament
and provincial assemblies on gender and women's rights
so as to ensure their participation in the peacebuilding
and security process. We recommend the adoption of
specific measures to facilitate the inclusion of women
in the defence and security forces. We recommend
that our Government implement a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for
armed groups at the local level in the context of crisis
prevention efforts. We call for the implementation of
laws and measures related to gender and the women and
peace and security agenda. We call on the Government
to accept support for the organization of local elections.
Article 13, paragraph 3, of the electoral law must be
revised to mandate the inclusion of more women on
partisan candidate lists.

We recommend the rollout of training programmes
to boost managerial capacities, mentoring programmes
and the sharing ofbest practices in order to establish role

models for the youngest sector of the population. We
call on the members of the Security Council to support
efforts to boost mass civic gender-awareness education
at the community level, targeting leaders, young people
and boys, in order to promote a model of positive
masculinity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Efforts must also be made at the subregional, regional
and international levels to strengthen instituional
capacities and regional and national mechanisms in the
area of gender, women and peace.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
thanking Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the African
Union for all they have done to support us and the
African Women Leaders Network.

