The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

Today's resolution 2350 (2017) brings to a close
a Mission that began in 2004 when Haiti was first
faced with an armed conflict that had spread to
several cities across the country. Accountability and
reporting language has been added so that we are able
to track the effectiveness of remaining personnel.
Two regional hubs will be removed to focus efforts
in the areas that need the most support. As the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti draws down and
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti gears up, the Haitian people will be set on
the path of independence and self-sufficiency. This
is a success story when it comes to drawing down a
peacekeeping mission.

The United States will continue to stand with
the people of Haiti. We have previously noted the
contributions of many of the peacekeeping troops in
Haiti. While this is seen as a success, unfortunately,
it is a nightmare for many in Haiti, who will never
be able to forget and live with brutal scars. We must
acknowledge the abandoned children, 12-15 years old,
who lived every day with hunger. They were lured by
peacekeepers with cookies and snacks. The high price
of this food was sexual abuse. According to Paisley
Dodds of the Associated Press, the children were
passed from soldier to soldier. One boy was gang raped
in 2011 by peacekeepers, who disgustingly filmed it on
a cellphone.

What do we sayto those kids? Did thesepeacekeepers
keep them safe? We must acknowledge those realities.
How can we learn from those acts? These peacekeepers
are sent into vulnerable communities to protect the
innocent, not to exploit or rape them. The United States
has made it clear to the United Nations and all troop-
contributing countries that these abuses must stop.
Countries that refuse to hold their soldiers accountable
must recognize that this either stops or their troops will
go home and their financial compensation will end. The
abuses do not represent a troop-contributing country
poorly ifthey hold those abusers accountable and stress
this to the soldiers who are in place.

The United States will continue to work closely
with Haiti as it makes progress towards security and
stability. With the international community, we stand
by the Government of Haiti and are committed to the
country's democratic development, independence
and economic growth. We will, however, continue to
push for the accountability of those troops in Haiti,
as well as all troop-contributing countries involved in
peacekeeping efforts. We owe it the vulnerable in those
countries, who desperately need peace and security. I
ask Council members to join me in that effort.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

