Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation would like to welcome the Deputy Special Envoy for Syria, Ms. Khawla Matar, to the Chamber and thanks her for her briefing. Indonesia remains committed to the full implementation of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process in order to end the conflict in Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). However, the unfortunate reality on the ground is of grave concern. The continued hostilities in north-west Syria have worsened the humanitarian conditions, with more than 350,000 people displaced. We urge all the relevant parties to respect the ceasefire agreements. We also remind them of their obligations to protect civilians under international humanitarian law. I wish to focus on three main points. First, my delegation believes that the number one priority must always be the Syrian people. The foundation of the whole political process in Syria needs to be based on the interests and aspirations of the Syrians. In that regard, Indonesia reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. In the context of sovereignty, Indonesia also wishes to reiterate its position in recognizing the occupied Syrian Golan, occupied by Israel in 1967, as an inalienable part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. We strongly reject the recognition of the occupied Syrian Golan as part of Israel. Israel's decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupiedSyrian Golan is null and void and without international legal effect. Secondly, on the work of the Constitutional Committee, we are hopeful that the third round of negotiations will soon materialize in Geneva, facilitated by the United Nations. Indeed, a lot of work has been put into that process. We encourage the Syrian parties to display genuine and concrete efforts to advance the work of the Constitutional Committee. Flexibility and strong commitmentare needed in order to be able to move forward. Indonesia is also of the view that the work of the Constitutional Committee must be administered by consensus and constructive engagement. A substantive discussion is necessary to achieve positive outcomes that will serve the aspirations of all the Syrian people. Any gaps or divergences among the Syrian parties must be addressed through continuous dialogue, without external interference. That leads me to my third point - the urgent need to prevent further escalation, which would disrupt the efforts to reach a political settlement. Indonesia appeals to all parties involved to cease hostilities and create an environment conducive to the successful conduct of political talks. We cannot move the process forward with hostilities as the background. The international community needs to fully support that. Indonesia strongly supports the work of the United Nations, in particular the mandate of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, in facilitating the process. We appreciate Special Envoy Pedersen's intensive coordination with all relevant parties and encourage those parties to continue to support his work. In conclusion, my delegation urges the international community to be fully supportive of the genuine efforts to reach a political settlement in Syria and to avoid provocative rhetoric and actions that would undermine the ongoing work of the Constitutional Committee, facilitated by the United Nations.
