Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): The situation on the
Korean peninsula is the greatest threat to international
peace and security facing the world today. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programme illustrates,
as we have already heard, a blatant disregard for its
international obligations. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has repeatedly violated international
law, including numerous Security Council resolutions.
Its actions are also contrary to the existing global
norm against nuclear testing, as embodied in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and global
non-proliferation norms.
The Council has repeatedly - I believe this is
the sixteenth meeting - been called together this
year to address the illegal testing of nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. At each meeting, Council members
have unanimously condemned those provocations in
the strongest terms. The world does not accept the
nuclear weapon and ballistic missile programmes of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and it is
essential that we continue to stand united.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's important meeting. I particularly
welcome the presence of the representatives of the
Republic of Korea and of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea here today. Let this meeting be a step
towards dialogue.

I want to take this opportunity to convey directly
to the representative of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea the following five messages. First,
cease all provocations; secondly, engage in a credible
and meaningful dialogue; thirdly, abide by the
Security Council's resolutions and fulfil international
obligations; fourthly, abandon the nuclear weapon
and missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner; and, fifthly, return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.

The adoption of resolution 2375 (2017) toughened
the targeted sanctions against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, and it now constitutes the most
rigorous sanctions regime ever enforced under the
United Nations system. For the sanctions to have the
desired effect, it is critical that we urgently ensure their
universal and comprehensive implementation. To that
end, we need additional capacity at all levels, including
improved monitoring and targeted capacity-building.
We are actively engaged, through the European Union,
in support of such efforts.

This week, the Council has held discussions
on both the acute human rights situation and the
precarious humanitarian conditions in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The humanitarian situation
for ordinary North Koreans remains of serious
concern. The responsibility for the well-being of the
North Korean people falls, without a doubt, on the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. At the same time, it is of the utmost importance
that the humanitarian exemptions provided for
under the sanctions regime be upheld. Reports that
international humanitarian organizations' ability to
provide assistance has been reduced, therefore, need to
be addressed. As the Secretary-General has pointed out,
there is also an urgent need for more funding towards
life-saving humanitarian assistance in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

Over the past year, tensions on the Korean peninsula
have continued to rise. They have now reached a very
dangerous level. I think we all want to instil a sense
of urgency on this matter. Provocations have been
accompanied by an increase in confrontational rhetoric.
In that environment, the potential for mistakes,
misunderstandings and miscalculations is high.

In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, we must undertake further work
to reduce tensions in order to advance the prospects
for a comprehensive settlement. Sanctions alone
will not resolve the current situation. Intensified and
creative diplomatic efforts that pave the way for a
peaceful, diplomatic and political solution are urgently
needed. The situation must be approached without
prejudice, and we must be prepared to consider both
new and previous proposals and agreements. In that
regard, there is also need to explore the possibilities
for regional security cooperation and arrangements.
Sweden is contributing to those diplomatic efforts, and
we welcome Under-Secretary-General Feltman's recent
visit to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The Council has the responsibility to uphold peace
and security. All over the world, people have their
eyes on what happens here, and they fear what could
be the result of a further escalation of the crisis on the
Korean peninsula. We have to exhaust every avenue
for diplomacy and dialogue. Efforts are urgent, and the
consequences of failure would be disastrous.

