Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): After two years as a member of the Security
Council, I wish to take the floor at today's meeting, as
it is the last on the Palestinian question that my
delegation will be participating in as a member. I wish
to assess the way in which the Security Council has
dealt with this issue.

We have participated in the work of the Security
Council with good intentions and a positive attitude.
Sometimes, we have even given up our positions of
national principle in order to make progress in the
Council's work because of words we often hear in the
Council: "peace" and "final solution".

However, let us stop to consider the situation in
Palestine and Israel. Last year, in 2008, after Israel had
carried out a widespread attack on Gaza - Operation
Cast Lead - and used white phosphorus, banned under
international law, killing some 1,500 civilian and
destroying United Nations facilities, the Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009). What happened after
that? The siege continues.

At the request of the Secretary-General, the
Board of Inquiry went to Gaza to draw up a report.
What has happened with that report? Nothing.

There has been an advisory opinion (see A/ES- 10/273) of the International Court of Justice on the
apartheid wall built by Israel, and no one even
mentions it. The entire world acknowledges that what
is happening in Gaza is a crime in the true sense of the
word. What have we done? Even in resolution 1860
(2009), Israel is still above the law and beyond
accountability.

We now hear talk of the West Bank as a
prosperous paradise compared to Gaza, which is
governed by "terrorists", as the members of Hamas are
called - even though they were elected by the
Palestinian people. If the Palestinians elect a militant
5
group, they are called terrorists. But if the Israelis elect
terrorists, they are called democratic. That is not fair,
because if any State tries to bring Israelis to justice for
the crimes committed in Gaza, the Council seems to be
trying to change the law so that criminals will not be
prosecuted.

Three days ago, a photograph was published,
which I am now displaying to members, and I urge
them to look at it. It shows a young Palestinian tied up
and blindfolded in the midst of a group of Israeli
soldiers. This is a young Palestinian tied up,
surrounded by Israeli soldiers, and suddenly, an Israeli
soldier attacks and kills him. He was tied up and
blindfolded, yet he was killed. Even worse, the
occupation forces invaded his home and took these
photographs inside his home.

Then, there is talk of Shalit. Is Shalit a Boy
Scout? Had he gone where he was captured for a
picnic, or had he gone there to kill?

There is talk of Rwanda and Burundi and the rape,
murder and Violence against civilians and pregnant
women. What about the thousands of pregnant
Palestinian women? When the Council discusses a
Palestinian State, I ask it to show photographs of
settlements, such as the ones I am displaying now.
When the Council talks about a Palestinian State - I
am also addressing the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General - where will that State be created?
In a vacuum, in the air or on the ground?

Now I shall display some maps: this was
Palestine in 1948; this is Palestine since 1967; these
spots are all settlements. The second map shows the
1947 partition, with two States: Palestine and Israel.
And after 1967, the West Bank and Gaza can be seen
marked in yellow. I have a question about this map,
which resembles a tiger skin. There are settlements and
infrastructure throughout the area, and when
Mr. Netanyahu says he is going to freeze settlement
building for 10 months in a very limited number of
places, I am not at all convinced. Mr. Netanyahu said,
in his book "A Place Among the Nations,", published
in 1996, that the West Bank belonged to Israel, and he
affirmed that Israel would not leave the West Bank.
Anyone can read this in his book. So there are
contradictions that destroy his credibility.

Unfortunately, as far as any evaluation is
concerned, we can say that we are convinced that for
certain members of the Council Palestinian lives do not
6

count and their massacre will not be punished. Yet if a
single Israeli is killed by a Palestinian rocket, it is
considered an unpardonable crime, While the massacre
of hundreds of Palestinians, including dozens of
women and children, seems to be almost a legal Israeli
right. When one single Israeli soldier is taken prisoner,
that is considered to be an unpardonable condemnable
crime, whereas the detention of more than 11,000
Palestinians, including hundreds of women and
children, seems to be considered standard procedure,
both legal and not requiring mention. These are double
standards. Some members have given endless speeches
on human rights, and yet their true stance was revealed
at the moment of truth when they voted in the General
Assembly on General Assembly resolution 64/10 on
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by
Israel in Gaza (see A64/PV.39). Things will become
clearer in the next few months when United Nations
bodies endeavour to follow up on the Goldstone report
on war crimes committed by Israel in Gaza.

Sadly, I have to say, in conclusion, that this has
been a bitter experience for us. We have witnessed
injustice, oppression and inequity destroy truth and
justice. The poor Palestinians, the Arab system and the
official Arab order could not take a solid stance to face
these challenges and our rights have, therefore, been
wasted and our position has been weak.

