The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and other briefers for their
valuable contributions this morning. I welcome the
earlier presence of the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg at today's
debate.

The progress already made during Luxembourg's
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is encouraging. The United Kingdom
welcomes the strong leadership shown by both Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
Ambassador Lucas on this work. We look forward to
their continued efforts.

This debate is a reminder of why the Security
Council's work is so important. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/245) documents hideous
violations - thousands of children killed and maimed
by explosive weapons and continuous shelling, the
systematic rape and torture of girls and boys and
the forcible use of children as human shields. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has demonstrated effective advocacy and active
engagement to prevent those grave violations against
children. I am grateful for her report and commend
United Nations country task forces for producing
reliable and evidence-based information on violations
against children.

But a high level of ambition for the children-
and-armed-conflict agenda must be sustained. The
Special Representative's campaign, announced today,
for no child to be associated with State armed forces
in conflict by 2016 demonstrates such ambition. The
United Kingdom fully supports that goal. In the past
12 months, action plans were signed with parties
to conflict in Burma, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We expect, and look forward
to, the signing of the additional action plans under
negotiation. The expected adoption of today's draft
presidential statement builds on that success by
strengthening Council consensus to tackle persistent
perpetrators.

I call on all of us to address three challenges in
particular, namely, implementing the action plans, the
reintegration of children and combating impunity.

We call on all parties to conflict that have not
concluded action plans to do so immediately. But
signing an action plan is only the first step. All parties
to conflict must honour their commitments as quickly as
possible. To support the implementation of such plans,
the United Nations, international partners and Member
States must address funding gaps and prioritize the
deployment of senior child-protection advisers.

The ultimate tragedy is that of children who grow
up to perpetuate the cycle of conflict as adults. Denied
a childhood, a home and an education, children become
trapped in a world of armed conflict. We can support the
successful reintegration of those children into society

by stopping the military use of schools and securing
provisions to protect children in peace processes.
Finally, impunity for those who commit violations
against children is unacceptable. Perpetrators should
be in no doubt that their crimes will be investigated
and that trials will follow, as demonstrated by the trials
of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Charles Taylor and the
recent transfer of Bosco Ntaganda to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Cooperation between the
Security Council and the ICC is critical to ensuring
such accountability.

The future of children across the world depends
upon the United Nations rising to these challenges.
No child anywhere or at any time should needlessly be
endangered or suffer in conflict. The draft presidential
statement to be adopted today signals that determination.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council has before it the text of a draft
statement by the President on behalf of the Council
on the subject of today's meeting. I thank the Council
members for their valuable contributions to the draft
statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
draft statement, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under S/PRST/2013/8.

It is so decided.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
That way, we shall be able to conclude the debate before
lunchtime.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.

