Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
However, I would like to make a few additional remarks.
I wish at the outset to express my Government's
appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this open meeting of the Security Council. We are
encouraged by the fact that the Vice-President of the
United States, Mr. Al Gore, opened this first Council
meeting of the year 2000 and by his pledge of increased
United States contributions. We share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General at this grave
humanitarian emergency facing the world, particularly in
Africa, with the spread of HIV/AIDS.

Cyprus considers the discussion in the Security
Council to be a good opportunity for refocusing the
attention of the international community and its
commitment to confronting this pandemic, as well as to
supporting Africa's endeavours for economic and social
development, which is inextricably linked with
strengthening regional peace and security. The AIDS
epidemic is a serious threat to mankind, and especially to
Africa, since, as was so grimly pointed out, it takes more
African lives each year than all the conflicts in that region
combined. We also express our particular concern about
the rising number of infected children and women.

We hope that the dialogue that is being initiated
today in the Security Council will address not only the
major scientific and medical challenges which remain but
also the socio-economic consequences in many countries.
We need, however, to go beyond discussions and pursue
effective solutions and practical responses. Sub-Saharan
Africa is experiencing a disproportionately high level of
the epidemic, which is causing great human and material
suffering. We must also address the need to invigorate the
efforts to make scientific discoveries and to provide
solutions to stop the transmission of the disease. Efforts
to develop a vaccine which will not be costly and will not
have severe side effects must be intensified. In this
respect, I would also stress the need for HIV screening of
blood donors.

Over the years, through the efforts of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and
of international and regional conferences, many of the
taboos and myths about HIV have been dispelled. It is
important that, on such a sensitive issue, people be
provided with the necessary knowledge and health
information, which will act as the best preventive
measure.

While our specific discussion concerns the region of
Africa, we must not lose sight of the fact that AIDS is an
international epidemic which requires a global response
based on a common strategy, solidarity and compassion,

 

as well as close coordination between Governments, non-
governmental organizations, including organizations dealing
with people living with HIV/AIDS, religious organizations
and the business community. Of course the United Nations
role remains indispensable.

Speaking about international cooperation on this issue,
I would like to stress once again the need for helping
Africa overcome its serious economic problems, which,
despite progress in some countries, still persist. Noting the
courage and the burden carried by African countries in
pursuing economic reform, we believe that the international
community should redouble its efforts to alleviate the
suffering of millions of people in the continent.

Special attention should be given to debt relief and the
needs of the least developed countries and other African
countries that are in danger of marginalization. Part of the
savings resulting from debt relief can be effectively utilized
for awareness campaigns about HIV/AIDS and for better
infrastructure to assist the victims of this disease.

Being so close to Africa, we have always had strong
ties with the African peoples. These special bonds were
forged during the decolonization era and by the presence of
Cypriot communities in many African countries. Cyprus,
within its capabilities, has consistently offered assistance to
African countries. In particular, the Cyprus Government is
providing scholarships for graduate and post-graduate
programmes in various fields, as well as special
programmes such as nursing. We pledge our continued
support to the efforts of the international community, in
solidarity with Africa, to confront the AIDS pandemic and
to strengthen peace, cooperation and development in the
continent.
