Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I acknowledge
Mr. Diop's presence at today's meeting. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Lacroix and thank him for his
briefing. I wish him every success in his new post.

We note that there has been ongoing progress in
Mali's political arena. The holding of the National
Accord Conference, newjoint patrols in Gao and further
steps in the setting up of interim authorities in Kidal,
Gao and Menaka are encouraging signs. However, the
deteriorating security situation and the ongoing terrorist
threat in the region reminds us that more must be done,
and rapidly, to stabilize the country. The solution lies
in the implementation of the Algiers agreement. Its
implementation and the constitutional reform process
under way should be a key component in the process
towards inclusive stability that fosters dialogue among
the parties in the country. That dialogue must continue
beyond the interim period.

Stability in the Sahel depends, to a large extent,
on stability in Mali. We share the Secretary-General's
concerns about growing ties between terrorism,
transnational organized crime and trafficking in drugs
and in persons. Such scourges are major hurdles in
the peace process in Mali and in the wider region. In
partnership with the Secretariat and other members of
the Security Council, we will continue our efforts to
develop solutions and stem those threats. In that regard,
we will also continue to provide bilateral assistance.

I should like to recall that the protection of cultural
heritage is part of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The Council has demonstrated its
commitment to that subject by adopting resolution 2347
(2017), which was put forward by France and Italy. The
International Criminal Court handed down a historic
ruling in the Al-Madhi case about the destruction of
cultural heritage in Timbuktu.

With regard to regional efforts, we welcome the
initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel to establish a
counter-terrorism brigade and we encourage those same
countries and MINUSMA to coordinate their efforts in
the region. In more general terms, we believe that it
is useful to have a high level of coordination among
all international partners working in the security sector
in Mali, in particular with the European Union (EU)
and its EU Training Mission and the EUCAP Sahel
Mali mission. In addition, we recall the importance of
relaunching the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which, we believe, is a central platform for
addressing challenges throughout the region.

MINUSMA continues to face major challenges
and we cannot forget the price that it has already paid
in human lives. However, MINUSMA's mandate has
already shown its ability to include several innovative
principles, in spite of logistical constraints and the
shortage of equipment. I would like to commend the
Mission, troop-contributing countries and the French
Operation Barkhane for their efforts. In that regard, I
should like to extend condolences to France and to the
family of the French soldier from Operation Barkhane,
who was killed last night during a mission in the south-
east of the country. That serves as a sad reminder of the
growing terrorist threat in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of the Secretariat to ensure MINUSMA's effectiveness,
as illustrated by the force generation conference to be
held in May. I am also pleased to share information
about Italy's contribution to the Mission's Trust Fund.
The aim of the Fund is to support Malian security
forces in their policing and border-control activities in
the centre and east of the country.

