Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Sweden voted in
favour of resolution 2440 (2018) today, as it extends
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and
expresses full support for the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, as well as for
the resumption of the negotiating process, beginning
with the round table meeting in Geneva later this year.

When Sweden entered the Council as an elected
member almost two years ago, it was in the firm
conviction that the United Nations-led political
process - dormant for almost a decade - needed to be
revived. However, this was far from given. The Council
was faced with a dangerous stand-off in Guerguerat that
threatened the ceasefire and could have led to renewed
hostilities. MINURSO was hampered in carrying out its
mandate as its full functionality had not been restored
and the level of trust between the parties and the United
Nations was at a low. I think everyone in the Chamber
recognizes that we have come a long way since.

A new Secretary-General decided to directly engage
with the parties, paving the way for the restoration of
the full functionality of MINURSO and eventually
a solution to the Guerguerat crisis. The Secretary-
General's ambition to relaunch the United Nations-led
political process with a new dynamic and spirit led
to the appointment of Horst Kohler as his Personal
Envoy. We pay tribute to his tremendous efforts and his
personal dedication. Following the Personal Envoy's
consultations with the parties and neighbouring States
over the past year, we are now witnessing preparations
for a round table meeting in December. We welcome
the positive response from all those invited as a positive
sign of a renewed commitment to the United Nations-
1ed political process.

As a member of the Council, our ambition was to
contribute to breaking the deadlock on the question
of Western Sahara and moving beyond the status quo.
It is in this spirit that we have worked in support of
the United Nations, MINURSO and Personal Envoy
Kohler. We have tried to bring more attention to the
humanitarian situation and the insufficient funding
for Sahrawi refugees. We have advocated for the full
inclusion of women and youth in the political process,
and we have encouraged enhanced cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, including further visits to the region.

Resolution 2351 (2017) turned the page following a
year of many challenges. Resolution 2414 (2018) paved
the way for a resumed United Nations-led political
process, and resolution 2440 (2018) sustains the positive
momentum towards advancing direct negotiations.
MINURSO has our unwavering support, as it upholds
the ceasefire and serves as a conflict prevention tool.
It also plays a key role in supporting a United Nations-
led political process that is finally under way. While
a strong and effective Mission remains essential, our
shared goal must be to ultimately make MINURSO
obsolete by reaching a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
This ultimate aim remains as valid as ever.

Finally, we want to commend the United States for
its extraordinary leadership on Western Sahara. This
is a question that has suffered from a lack of attention
and political will for far too long. That clearly is no
longer the case. There is now a real opportunity to
find a sustainable political solution and resolve one of
the most long-standing disputes on the agenda of the
United Nations. This must be seized to end the plight
of the people of Western Sahara and to realize their
legitimate aspirations.

We urge the parties and neighbouring States to
continue to constructively engage with the Secretary-
General and his Personal Envoy without preconditions
and in good faith as they prepare for direct talks in
Geneva and beyond.

