Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr.
President, I wish to congratulate you, other members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General on the
referendum held in East Timor with the assistance of
Indonesia and Portugal and with the support of the entire
international community.

Undoubtedly, without the cooperation of the
Government of Indonesia, the action taken in East Timor
would not have yielded such important results. I wish to
point out that the more important developments which the
international community expects to witness following this
stage would also require the cooperation of the
Government of Indonesia as the main party to the
five-point Agreement.
We must safeguard the success of the United
Nations in organizing and holding the referendum, as well
as the signing of the five-point Agreement. In this
connection, guided by recognized principles of
international law, including the right of peoples to self-
determination, and in View of the acceptance by the
Government of Indonesia of the outcome of the
referendum, it is incumbent upon us as a whole - that is,
on the entire international community - to make a
concerted effort, with the help of the Government of
Indonesia, to put an end to the violence in East Timor as
soon as possible.

The state of affairs in East Timor and the violence
there is a cause for deep concern on the part of the
international community. The Islamic Republic of Iran
expresses its concern at the situation, notes with
appreciation the efforts of the United Nations and
supports any measure it would deem necessary to help put
an immediate end to the violence in East Timor. My
Government hopes that the international community will
take the sensitive situation of the people and the
Government of Indonesia into account and assist them in
adopting effective measures to bring the tragedy in East
Timor to an early conclusion.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is seriously concerned
about, and deeply regrets, the violence in East Timor. We
believe any intervention in the current crisis without prior
coordination with the United Nations and the Government
of Indonesia will exacerbate the crisis, and that the only
solution is the continuation of negotiations to reach a
political settlement under the auspices of the United
Nations. I hope that through dialogue, mutual
understanding and cooperation along the lines of the
efforts of the United Nations, we will soon witness peace
and stability in East Timor, and that, by promoting
democracy and the rule of law, violence and instability
will be halted in that region.

 

