Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
also take this opportunity to extend my delegation's
sincere congratulations to the new members of the
Council - Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria - and to wish them every
success in upholding their responsibility to fulfil their
duties over the next two years. Likewise, my warm
appreciation goes to the outgoing members of the
Council: Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, Libya and
Viet Nam.
One year ago, Gaza faced an all-out attack, the
so-called Operation Cast Lead. During that barbaric
operation, the Israeli regime killed or maimed thousands
of besieged innocent Palestinians, including women
and children, and wilfully and systematically targeted
civilian infrastructure and facilities. Even the United
Nations was not spared the Israeli atrocities, as the
compound of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East was
deliberately shelled by the Israeli army. There is no
doubt that the Israeli acts in Gaza amounted to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

Almost one year has passed since then but,
despite all efforts on the part of the United Nations,
there is still no prospect of justice for the victims. The
Israeli regime continues to defy the will of the
international community and persists in the Palestinian
blockade, causing an unprecedented humanitarian crisis
in Gaza.

These violations of international norms and
principles are not limited only to Gaza. The persistent
assault against the Islamic and Christian holy places in
Jerusalem, the continued construction of the separation
wall, the excavation work in and around the holy
mosque, the revocation of Palestinian residency rights
in the city, the forced eviction of Palestinian families
from the city and the imposition of severe restrictions
on movement are but some of the illegal acts carried
out by the Israeli regime in the West Bank. Despite
strong international condemnation, illegal settlements
are being expanded much faster than in the past, and
more and more Palestinian houses are being
demolished. The illegal decision to build new housing
units is a move undoubtedly geared at altering the
demographic composition and architectural, cultural
and religious character of the Palestinian territories,
particularly in Jerusalem and its surrounding areas.

On 5 November 2009, the General Assembly
adopted its resolution 64/ 10 on the follow-up to the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict. That resolution constitutes an
important step forward in remedying the violations of
the Israeli regime in Gaza, so vividly authenticated in
the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). We expect the
necessary action to be taken by the relevant bodies of
the United Nations, including the Security Council, in
order to put an end to the culture of impunity for Israeli
war crimes and crimes against humanity. If criminals
were brought to justice, room for criminal acts by those
who possess the motives and the madness to commit
them would be restricted. Impunity for perpetrators of
crimes of a grave nature is, in itself, a cause of and an
incentive for further atrocities.

Unfortunately, it seems that, for certain members
of this Council, the lives of the Palestinians and their
long suffering under the occupation and suppression do
not count, as the massacre of hundreds of Palestinians,
including dozens of women and children, is not worthy
of the least consideration, let alone meaningful firm
action. That is true with regard to the illegal detention
of more than 11,000 Palestinians, including hundreds
of women and children. Certain members of the
Council are used to giving long speeches on human
rights, and yet their true stance was revealed by the
result of the voting in the General Assembly on
resolution 64/ 10 on the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by Israel in Gaza. That is a clear
example of double standards, which is detrimental to
the cause of justice and human rights.

We hope that in the next few months, when
United Nations bodies endeavour to follow up on the
Goldstone report on the atrocities committed by the
Israeli regime in Gaza, we will see them revisit their
unwavering and unconditional support for the Israeli
regime.

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating its land, sea and airspace and by
refusing to withdraw from Lebanese occupied land in
Shab'a, the Kafr Shuba hills and the northern part of
Ghajar village. It also continues its occupation of the
occupied Syrian Golan. That regime should
immediately and fully withdraw from those occupied
territories, in compliance with the most basic principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter.

The question of Palestine is the most urgent issue
that the international community continues to face, and
it needs swift and comprehensive attention.
Undoubtedly, attaining a peaceful and just settlement
of the question of Palestine is imperative for the
realization of comprehensive and lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East and beyond. Occupation,
aggression, State terrorism, expulsion, intimidation, the
setting up of new settlements, the construction of the
separation wall and attempts to change the
demographic and cultural identity of the occupied land
will not bring peace in the Middle East. Those are
undoubtedly most serious and gross violations of
United Nations resolutions, especially Security Council
resolutions, and must therefore be dealt with urgently
and appropriately by the Council and other United
Nations bodies in a resolute and decisive manner.

In conclusion, in our View, a lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible through
justice and by ending discrimination and the occupation
of Palestine and other occupied territories. Today,
which coincides with the first anniversary of the tragic
events in Gaza, we need to act collectively to
demonstrate our unqualified support for the cause of
Palestine and to rally to the assistance of those who
have been deprived of their rights. Lifting the blockade,
starting the reconstruction of Gaza and putting an end
to the illegal acts in the West Bank are among the most
urgent Palestinian issues. We have a common duty and
responsibility to offer multifaceted support to the
Palestinians, whether in Gaza or in the West Bank. Let
us hope that oppression and occupation will end and
that justice and freedom will prevail in the Palestinian
occupied territories.

