Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
extending the Indonesian delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the latest developments
in the implementation of the peace accords in Angola and
on the operation of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III). The report clearly shows that the
process of implementation of most of the military tasks set
out in the peace accords has begun. However, they have not
yet been finalized. While my delegation welcomes the
positive developments and the initiatives taken by the
parties, as well as their willingness to work cooperatively,
the pace of the peace process remains slow. It is in this
respect that my delegation reaffirms how important it is for
the Government of Angola and UNITA to fulfil promptly
their obligations in accordance with the "Acordos de Paz",
the Lusaka Protocol and all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

My delegation is furthermore cognizant of the close
links between the military and political aspects of the peace
process. It is therefore imperative for both parties to make
progress in the military aspects, in order to provide the
necessary impetus for the political aspect to move forward.
We are of the opinion that, once the first stages of the
military tasks have been implemented, the parties concerned
should faithfully begin the process of demobilizing former
combatants, vacating them from the quartering areas and
reintegrating them into civilian society. Those steps, which
are prerequisites for ensuring stability and consolidation of
the peace process, require close cooperation between the
parties and assistance from the international community.

My delegation has taken note that ceasefire violations
have declined. Nonetheless, we also note that the security
situation in the country remains volatile, and many areas
are still unsafe. In this context, we would like to urge both
parties, particularly UNITA, to remove all illegal
checkpoints that obstruct the free circulation of people and
goods throughout the country. The report attests that over
1 million internally displaced persons continue to rely on
humanitarian assistance instead of being able to return to
their homes to lead productive and independent lives.
Moreover, my delegation considers it very important and
necessary to ensure the safety of United Nations and other
international personnel and premises, as well as to
guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
humanitarian supplies throughout the country.

The completion of the military tasks will allow the
peace process to focus on the key outstanding political
issues. My delegation continues to encourage direct talks
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, which,
in our view, would promote confidence and mutual
understanding between the parties in order to move
towards achieving national reconciliation. Thus, my
delegation hopes that the parties will resolve the problem
of the return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation, the reaching of an
agreement on the status of the President of UNITA before
31 December 1996 and the extension of the State
administration throughout the country. In this regard, my
delegation is pleased to note that these have already been
reflected in operative paragraphs 9 and 10 of the draft
resolution now before the Council.

Parallel to the political initiatives necessary to
reconcile the country, much still needs to be done on the
economic front to reconstruct Angola. In this respect, my
delegation is cognizant of the work carried out by
UNAVEM. III and other United Nations agencies in
establishing programmes to permit Angola to rid itself of
the remnants of war and to rebuild itself. My delegation
is of the view that the international community should
fulfil expeditiously its pledges in providing assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country's
economy in order to consolidate the gains achieved in the
peace process, as expressed in paragraph 19.
The issue of mine clearance in Angola is, indeed, an
important matter. The impact of mines affects all facets
of national life and hinders society's return to normal life.
The disastrous effects of landmines can be curbed through
technical and financial assistance. In this regard, we fully
support operative paragraph 17 of the draft resolution.
This demining programme, which includes mine clearance
and road rehabilitation efforts, human rights education
campaigns, the formation of a national police force and
the Community Rehabilitation Programme, are all
testimony to the United Nation's dedication to seeing
peace last in Angola.

Finally, with regard to the future role of the United
Nations, we fully share the Secretary-General's
observation, contained in paragraph 33 of the report, that
the withdrawal of UNAVEM. III's formed military units
should be conducted gradually, commensurate with the

 

progress achieved in the peace process. This is precisely
because of UNAVEM. III's positive influence on the
military and political situation in the country. We take note
of the Secretary-General's recommendation for a new form
of mandate, focused more on political, police, human rights
and humanitarian activities, including mine clearance, once
the military components are no longer needed. This
mandate would permit follow-up and continuity, with the
United Nations presence, to consolidate the gains made in
the peace process, thus ensuring a lasting peace in Angola.

On the basis of these observations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution extending the mandate
of UNAVEM. III until 28 February 1997.

