Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his detailed briefing
on the bimonthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1113), and the assessments by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General on the first phase of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

We would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the positive aspects of the issue, which have been chiefly
in the security sector, as we also saw during the previous
reporting period. The fact that have been no clashes
between the Sudanese Government and the rebel groups
in Darfur for a subsequent reporting period represents
significant progress. In that regard, we welcome
the Government's decision to extend the unilateral
ceasefire to 31 March, creating an environment that will
make it possible for the Government and UNAMID to
focus their efforts on consolidating peace in Darfur and
on the political process, by addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict, such as land-ownership issues,
and promoting development in that area.

Another aspect we would like to emphasize is the
progress that has been made with the weapons-collection

campaign promoted by the Government. Its success is
essential to improving security in local communities
and building a stable and sustainable peace. We should
prevent any possible disputes and foster commitment
to the process on the part both of civilians and militias.
This Government-initiated process aligns with
UNAMID's peacebuilding efforts and needs committed
support from the international community.
On the humanitarian front, it is clear that the
improved security conditions have prevented any
further displacement of civilians. While that is a
positive, however, the situation of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is still worrying, and no significant
improvements have been made despite the efforts of
the Government, agencies and humanitarian workers.
It is urgent that the international community support
the development of projects that will make it possible
for IDPs to obtain access to basic services and improve
their quality of life. We also express our thanks
for the work that is being done by the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the World Food Programme
and other humanitarian actors.

We would highlight the fact that new cases of
obstruction to humanitarian access have been reported.
However, access has been provided to people in Jebel
Marra, which reflects the good relationship between and
the joint work done by the Government and the various
relevant agencies. In addition, although the number
of cases of human rights violations and other types
of crimes has declined compared with the previous
period, we must redouble our efforts to put an end to
cases of illegal detentions and violence against women
and children, in particular sexual and gender-based
violence, and promote access of women to justice.

Bolivia believes that one of the main challenges
facing Sudan at the moment is the revitalization of
the political process. We welcome the work of the
Government to promote the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and stress that the only possible solution to
the crisis in the area is a political process that will
make it possible to resolve the outstanding issues
between the parties, primarily disputes with regard to
land ownership. Conflicts between communities, the
disarmament of the civilian population and militias,
and a permanent ceasefire, inter alia, are issues that
must be addressed.

We believe that the differences that exist with
regard to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
must be resolved, and we encourage those parties that
have not yet signed on to it to engage in a consultative
dialogue with the Government. We also welcome the
good offices ofthe Special Representative, Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, and members of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel.

Finally, we believe that in order to make progress
in development and to consolidate a stable peace in
Darfur, the Sudan needs the United Nations to work
together with the African Union and the international
community in general. We also commend the progress
that has been made in the process of reconfiguring
UNAMID, and we believe that we must strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations country team in order
to move on to the second phase and ensure a successful
drawdown of the Mission. We thank UNAMID for its
efforts and dedication to peacebuilding in Darfur.

