Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to thank the
Indonesian presidency of the Council for convening
today's open debate, the Secretary-General for his
annual report (S/2019/373) and briefing, and the briefers
for their presentations.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I wish to add some
remarks in my national capacity.

This year, we mark 20 years since the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and 70 years since the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions. And yet, 70 years later,
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties. Worse yet, the scale and severity of human
suffering in armed conflicts worldwide continue to grow
at an alarming pace. Today, many parties to conflicts
show blatant disregard for the principles governing
the conduct of hostilities. Quite the opposite - they
deliberately target civilians.

The most affected are the most vulnerable groups:
women, children, refugees, internally displaced
persons and people with disabilities. New ways and
means of armed conflict, such as the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State actors, increasingly urban
warfare and the indiscriminate use of explosives, are
putting even more civilians at risk of being killed,
injured or displaced.

Peacekeeping operations play a central role in
protecting civilians and it is essential that the Council
provide all peacekeeping missions with mandates in
which special emphasis is given to the protection of the
most vulnerable.

Slovenia has a history of assisting the victims of
armed conflict and it remains committed to alleviating
the pain of children affected by armed conflict,
including by providing psychological and physical
assistance and rehabilitation. In recent years, more
than 500 children have been rehabilitated in Slovenia.
Social rehabilitation training for pre-school and school
counsellors and a mine-risk education programme
are just two examples that have proven to be of great
importance for strengthening the overall well-being and
development of children affected by armed conflicts.

Slovenia also continuously advocates for respect
for treaty obligations and customary international
law protecting civilians. We fully support the use
preventive diplomacy and call for prevention and a
better response to large-scale violations ofhuman rights
and international humanitarian law. We repeat our call
on the Security Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations of
international humanitarian law, including by using
restrictive measures against State and non-State actors
in breach of international humanitarian law.

Ensuring accountability and fighting impunity,
which are key elements in the protection of civilians,
remain a major challenge. In that regard, the role
of international criminal justice, in particular the
International Criminal Court, has been recognized.
States must comply with their obligations under
international law to hold accountable perpetrators of
crimes committed against civilians.

Women have a very important role to play in
the protection of civilians, and their involvement is
crucial to finding the best ways to lessen the burden of
civilians in conflict situations. Exactly a month ago, we
called on all parts of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, to continue prioritizing this issue, and
further urged the Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations in
situations of armed conflicts (see S/PV.8514). Today
we again ask the Council to do its utmost to prevent,
investigate and, when necessary, take appropriate
actions to ensure accountability. We must continue to
maintain the safeguarding of humanitarian access and
respect for humanitarian principles at the core of our
endeavours to protect civilians and provide assistance
to them in situations of armed conflict. Impunity for
violations of international humanitarian law can no
longer be tolerated.

I would like to conclude by stressing that effective
peacebuilding and peacekeeping must involve the
entire United Nations. Mandates must be robust but still
flexible enough to ensure that protecting and assisting
civilian populations remain at their core. That demands
the Council's strong and continuing engagement.

