Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency and thank
you for organizing today's open debate. We appreciate
the important role that Kuwait has been playing
with regard to the issue of the working methods
of the Council, particularly by steering the related
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.

The leitmotif of today's open debate is probably
that we are still far from a transparent, accountable
and effective Council. That has to do not only with
the interaction between the Council and the wider
membership, but also with the dynamics in the Council,
particularly the relationship between the elected
members and permanent members, which also play
a large part. Finding ways to ensure increased and
better interaction between the Council and the wider
membership is crucial to improving the Council's
working methods. That entails keeping closed meetings
and informal consultations to a minimum. It also
requires ensuring the meaningful participation of States
with a legitimate stake in the Council's deliberations
throughout the decision-making process. Voices from
the field also need to be heard. Civil society must
be given more opportunities to brief the Council,
particularly on issues that make a difference.

Transparency is especially important for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and sanctions
regimes. The Council must cooperate more closely with
troop- and police-contributing countries. The success
of sanctions depends on the cooperation of all Member
States. The details of sanctions regimes must be more
accessible and transparent.

When it comes to the dynamics within the Council,
ensuring that the elected members are on an equal
footing with the permanent members is the absolute
minimum we should aim at to guarantee an effective and
accountable Council. Today, three permanent members
are the sole penholders on the overwhelming majority
of country situations on the Council's agenda. The
responsibility of penholdership should be distributed
evenly among permanent and elected members. Drafting
should also be carried out in an inclusive manner. The
penholders should engage in timely consultations with
all relevant actors with openness and flexibility.

Another improvement would be to better incorporate
conflict prevention into the Security Council's agenda.
The current experience indicates that the Council often
finds itself responding to crises in an incremental
manner, making more use of the tools at its disposal
only as situations deteriorate. There is broad consensus
among Member States on the need to enhance our
efforts on prevention, including through mediation
efforts. Better outcomes could be achieved and more
humanitarian tragedies prevented if the Council's tools
were utilized much earlier, without resorting to the veto
as a tool to advance national interests. The use or even
the threat of the use of the veto has proven to hamper
the most needed role that the Council has to play on
behalf of the entire United Nations membership.

Needless to say, we need to increase coordination
and cooperation between the Council and the other main
bodies of the United Nations. The Council is the main
organ for the maintenance of peace and security, but not
the only one. Council members should bear that in mind
in all their efforts and make more conscious efforts to
ensure better coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat,
as well as with the Peacebuilding Commission. More
interaction with regional organizations would also
contribute to the Council's effectiveness.

Finally, I would also like to emphasize that we
consider the topic of working methods to be one of the
components of the broader Security Council reform
agenda. Updating the working methods cannot be a
substitute for engaging in more substantive, forward-
looking discussions on Security Council reform. We
must continue to search for a constructive solution by
identifying common denominators to channel the debate
on the Council's reform agenda. In the meantime, we
need a Council that is more responsive to the United
Nations membership, which will be better placed
to meet the challenges of an increasingly complex
world. Improving transparency and effectiveness will
only enhance the legitimacy of this body, which is
much needed.

