Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): Horrible acts of
terrorism occur almost every day. Hardly any part of
the world is spared. Terrorism knows no borders. No
country is immune. No country, how big or small, can
succeed unilaterally. Terrorism can be combated
effectively only in a global multilateral framework.
The United Nations must be at the centre of our joint
efforts to counter terrorism.

I would like to thank Turkey and you personally,
Mr. President, for presiding over today's meeting. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Austria fully supports the draft presidential statement
to be adopted today, which sends a strong message of
the Council's determination to combat the scourge of
terrorism.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy provides the first universally agreed strategic
framework for combating terrorism in a holistic and
integrated manner. The success of the Strategy will
depend on its implementation through concrete
measures. A few weeks ago, the General Assembly
completed the second review of the implementation of
the Strategy. Some progress has been achieved, but
much more needs to be done to make the Strategy more
widely known and to implement it worldwide. In order
to better link the efforts of Member States in this regard,
in October 2009, together with Switzerland, Turkey,
Norway and other partners, Austria co-sponsored the first
International Workshop of National Counter-Terrorism
Focal Points in Vienna.

Coordination and cooperation are key to the
success of our counter-terrorism efforts. Member
States; United Nations organs and entities, including
the Security Council and the General Assembly; other
international, regional and subregional organizations;
as well as civil society and the private sector must all
work together in a coordinated manner. We encourage
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to continue its efforts to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system.

Austria calls upon the Security Council and its
three committees and expert groups dealing with
counter-terrorism to look at ways in which to better
support the work of the Task Force, incorporate the
Strategy into their work, and coordinate their activities
in a transparent and effective manner.

It is Austria's firm belief that respect for human
rights and the rule of law is a fundamental basis of all
efforts to combat terrorism. We all must ensure that
any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with
our obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law. The development of an effective and
rule of law-based national system of law enforcement
and criminal justice is an essential element to prevent
terrorist acts and to bring terrorists to justice. In this
context, we commend the work of the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which provides technical assistance
in legal and related aspects of counter-terrorism.

Austria is also committed to promoting the rule
of law in the daily work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies. In particular, as chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
Associated Individuals and Entities, Austria has
worked intensively to enhance due process and fair and
clear procedures. This year, the Committee concluded
the two-year review of its consolidated list. Of the 488
list entries examined, hundreds were updated and
almost 10 per cent removed.

The recent appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as
first Ombudsperson to receive de-listing requests in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009) constitutes
another major step forward. These steps will contribute
to promoting the fairness and effectiveness of the work
of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee. However, further
efforts will be necessary to improve fair and clear
procedures, in particular with regard to other sanctions
regimes.

Austria commends the progress of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) in addressing human
rights issues of relevance to resolution 1373 (2001).
However, there are still serious challenges to
implementing effective counter-terrorism measures
within a rule of law framework. In this regard, we call
for the development of best practices and guidelines to
ensure that all States adopt consistent approaches in the
field of human rights and counter-terrorism. A pro-active
approach of the CTC in this field is key to its
credibility and long-term success. The upcoming
renewal of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) will provide
an opportunity to affirm this commitment.

In the context of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), at the
comprehensive review in October 2009 Austria
spearheaded an initiative to raise awareness of the need
for strict respect of the rule of law, due process
standards and the protection of human rights in the
implementation and enforcement of resolution 1540
(2004). Austria also plans to host a meeting with
international and regional organizations relevant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Vienna on 15 and
16 December this year.

It is our firm conviction that we will be
successful only in combating terrorism in the long term
if we address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. We must win the hearts of the people
through dialogue and mutual trust. In this regard, we
highly commend the role of the Alliance of
Civilizations, led by Turkey and Spain. Austria is
proud to host the Fifth Annual Forum, given our long
tradition as a platform for dialogue, cooperation and

peace. As part of our dialogue initiatives to promote
trust and understanding among people of different
religions and cultures, in November 2010 Austria will
launch the first Arab-European Young Leaders Forum,
which will bring together emerging leaders from
politics, civil society, business and the environmental
sector in the European Union, Turkey and the Arab
world to discuss ways to implement responsible
leadership.

In conclusion, Austria once again welcomes
today's meeting, which underlines the United Nations
central role in countering terrorism and sends a strong
message that we all stand united to overcome the
global threat of terrorism.

