I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the States members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the OIC group. Our deliberations today are taking place at a critical time, characterized by distressing humanitarian and health challenges in the occupied Palestinian territory as aresult of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Additionally, the current political stalemate constitutes an obstacle hampering the achievement of a just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and continues to obstruct the realization of Palestinian rights, including to self-determination. In particular, the OIC group is concerned about the continued Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The recent approval by the Israeli authorities of the construction of more than 5,000 new settlement units is a blatant violation of international law and United Nations resolutions, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). Additionally, settlement activities further entrench the occupation, undermine the territorial integrity and contiguity of the Palestinian State and jeopardize the viability of the two-State solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders. Settlement activities must be completely and immediately halted. The OIC group also remains seriously concerned about the situation in East Jerusalem. We reaffirm that East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian territory. All illegal measures and decisions aimed at altering its demography and historical, legal, and political status are null and void under international law and United Nations resolutions, particularly resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and must accordingly be rejected by the international community. Another major concern is the deterioration of the social and economic conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory, which is further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the occupation. During the last monthly meeting on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.8762), Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov warned that "the health emergency is rapidly becoming a socioeconomic crisis" in the occupied Palestinian territory. He noted that the shocking 50 per cent unemployment rate in the Gaza Strip, where the humanitarian crisis is dire and conditions are deemed unliveable. Meanwhile, UNRWA is currently facing a funding gap of $200 million, which risks the suspension of some of the agency's essential services. In light of the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, the OIC group calls on the international community to pursue the following priorities. First, the Council should take the necessary measures to put an end to settlement activities and maintain the historical status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. Israel must stop all its illegal actions, including wall and settlement construction, land confiscation, the demolition of homes and properties and the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians. Secondly, the international community must intensify its efforts to break the deadlock in the political process. We encourage launching a credible, time-bound and multilaterally sponsored political process to realize the vision of the two-State solution, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, to which the OIC remains fully committed. We encourage in this regard any steps that are aimed at preserving the prospects of a just peace and advance its realization. Additionally, in this regard, the OIC group supports the call of the President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, on the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps, in cooperation with all members of the Security Council and the international Quartet, to convene a multilaterally-sponsored international peace conference, with full authority and with the participation of all concerned parties, and to re-engage in a meaningful peace process, based on international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Finally, we must provide humanitarian and financial assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees. The international community must also ensure that the occupied Palestinian territory has enough medical supplies and equipment to confront the pandemic. We must also provide more predictable and sufficient financial contributions to UNRWA and support its COVID-19 appeal. In conclusion, the OIC will continue to support the Palestinian people's efforts to regain their legitimate rights, including to freedom and independence within their sovereign State, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and resolving all final status issues, including the question of refugees, based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
