Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me also offer our
condolences on the passing of Mr. Amano to the people
of Japan and his family.

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her valuable briefing.

Our position is quite clear on this very important
issue. I will therefore focus primarily on the
latest developments.

We continue to be alarmed by the unceasing
provocations of the occupying Power, including its
destabilizing actions and violations of the situation and
status of Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. I wish to
reiterate three important points in that regard.

The first concerns the two-State solution and actions
that undermine it. We reaffirm that solution, based on
the 1967 lines, with Palestine and Israel living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition and
in conformity with relevant United Nations resolutions.
The international community must not budge an inch
from that platform and position.

Our objective must remain the realization of the two
States and the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as negotiated
outcomes for all final status issues. Any action that
contravenes that platform must be rejected. For that
reason, Indonesia strongly condemns Israel's illegal
construction and inauguration of the underground
tunnel and path towards Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as
clearly articulated at the extraordinary meeting of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation held last week
in Jeddah.

That is undoubtedly a clear violation of relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 476 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Together with the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the construction of
tunnels can also be seen as a de facto annexation.

The Council must defend the status and character
of the Old City of Jerusalem and its walls. That is
the obligation of the Council itself. We also strongly
condemn yesterday's arrogant, illegal and inhumane
pre-dawn destruction of Palestinian homes, including
occupied family homes, in the communities of Wadi
Al-Hummus and Sur Baher in the West Bank. Is it
possible to imagine one's house being demolished in
front of one's children's eyes, as the Permanent Observer
of the State of Palestine showed us earlier in the glaring
photo? I cannot imagine my house being demolished.

That is a further reason why the Council must act
in defence of its resolutions and the Palestinian people.
We must stop turning in circles or else we run the risk
of spiralling into the pit of oblivion.

My second point concerns the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Given
the continued use by the occupying Power of the
negative policies of restriction of movement, arbitrary
detentions, the use of force and the multiple-year
blockade of Gaza, it is no surprise that the humanitarian
conditions have continued to deteriorate. Israel also
continues to withhold tax revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. Let me stress again that we cannot question
the Authority's refusal to accept any transfer that is less
than the full amount owed to it and we must demand
that Israel not take what is not Israel's.

With regard to the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, we once again appeal to the international
community to continue to ensure reliable and sustainable
funding for the Agency's life-saving services. An
agency that has carried out many years of public service
for humankind and demonstrated impartiality and the
best of intentions should be supported by us all.

Thirdly, I wish to comment on the need to
strengthen Palestinian economic capacity. It is of the
greatest importance that we work towards the optimal
economic capacity of Palestinians, but we caution that
economic assistance cannot be used as a substitute for
a final political settlement since that could be exploited
by the occupying Power to gain time to advance its
agenda, including its settlements, thereby making a
solution more and more difficult to achieve.

Indonesia continues to work through various
mechanisms to try to strengthen the economic capacity
of Palestine. Earlier this month in Jericho, Indonesia and
other East Asian countries met at the fourth Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development in order to strengthen efforts
to support Palestine through economic and trade
cooperation and joint investments. We encourage other
members of the international community to consider
similar undertakings in the interest of humankind.

As I promised, my statement will not be long since
many of our points have already been alluded to many
times in our previous statements. I would, however,
like to address one important issue.

This morning we heard a statement that made
the point that the status of Jerusalem will be not be
resolved in this Chamber or any capital, but through
direct negotiation between the two parties, as well as an
appeal to create a conducive environment.

But how does one create a conducive environment
when illegal settlements continue, when buildings
are being demolished before children's eyes, when a
nine-year-old Palestinian boy can be shot by Israeli
authorities and when arbitrary detentions and many
other human rights violations persist? How can one
achieve peace when one does not believe in international
law and international humanitarian law? And if we do
not believe in international law and Security Council
resolutions, then let us all together throw the beautiful
Charter of the United Nations into the East River.

