Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over the Security Council on this important occasion for
Africa, and we are pleased also that the Council is in the
hands of your country's Ambassador during the month of
February.

At the same time, I should like to convey to the
Argentine delegation our great appreciation of the good
work done by Ambassador Cardenas during the month of
January.

France would also like to welcome the impressive
delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
which is honouring us by participating in this Council
meeting on Angola. The delegation's presence shows how
interested Africa as a whole is in the question of Angola.
For us, this is an additional guarantee that should make it
possible for the Angolans to put an end to a fratricidal war
and return to the path of democracy and progress. In this
connection, my Government welcomes the role that OAU
intends to continue to play in resolving the Angolan
conflict. The involvement of regional organizations in
solving crises is indeed a great advantage and vital to the
success of the United Nations.

The Security Council will shortly be adopting a draft
resolution establishing the third phase of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). This
operation will include more than 7,000 personnelThe draft
resolution provides a full framework for United Nations
actions over the next two years. Indeed, UNAVEM. III, as
established, will have a clear mandate enabling it to
underpin the efforts of the Angolan Government and
UNITA to implement the Lusaka agreements signed on
15 November last until presidential elections are held and
the elected President of the Republic assumes office.

In the mandate, nothing has been overlooked.
UNAVEM. III will perform political, military, police,
humanitarian and electoral duties. We note also that
special attention is given to mine clearance operations -
which, inter alia, will make it easier for refugees to
return - and to supplying the Angolans with
information. My Government is also glad that the
Secretariat has learned from past experience and that a
United Nations radio station will soon be brought into
service in Angola.

In adopting this draft resolution, the Council is not,
however, giving carte blanche to the Angolan
Government and UNITA. In 1992, the electoral process,
monitored by the United Nations, was not enough to put
an end to the Angolan crisis. This failure must not be
repeated.

The United Nations involvement in Angola, having
gone on for more than three years, should now enjoy full
cooperation from the Angolan Government and UNITA.
This cooperation is a prerequisite for the deployment of
the infantry battalions that will be the mainstay of
UNAVEM. III. Moreover, the Security Council states that
it intends to review the United Nations role in Angola
should the Secretary-General report that the cooperation
required from the parties falls short or is slow in coming.
For my delegation, this provision is no mere formality.

The Angolan Government and UN ITA negotiated the
terms of the Lusaka agreement with a certain fierce
resolve. In this connection, we pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, who, with his patience and skill, was able
to bring the two parties together to sign the document.
We now hope that the Angolan Government and UN ITA
will show the same fierce resolve in fulfilling the
obligations that they have taken upon themselves.

The Security Council has been kept scrupulously
informed of the course of the negotiations. The draft
resolution provides that it should also be scrupulously
kept abreast of the details of their implementation.

Ten years ago Southern Africa was riven by every
conflict imaginable. Peace and democracy have gradually
triumphed in this part of the continent - first in
Namibia, then in South Africa, then in Mozambique. Now
only Angola is left. The Angolan people have shown
many a time and oft that they want peace and national
reconciliation. We hope that the opportunity they are now
being given to end the war will enable them finally to
turn over a new page in their history. My country, for its
part, will do its utmost to ensure that this is so.

 

