The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania.

1 thank Mr. Antonio Guterres, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for his very
elaborate and informative presentation on the
commendable work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
protecting and assisting refugees around the world. I
also wish to recognize the presence of Ms. Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and congratulate her on her recent
appointment as Assistant High Commissioner for
Refugees.

We have received, hosted and protected refugees
from neighbouring countries in the Great Lakes region
and southern Africa continuously for the past 45 years.
Tanzania has been working with UNHCR since 1964.
Currently, there are a total of 532,240 refugees -
mainly from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Somalia - in the United Republic of
Tanzania. This is still the highest number in Africa,
despite the limited voluntary repatriation to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi that
has started.

Tanzania grants asylum as a humanitarian
imperative to our neighbours and as an international
obligation. We have learned the importance of
tolerance and compassion for strangers and those in
distress. At the same time, as a host country, we have
experienced the challenges of mixed flows and the
need to separate genuine asylum-seekers from those
with ulterior motives, such as criminals, and those
misusing the asylum channel for social and economic
reasons. In a region of growing demographic pressures,
this can be a very complicated exercise.
For us as a host country, areas of concern on
refugee issues include dwindling levels of assistance to
refugees, pressure on the environment and
infrastructure in the refugee hosting areas, the
deterioration of public safety and security due to arms
and light weapons carried by some refugees,
inadequate funding for UNHCR repatriation operations
and poor receiving capacity for returnees in countries
of return, which are impeding voluntary repatriation.

In our region, where we have witnessed a
genocide in Rwanda, we need to embrace the concept
of the responsibility to protect civilian populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We also reiterate the need to
strengthen the protection of humanitarian workers in
zones of conflict.

The refugee problem can be eased and effectively
resolved by addressing its root causes, in order to
prevent conflicts, including by heeding early warning
signals, such as those given by UNHCR in eastern
Sudan. The resolution of residual conflicts in our
region - including through the Great Lakes process -
by the countries of the region should be encouraged
and supported in the context of Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005). We must rise up to address the
unfolding crisis in Darfur. We commend the work done
there by humanitarian agencies, such as UNHCR, but
humanitarian action has to be accompanied by
sustained and coordinated political and security-related
actions carried out by the Council in partnership with
the African Union.

I recall that UNHCR was one of the agencies that
pioneered, and advocated the need for, a seamless
transition from relief to development in post-conflict
situations. The recently established Peacebuilding
Commission, therefore, is a much-needed institution
for the consolidation of peace and security for
countries emerging from conflict in our Great Lakes
region. It is our hope that it will be adequately
resourced to fill the development gap in post-conflict
countries and to stabilize nascent Governments and
shattered societies.

We wish to reaffirm the commitment made by our
leaders at the summit last September to safeguard the
principle of refugee protection. We urge shared
responsibility in protecting refugees and in finding
durable solutions to the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and we endorse the idea
of burden-sharing with host countries. We concur fully
with the observations made by the representative of
Japan.
Finally, like our Danish colleague, we would like
to know the status of UNHCR's funding for its
programmes for refugees, especially in the light of the
newly acquired responsibility of the cluster approach to
responding to situations involving internally displaced
persons. We would also like to hear about the
constraints faced in meeting the requirements of
returnees, specifically in countries such as Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres to respond to
comments and questions raised.

