Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by joining previous speakers in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his comprehensive
briefing and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2008/688). My delegation also thanks the
representative of the United States for his statement on
behalf of the multinational force in Iraq. We also
greatly appreciate the information provided by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.
We are encouraged by the overall improvement in
the security situation in Iraq. We believe that this
accomplishment will provide Iraq with the opportunity
to make further progress in its political processes and
economic development. It is critical that the
encouraging achievement be maintained and
strengthened. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the continued efforts by the Government of Iraq to
build the capacity of the Iraqi security forces. The
recent transfer of security responsibilities from the
multinational force to the Iraqi army in some
governorates is a sign of the increased capacity of the
Iraqi security forces.

My delegation also recognizes that, despite the
improvement, Iraq continues to face serious security
challenges. We believe that addressing the persistence
of security threats will require not only military
measures but also the promotion of dialogue and
national reconciliation across political, ethnic and
sectarian lines. Peace and stability in Iraq could also be
underpinned by tangible progress in socio-economic
reconstruction, strong steps to bolster the human rights
protection system to guarantee the rights of Iraqi
citizens and the promotion of good governance and the
rule of law.

Electoral democracy is an important part of
political stability in Iraq. My delegation, in that regard,
is particularly encouraged by the adoption of the
provincial election law in September 2008, which will
serve as the legal basis for the conduct of the
forthcoming provincial elections in early 2009. We are
hopeful that those elections will advance political
dialogue, establish representative provincial councils
and empower community leaders to meet the needs of
local citizens in cooperation with the Government of
Iraq.

In ensuring political stability and economic
progress, Iraq will continue to require the support of
countries in the region. In that regard, we welcome the
increasing cooperation between Iraq and other
countries as well as institutions in the region. We are of
the view that the sustained work of the working groups
on Iraqi border security, refugees and energy could
further enhance such cooperation.

We continue to attach primary importance to the
International Compact with Iraq, serving as a new
partnership between Iraq and the international
community in order to achieve peace, consolidation
and comprehensive development. We recognize the
importance of the increased presence of international
agencies in Baghdad and at the provincial level, in
order to support various initiatives within the
framework of the Compact. We therefore commend the
United Nations agencies, such as the World Food
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Health
Organization for establishing a permanent presence in
Iraq.

The humanitarian situation of the Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) remains a
matter of concern to my delegation. International
support aimed at meeting their urgent needs remains
critical. The United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq signed in August 2008 by the United Nations and
the Government of Iraq should provide a framework
not only for enhancing economic development but also
for mitigating the difficulties that Iraqi refugees and
IDPs continue to face. We welcome the fact that
increasing numbers of refugees and IDPs are returning
to Iraq and the measures taken by the Government of
Iraq to facilitate their return.

We remain concerned over the continued
incidence of civilian casualties in Iraq. In that regard,
my Government underlines the importance of respect
for international humanitarian and human rights law
and for appropriate measures to ensure the protection
of civilians.

Indonesia continues to attach primary importance
to UNAMI's role and contribution to the efforts of the
Government of Iraq in reconstruction and development,
conducting elections and promoting human rights,
good governance and the rule of law. We commend
UNAMI for its continued support for the enhancement
of relations between Iraq and the countries of the
region with a view to promoting an agenda of mutual
collaboration and partnership.

Finally, in light of the fifth anniversary of the
heinous terrorist attack on the United Nations office in
Baghdad in 2003, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the staff members and others who became the
victims of the heinous attack. Their dedication and
sacrifices will always be remembered.

