Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to welcome the presence of
the Secretary-General at our meeting today. I should
also like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I am confident that, under
your leadership, the Council will be able to accomplish
its task successfully. I would like to assure you of our
full support in your work. In addition, I should like to
take this opportunity to thank the representative of
Spain for his outstanding performance as President last
month.

The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
situation in Liberia. We call upon all Liberian factions
to abide by their commitments. We hope that, in the
people's interests, they will intensify their constructive
negotiations in order to reach a consensus on
arrangements for a transitional Government as soon as
possible.

We welcome the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council, which authorizes the deployment of a
Multinational Force to Liberia. The resolution has
demonstrated the determination of the United Nations
in seeking a political solution to the Liberian question.

We have taken note of the concerns of a number
of members with regard to paragraph 7 of the
resolution, and we regret that a compromise solution
could not be found on that point by the parties
concerned. We hope that the resolution can contribute
to stabilizing the Liberian situation, to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis in its capital and to promoting a
peaceful solution to the Liberian question.

China appreciates the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in promoting the peace
process. We highly value the decisions reached at the
recent ECOWAS summit, and we call upon the
international community to provide assistance to the
ECOWAS peacekeeping force. We hope that
cooperation between the United Nations and ECOWAS
can be further strengthened so that, together, they can
help the parties in Liberia to end their conflict and to
achieve stability and peace in the country soon. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General on
the timely deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission.

