Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency and share your tribute to your able
predecessor.

It is very good to see Ms. Del Ponte back in the
Council. We would like to pay tribute to the vigorous
and professional way in which she is going about her
very complex and important business. The United
Kingdom is strongly committed to these two Tribunals.
We have always supported and will continue to support
fully the work of the Prosecutor in bringing to justice
those responsible for the horrors in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.

We are pleased by the progress that has been
made in recent months. We see many positive
developments, such as the arrests in Europe of
important military and political leaders who allegedly
played key roles in the atrocities in Bosnia and
Rwanda. There have been several important judgments
in the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The new Croatian
Government has made significant moves towards
meeting its obligations to ICTY, and we are glad to see
much improved relations between the ICTR and
Rwanda, helped by Ms. Del Ponte's own appearance on
a couple of occasions at the Tribunal in Arusha and her
eventually managing to get into Rwanda with that Visa.
We thank her for that continued effort. It is right that
the Rwanda Tribunal continues to receive high-level
attention.

Nevertheless, there are too many indictees who
remain at large, including senior ones. We want to see
all States fulfilling their obligation under Security
Council resolutions to arrest indictees when they are in
their jurisdiction and we condemn Belgrade's
continuing blatant refusal to implement mandatory
Council resolutions which call for cooperation with the
Yugoslav Tribunal. In Rwanda, it is all too clear from
Ms. Del Ponte's briefing this morning that the country
continues to face a very distressing situation.

As more arrests take place - and we welcome
the signs from Ms. Del Ponte that more indictees are
going to be pursued - it is important that both
Tribunals be in a position to try the indictees
expeditiously. We are concerned by the Prosecutor's
report of continuing problems in reducing delays, and
we understand why she is calling for more resources.
We welcome the recent United Nations Expert Group's
report, and efforts made by both Tribunals to
implement their recommendations. We look forward to
seeing further improvements in the Tribunals'
efficiency. We also welcome the initiative by the ICTY
judges in seeking to identify additional measures which
can be taken to speed up the pre-trial and trial
procedures. We look forward to seeing President
Jorda's report on these aspects and to hearing the
Secretary-General's views on the judges' ideas.

