Mr. Mbabazi (Uganda): On behalf of the
Political Committee and on my own behalf, I wish to
express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, to the
members of the Security Council delegation who
visited our region last month, and to the Security
Council as a whole for the invitation it extended to the
Political Committee to come to New York to share
information and exchange views on the process of
pacification of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We come with the hope and confidence that this
interaction will result in greater and faster engagement
of the United Nations in this process, for which the
people of Congo and the region have waited so long.

The Agreement for a ceasefire in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, popularly known as the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, was freely negotiated, agreed
and signed by all the then belligerents. It was
welcomed and adopted by the international community,
including the United Nations, as the best formula for
the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Agreement addresses the two dimensions of
the conflict - that is, the internal Congolese political
question and the regional security concerns of the
Congo itself and those of its neighbours. It provides,
among other things, for the cessation of hostilities; the
creation of a new political dispensation in the Congo
through inter-Congolese political negotiations; the
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration of all of the armed groups in the Congo;
and the withdrawal of all foreign forces. It further
provides for the normalization of the situation at the
borders of the Congo with a view to stopping any illicit
trafficking of arms and the infiltration of armed groups
across the borders.

The United Nations was requested, in pursuance
of its duty to maintain international peace and security,
to take charge of the implementation of the Agreement.
The parties also created the Joint Military Commission
(JMC), where they are all represented, to develop this
process of implementation.

Although, as you correctly observed, Mr.
President, the timetable for the implementation of the
Agreement, signed on 10 July 1999 by the States
parties and in August by the armed Congolese
rebellion, has not been met, the Agreement has held,
the various violations, many of which you referred to,
Mr. President, notwithstanding. These violations
occurred largely because the mechanism the Agreement
put in place to manage the implementation process has
to date not been fully operationalized.

The United Nations initially adopted what
appeared to be a very cautious approach to its
involvement in this implementation process. The
Political Committee was therefore delighted when last
January the Security Council decided to pay great
attention to the conflict in the Congo, a process that has
culminated in our meeting with the Council today.

We appreciated very deeply the visit of the
Security Council delegation, led by Richard Holbrooke,
to the region last month. For the first time we felt that,
as a result of that visit, a partnership between us and
the United Nations had begun in earnest. We therefore
have come to New York in that spirit of partnership in
the continuing dialogue, begun on 6 May in Lusaka, on
how to quickly and realistically achieve our commonly
shared desire to bring peace not only to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but to the region as a whole.

The Political Committee, working together with
the Joint Military Commission and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), under the able and dedicated
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamel Morjane, and
his staff, has laid the groundwork for the
implementation of the Lusaka accord. We adopted on 8
April last in Kampala the plan for the disengagement
and redeployment of forces in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Although its timetable has not been fully
met, sub-plans for the disengagement of forces in each
area were prepared, but they could not be finalized
because the JMC and MONUC lack the resources
required to carry out verification of the information
given by each party.

We look forward to discussing this question of
lack of resources with the Council during our visit
here, so that we can overcome this debilitating
limitation to the process of implementation. We expect
that when the planning teams of the JMC and MONUC
have verified the information given to them by each
party and new defensive positions have been agreed,
then the forces will begin to disengage to create the 30-
kilometre-wide disengagement zone.

The Political Committee, at its last meeting in
Lusaka, considered and adopted mechanisms for the
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration of members of all of the armed groups.

On the question of the release and exchange of
prisoners of war, the Political Committee requested the
parties concerned to expedite the process by quickly
complying with the requirements of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Red Crescent. I have
reliable information that all of the parties have since
done so. I should expect the release and exchange of
prisoners of war to commence by the end of this week.
I share the Council's optimism that this could begin
even in the course of our deliberations here in New
York.

On the issue of the inter-Congolese political
negotiations, the national dialogue has not commenced.
The Political Committee, however, welcomed the
holding of the preparatory meeting in Cotonou, Benin,
on 6 June, as a positive step in the right direction. The
Committee expressed its appreciation to Sir Ketumile
Masire for his efforts in facilitating the national
dialogue and called on all of the Congolese to honour
their obligations under the Agreement.

It is clear that the implementation of Lusaka has
not gone according to the plan we originally worked
out. Indeed, the Political Committee recognizes that
there are enormous challenges to the implementation of
this accord. The most recent challenge - which you
referred to, Mr. President - was the fighting in
Kisangani between the Rwandan and Ugandan forces.
The Committee expressed its concern over this
regrettable development, and, while welcoming the
efforts to bring the situation in Kisangani back to
normal, called on Rwanda and Uganda to immediately
bring an end to the fighting and to implement the
agreement between them for the demilitarization of
Kisangani. I am glad to inform the Council that the
fighting has since stopped.

The Political Committee restates the reaffirmation
by our leaders last January of our strong commitment
to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and reiterates our
determination for its full and expeditious
implementation. All we ask of the United Nations and
the international community as a whole is that they
lend us their unqualified support in the implementation
of this accord, which we freely reached among
ourselves.

