Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Ould Abdallah for his briefing and exemplary work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
also welcome the presence of and briefings by
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia (TFG) and Commissioner
Lamamra.

A firm commitment was made by the
international community a year ago at the donors
conference in Brussels to support Somalia and, in
particular, the TFG. One year later, we find that the
situation in Somalia remains highly volatile and
continues to be a source of deep concern. A quarter of
the pledges made at Brussels have not yet been
disbursed. The situation therefore requires a renewed
commitment to translating the political compact into
action.

First, we urge the TFG to continue to strengthen
its efforts for political reconciliation and outreach.
Japan commends the recent agreement between the
TFG and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a, which should be
immediately put into force. We also hope that the TFG
will continue to reach out to opposition groups to
achieve more inclusive administration.

The institution-building effort of the TFG is
crucially important. The training of and financial
assistance to Somali security personnel are essential to
building the Somali security institutions. The TFG's
capacity for financial management and to provide basic
services is also the basis for its governance. The major
challenge is how to make those efforts persistent and
sustainable. The international community must
concentrate its assistance to the TFG. We must ensure
that we stop any support to groups jeopardizing the
peace process and prevent activities against the TFG.

The international community, for its part, should
honour its commitment to supporting the efforts of the
TFG. With respect to security, Japan commends the
indispensable role played by the troops of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We are pleased
that the troop level has now reached 7,000 with the
deployment of a fourth battalion by Burundi. Japan
expresses sincere appreciation for the tremendous work
done by the troops of Uganda and Burundi under very
difficult conditions.

The deployment of seven AMISOM. police
personnel to train the Somali police in Mogadishu is a
small but positive step. We hope that more police
personnel will be deployed as soon as security
conditions permit. Japan appreciates the valuable
support of the logistical package provided by the
Secretariat to AMISOM. We welcome the
dissemination of balanced information through public
radio. The efforts to train the military and police
personnel of the TFG need to be accompanied by
equipment and infrastructure support.

We hope that the most effective use will be made
of the Trust Funds in support of AMISOM. and Somali
security institutions. Japan is pleased with the
contributions that have been made to support these
efforts. I add my voice to the appeal for the remaining
25 per cent of the pledges made at the Brussels
conference to be disbursed as soon as possible.

Humanitarian assistance plays an indispensable
role in the lives of millions of people in Somalia. Japan
condemns the obstruction and intimidation by
opposition groups to hinder the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It is our strong hope that the
assistance provided through the World Food
Programme will be fully implemented as soon as the
independent review clarifies the allegations of misuse.
We hope that the emergency rehabilitation project at
the Port of Mogadishu, to be implemented by the
World Food Programme with Japanese support, will
contribute to efficient food delivery and customs
revenues for the TFG. It will also be important to
strengthen the cooperation between the TFG, Puntland
and Somaliland with a view to long-term
reconstruction and development throughout Somalia.

To achieve peace and stability in Somalia, the
Security Council endorsed a three-stage incremental
approach to provide support for AMISOM. and the
early establishment of a United Nations presence in
Somalia. Improvement in security is of course a
prerequisite to making progress in the three-stage
approach. We hope that the TFG will make every effort
to make effective use of international support and to
strengthen its governance.

The issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia is
closely linked to the situation on land. Regrettably, the
incidents of piracy have not decreased in momentum.
Those activities are now expanding East, far from the
shore to the Somali Basin and close to the Seychelles.
The fight against piracy requires a multifaceted and
collective international approach. The efforts of the
TFG, Somaliland and Puntland to coordinate their
counter-piracy actions should be encouraged. The
international community must support the stabilization
of Somalia, capacity-building in neighbouring
countries, and the creation of productive employment
opportunities for young people.

Japan is committed to making active
contributions, including at the upcoming meeting of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

