Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to convey
my deep appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Nasser
Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jordan, and to you, Mrs. Dina Kawar, for
having organized this debate on the situation in Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

The Palestinian issue is a long-standing issue in
the field of international peace and security, and its
resolution deserves top priority. All will agree with
me that the people of Palestine cannot live with this
uncertainty of life and livelihood forever.

We regret that the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remain unheeded. The people
in the occupied territories continue to suffer due to
Israel's blockades, closures, confiscation of land and
demolition of houses. The illegal separation walls
continue to divide and isolate communities, destroying
livelihoods and preventing people from accessing their
jobs, families, markets, schools and hospitals. Let us
tear down these walls once and for all.
The Gaza borders have been subject to a regime of
closure that is without precedent anywhere. This closure
is tantamount to the strangulation of an entire population
in the form of collective punishment. The quality of life
ofthe Palestinians had already diminished to subsistence
levels; these systematic efforts at strangulation erupt
in periodic escalations of violence and lead to further
despair and destitution. Should we believe that Israel is
doing so purposefully to generate fear, fury and distress
among the Palestinians? We deplore these policies of
collective punishment - policies of forcing Palestinian
people off their land; detaining people for a long time
without charge; restricting freedom of speech, freedom
of movement and freedom of property ownership by
Palestinians; deporting Palestinian inhabitants; and
depriving people of their legitimate claim to natural
resources, including scarce water resources.

The Government of Israel has continued its
settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and confirmed as illegal, but they continue unabated.
All settlement construction, including so-called natural
growth, is illegal under international law and must be
halted immediately. Settlement activities constitute
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
war crimes under article 8 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We appreciate the
decision of the Palestinian Authority to become a State
party to the International Criminal Court in order to
seekjustice for the people of Palestine.

We are pleased that the Israeli Government has
finally announced the release of three months' worth of
the tax revenue it collects from Palestinians on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority. However, the practice of
withholding tax revenue is a punitive measure used to
undermine the Palestinian Authority; therefore, that
practice must forever be stopped. We urge Israel, as
the occupying Power, to fulfil its legal obligation to
ensure that all inhabitants are safeguarded against all
acts of violence or threats; to cease the illegal detention
of Palestinian people, including children; to stop the
destruction of homes and land confiscation; to allow the
Palestinian people access to their lands, employment
and natural resources; to desist from transferring its
own population to the territories it has occupied; to lift
its embargo against Palestinians; to immediately open
all border crossings, allowing the free movement of
goods, persons and humanitarian aid; and to withdraw
all Israeli settlers from the occupied land of Palestine.
We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support for
the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State. At this
juncture, we demand an end to the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967, and look forward to a two-State solution
wherein the sovereign and independent Palestinian and
Israeli States live side by side, in harmony and peace, on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders. We also demand just
resolution of all final status issues and the mobilization
of international support for assistance to the Palestinian
people without delay.

