Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Allow me also to
thank the President and Prosecutor of the Special Court
for their very informative briefings and for all the work
they are doing to help bring justice to the people of
Sierra Leone. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for attending this meeting and for
her words of support for the Court, which is a very
important cause of the Council.

Less than eight years ago, military intervention
was necessary to save Sierra Leone from total collapse
into civil war. The progress made since has been a
tribute to the efforts of the Sierra Leonean people, of
the United Nations and of others. My Prime Minister,
Tony Blair, paid a recent visit to Freetown. He was
able to see and remark on the turnaround in Sierra
Leone's fortunes over the past few years, which is truly
impressive. But, as those who have spoken before me
have said, there is no room for complacency. Sierra

Leone is still fragile, and the upcoming elections - the
first since the departure of United Nations
peacekeepers - will be a milestone in the country's
development. It is only right that the Peacebuilding
Commission should continue to help Sierra Leone deal
with its post-conflict future.

Against that background, the Court has an even
more important role to play in Sierra Leone's recovery
than the inherent good that bringing justice to the
country entails. We welcome the opportunity for the
Special Court to brief the Council on its work. This is a
very special occasion. We are pleased that it also gives
the Council an opportunity to demonstrate its support
for the role that the Special Court has played in the
restoration of peace and security in Sierra Leone.

It is particularly appropriate that, as other
speakers have noted, this meeting is taking place
during the same week as the start of the Taylor trial. It
enables the Council to send a strong message that
nobody is above the law and that there can be no
impunity for crimes against humanity and war crimes.
We are confident that the Special Court will ensure a
fair and expeditious trial for Charles Taylor.

My country is a strong supporter of the Special
Court, as we are a friend to Sierra Leone, and we have
demonstrated that support through practical and
concrete actions. We are one of the largest financial
contributors to the Special Court, and last month made
an additional contribution of $4 million, bringing our
total contribution since 2002 to some $23 million.

We are an active member of the Special Court's
Management Committee here in New York. We were
pleased to be able to agree to imprison Charles Taylor
if convicted, and welcomed the fact that that helped
unlock the transfer of Taylor to The Hague in June
2006.

With our assistance, the BBC World Service Trust
has developed a project in support of the Court's
important and innovative outreach work, enabling the
people of Sierra Leone and Liberia to have access to
the Taylor trial.

We believe that the Special Court has set out a
sound basis for its completion strategy. It remains
important that the Court continue to strive for the early
completion of its work in line with that strategy and,
where possible, to deliver further efficiencies and
budgetary savings.

Equally, it is essential that international
community help ensure that the Special Court has the
resources that it needs to complete its valuable work.
We would therefore like to urge all Member States to
respond to Justice King's call for further financial
contributions and the provision of other forms of
assistance in terms of sentence enforcement and
witness relocation.

Finally, it is vital that the important achievements
of the Special Court be preserved for the future. We
urge the Court to develop its strategy on its legacy, in
consultation with the Council's ongoing work in this
area in respect of the international tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.

We should like to pledge our support for the
continuing work of the Court.

