Mr. Neil (Jamaica): I wish to thank the members
of the Security Council for convening this open debate
at the request of the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, acting on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. This is a critical time for the world
community. We are involved with the question of war
and peace, an issue that can affect the survival of all of
us. The Security Council has the onerous
responsibility, under Article 24 of the Charter, for the
maintenance of international peace and security on
behalf of the international community. It is a
responsibility from which it must not resile and its task
is to find answers, however difficult or complex the
problem may be.

It is a matter of profound regret for Jamaica that
military action against Iraq was initiated by a trans-
Atlantic coalition on Wednesday of last week. Jamaica
has emphasized all along the importance of Iraq's
fulfilling its obligations. Indeed, Jamaica will always
insist that every Member State, not only Iraq, must
comply with resolutions of the Security Council. Nor
will Jamaica ever condone the so-called right of any
country to develop weapons of mass destruction,
engage in acts of repression against its citizens or
support terrorism.

But we have expressed our view, and we hold to
it, that there was a viable alternative to war - the way
of peaceful disarmament through an inspections
process that had not been exhausted. Regrettably, there
was resort to the use of force and what we are seeing
now are the harsh realities, death and destruction
caused by military conflict. We have seen in vivid
detail a powerful demonstration of sophisticated
technology and the destructive power of modern
weaponry. The aerial bombardment of Baghdad, the
wailing sirens and the thunder of explosions have no
doubt succeeded in producing fear and trepidation
especially among civilians in Baghdad. We fear that
this may be just the beginning. The scars of war run
deep and generations of Iraqis will bear them, as will
generations of Americans and other citizens of the
international community. We deeply fear the prospect
of a humanitarian disaster from a siege of Baghdad and
other Iraqi cities and from the consequences of
continued fighting.

In the circumstances, as the Secretary-General
has emphasized, a heavy responsibility for the
protection of the civilians lies in the hands of the
belligerents and occupying Powers to ensure that loss
of life and suffering among the civilian population is
kept at a minimum. In this process, the role of the
United Nations is twofold. First, it must insist that
humanitarian aid is provided for the Iraqi victims of
this war. Secondly, it must exert its influence to bring
about a ceasefire to end what could become the
massacre of innocent Iraqis.

Jamaica believes that it is never too late for
peace. We therefore urge the Security Council to
remain engaged and to take bold steps to achieve a
cessation of hostilities and to spare the peoples of the
world the horrors of continued war.

The nations that have undertaken military action
in Iraq are countries with which we are bound by ties
of history and shared values of freedom. That very
friendship, which we highly value, obliges us to make
heard today our small voice for peace. This is a time
for a sincere, bold and unequivocal search for peace to
save the lives of combatants and the innocent, to stop
the possible spread of war and to secure mankind's
future in this troubled world. Our position is rooted in a
deep commitment to the cause of peace, and comes
with a heavy sense of sadness about the outbreak and
consequences of war. It also comes from a concern
about the implications for the future of the multilateral
system and for the realization of ideals of collective
security under the Charter, the rule of law and our
collective search to achieve a higher destiny for
mankind.

Beyond what is happening in Iraq today, and
transcending the specific circumstances, there is a
challenge for all of us. It is a challenge to ensure that
the collective wisdom of the United Nations, and of the
Security Council in particular, not be eroded by the
will of the mighty. The Security Council must remain
the source of legitimacy for any collective action, and
it should not be compromised or undermined by any
new doctrines or policies inconsistent with the Charter
of the United Nations.

At this critical juncture, we urge the Security
Council to remain active and to continue to seek ways
and means to restore peace and address the
humanitarian emergency in Iraq, based on unity of
purpose and in accordance with the high ideals and
principles of the Charter. That must always be our
guide.

