Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate your country, Sir, Chad, for
having organized, during its presidency of the Security
Council, this open debate on a very crucial issue: the
fight against terrorism and cross-border organized
crime, two scourges that mutually reinforce each other,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East. The fight
against these two scourges is the heart of resolution
2195 (2014), which we have just adopted unanimously at
Chad's initiative, and of which Luxembourg has become
a sponsor. I thank you, Mr. Minister, for having invited
me to participate in this debate. Finally, I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey
Feltman, and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union, Ambassador Tete Antonio, for their statements.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

We are witnessing a profound change in the terrorist
threat. That is evidenced by the fact that terrorist groups
seek to control entire swathes of territory. That was the
case in northern Mali, with groups such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb. It is still partly the case in
Somalia, with Al-Shabaab. It is certainly the case in
Iraq and Syria with Daesh. In all of those cases, there
are strong links between terrorist groups and organized
crime elements, either in terms of funding, equipment
or the use of illicit trafficking networks, including for
the trafficking in natural resources, be they minerals,
charcoal or oil.

What should concern us most is the fact that cross-
border organized crime increases the strategic space
available to terrorists for operating. Criminals and
terrorists may have different motivations, but they
largely concur on their methods and the way they
operate. Criminals and terrorists thrive where the
State is weak or absent, as is the case in many border
areas, such as the Sahel. Criminals and terrorists
take advantage of instability and conflict. They take
advantage of war economies and therefore have a
particular interest in prolonging conflicts. Criminals
and terrorists seek to destabilize the established State
authorities at the central and decentralized levels, not
only through violence, but also through the corruption
of State institutions, especially security institutions
and the judiciary.

At the operational level on the ground, criminals
and terrorists are increasingly targeting directly
missions mandated by the Security Council, which are
not always equipped to counter that threat. In certain
regions, terrorism has grown stronger by forging links to
criminal networks that thrive from profits derived from
human trafficking and illicit trade in arms, drugs and
natural resources. That transnational threat demands
a coordinated response at the international, regional
and national levels, as well as greater cooperation and
increased assistance to States faced with that double
threat.

Luxembourg is firmly committed in that regard. We
are doing our part to strengthen African capacities to
combat the financing of terrorism. By way of example,
we supported a training programme in Senegal
established by the National Financial Intelligence
Unit. In May, in Tunis, we financed a workshop on
the freezing of terrorist assets, which was organized
by the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Middle East and North Africa
Financial Action Task Force.

The report that the Secretary-General will submit
six months from now will enable us to better identify the
measures required to reduce the profits that terrorism
extracts from organized crime. However, it seems Clear
at this point that our goal should be to strengthen law
enforcement and border control institutions as well as
legal structures. The Peacebuilding Commission can
play an important role in that regard by supporting
fragile States in the aftermath ofconflict, mobilizing the
support of the international community to strengthen
those States' capacities and by encouraging regional
approaches and inter-State cooperation.

Luxembourg is particularly concerned by the
disproportionate impact of organized crime and terrorist
activity on children. Because of their vulnerability,
children are easy prey for recruiters, as Mr. Feltman
noted earlier. For that reason, children associated with
extremist groups should be treated first and foremost
as victims. Anti-terrorism measures should conform
to international human rights and child protection
standards, with particular regard for the norms of
juvenile justice. The prolonged detention of children for
their real or alleged association with an extremist group
exposes them to degrading and inhuman treatment. We
mustjoin forces to fight that sinister trend.

On 15 January 2013, on the occasion ofmy very first
statement to the Security Council as a non-permament
member, I spoke of the imperative of combating
terrorism (see S/PV.6900). That open debate took place
under Pakistan's presidency of the Council. I wish to
take this opportunity to extend my condolences to the
Government and the people of Pakistan and to add
my voice to that of those who have condemned in the
strongest possible terms the infamous terrorist attack
committed by the Taliban on 16 December against a
school in Peshawar, in which more than 140 victims
lost their lives, including 132 children. Today, as our
mandate in the Security Council nears the end of its
term, and not without a degree of emotion, I reiterate
Luxembourg's commitment to combat the scourge of
terrorism.

We have come full circle, in a sense. Over the course
of the past two years, we have lent our efforts with
determination to promoting international peace and
security. We conclude our mandate with the hope that we
have contributed, however modestly, to achieving that
noble goal. I assure the Council that Luxembourg will
remain committed and will spare no effort to contribute
to promoting security, development and human rights,
the three ingredients that are indispensable to assure a
better future for all.

