Mr. Hetesey (Hungary): I wish to thank Chile for
convening this timely open debate. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ms. Leymah
Gbowee for their informative briefings this morning.

Hungary, as co-Chair of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, worked
with Member States to ensure that draft goal 16 of
the outcome document explicitly recongizes the link
among peace, inclusion, sustainable development,
justice and accountability. Based on those joint efforts,
Member States agreed by consensus that the rule of
law, equal access to justice, effective, accountable
and transparent institutions, as well as responsive,
inclusive and representative decision-making at all
levels are equally necessary for establishing peaceful
and inclusive societies.

Hungary fully supports the statement of the
European Union. Building on that, allow me to add
some remarks on some special challenges.

Hungary recognizes the power, unique skills and
role of women in peace and development. Empowering
women by investing in their education, providing
them with economic opportunities, strengthening
their leadership capacities and engaging them in
decision-making are in each society's best interest.
That is especially relevant in places where peace had
broken down and conflict has shifted focus away
from cooperation towards division and hatred. We
also commend the Secretary-General for choosing the
empowerment of women and children as one of his
priorities for 2015.

Gender equality is an important public issue in
Hungary and is reflected in policy decisions. We also
support draft sustainable development goal 5, on gender
equality. In the framework of gender equality, aspects
related to the family as a whole and to its members need
to be duly considered. We strongly support development
efforts that are aimed at strengthening and protecting
the vulnerable by creating policies in particular in the
areas ofwork, social security, social protection, dignity
and integrity, education and public security. The 20-
year review of the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action provides another
opportunity to highlight these issues.

In our corner of the world, and in Hungary in
particular, one of the most serious impediments to
inclusive development is the situation of vulnerable
groups living in poverty, including the Roma
population. In order to overcome that challenge, the
Hungarian National Social Inclusion Strategy sets
forth a comprehensive approach with projects in the
areas of child welfare, education, employment, health
care, housing and the fight against discrimination. As
part of those efforts, Hungary supports the education
of Roma children through a scholarship programme,
promotes entrepreneurship and job opportunities
for Roma women through microcredit projects and
skills development and supports the access of Roma
families to improved housing. We have also established
mechanisms to ensure the effective participation of
minorities, including the Roma, at various levels of
political decision-making, from the local government
level to Parliament.

Hungary strongly condemns all forms of
discrimination and exclusion based on race,
ethnicity, religion or any other status. For example,
the Hungarian Government has announced a zero-
tolerance policy against anti-Semitism. Across the
world, crimes committed against religious and ethnic
minorities or other vulnerable groups demonstrate
where radicalization and hatred can lead us. It also
helps us realize that the only way to achieve and
preserve peace within and among societies is through
dialogue, tolerance and respect for cultural diversity.
In that context, we actively promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation. We will
continue to make every effort to build bridges among
various faiths, cultures and traditions.

Lastly, Hungary is of the view that education is one
of the most powerful weapons against discrimination
and inequality. We believe that the realization of the
right to education is the cornerstone of lasting peace,
since ignorance, misunderstanding, the erosion of
culture and the loss of cultural identities are often the
starting points for fanaticism.

Education has an important role both in preventing
conflicts and in post-conflict peacebuilding. For that
reason, Hungary welcomes a strong, stand-alone
sustainable development goal on inclusive education,
which includes a target on the promotion of a culture
of peace, nonviolence and appreciation for cultural
diversity.

