Mr. He Yafei (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
The past two years have witnessed continued political
turbulence, a further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Burundi and an increasing outflow of refugees
from the country, which has posed a threat to peace and
stability in the region. The Chinese delegation is deeply
concerned over this situation.

In his recent letter to the President of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General proposed to set up an
international commission of inquiry to establish the facts
relating to the assassination of the President of Burundi in
October 1993 and the massacres that followed and to
make recommendations on the punishment of those who
committed the crimes. The Chinese delegation endorses
this proposal in principle and will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us. We hope that this move by the
Council will contribute to national reconciliation in
Burundi.

We are of the View that the international community,
in assisting with the settlement of the Burundi question,
should fully respect the independence and sovereignty of
the Republic of Burundi and should not interfere in its
internal affairs. Therefore, it is very important to heed and
respect the views of the Burundi Government in
connection with the establishment of the commission of
inquiry. Only with the full cooperation of the Burundi

 

Government can the commission function smoothly after its
establishment.

We have noted that the mandate of the commission
whose establishment is about to be authorized is rather
extensive, touching in certain aspects upon Burundi's
sovereignty and internal affairs. We maintain that the
Security Council must be very prudent when making or
implementing its decisions in this regard. At present, as a
matter of principle, we have certain reservations about some
elements of the commission's mandate. However,
considering that some amendments have been made to the
text and that the Government of Burundi has stated that it
can accept the text, and also considering the very special
circumstances in Burundi, it can be treated as a special
case.

In order to establish at an early date the facts relating
to the assassination of the President of Burundi and the
ensuing massacres, we call on the parties concerned to
provide the commission of inquiry with all possible
assistance for the successful fulfilment of its mandate.

