Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
his leadership in working to find enduring solutions to
increasingly complex problems.

It is fitting that Kazakhstan has called this important
meeting. One of Kazakhstan earliest decisions as an
independent nation remains one of the most important
moments in the history of non-proliferation. After the
fall of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan voluntarily removed
Soviet nuclear weapons from its territory and joined the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
By rejecting nuclear weapons, President Nazarbayev
set an example for the rest of the world. That action
built confidence. It showed Kazakhstan's neighbours
and the world that it was not a threat. It was a vote of
confidence in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
which remains the cornerstone of the global nuclear
non-proliferation effort. Critically, Kazakhstan's action
demonstrated that it valued peace and stability in its
relations with other countries. It was an unmistakable
concrete expression of Kazakhstan's willingness and
readiness to be a responsible member of the community
of nations.

The United States continues to lead in efforts to
stop the spread of nuclear weapons. We play a leading
role in ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) - a landmark agreement that the Security
Council unanimously adopted in 2004. Together with
our partners, we work to assist States and international
organizations in their efforts to prevent non-State
actors from developing and acquiring nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems. But
the reality is that today's security environment is more
challenging than in the past. An essential element of
further nuclear disarmament is successfully addressing
fundamental security challenges.

The regimes that most threaten the world today
with weapons of mass destruction are also the source of
different kinds of security challenges. They deny human
rights and fundamental freedoms to their people. They
promote regional instability. They aid terrorists and
militant groups. They promote conflict that eventually
spills over their borders. There is no greater threat to
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime than
that posed by North Korea. North Korea continues its
reckless pursuit of nuclear weapons, in defiance of
repeated resolutions by the Council. It continues to
pursue nuclear weapons while its people starve, and
to threaten other nations, while intimidating its own
citizens. The example that Kazakhstan set and the
efforts of so many others to curb the spread of nuclear
weapons will begin to unravel if the Council cannot
rise to the challenge. We call on all Member States to
fulfil their obligations and fully implement all Council
resolutions on North Korea. We will continue to work
with our partners in the Security Council in pursuit of a
peaceful, diplomatic solution to the crisis. However, let
me say it one more time: the United States remains fully
committed to defending itself and its allies if necessary.

The actions of the Iranian regime are another
example. The regime in Tehran is the leading cause of
instability in an unstable part of the world. It supports
terrorists, proxy militants and murderers like Bashar
Al-Assad. It provides ballistic missiles in violation of
United Nations arms embargoes. Its proxies launch
them at civilian targets, as we saw when Houthi militias
in Yemen fired an Iranian- supplied missile at an airport
in Riyadh. When the Iranian people protest their
money being diverted to terrorists, the regime arrests
and kills them. It silences their voices and lies about
their motivations. When the Council adopted resolution
2231(2015), it endorsed the nuclear agreement and
retained its series of prohibitions on Iran's behaviour.

The Iranian regime has repeatedly violated those
prohibitions and, in doing so, it has repeatedly shown
itself to be unworthy of our trust and our confidence.
When the Council considers the question of how we
can promote trust that States will not engage in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the place
we must start and the very least we can do is to insist
that States comply with their existing international
obligations. In the case of Iran, while the United
States continues to uphold its commitments under the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the international
community must also demand that Iran fulfil its
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). We impose
those obligations as the Security Council. Together we
must respond to Iran's dangerous violations, not because
we want the nuclear agreement to fail but because we
want the cause of non-proliferation to succeed.
We must not forget that weapons of mass destruction
are not just an abstract threat, but weapons that evil
regimes will put to use. The Syrian regime has repeatedly
used chemical weapons against its own people. They
are the actions of a Government so corrupt that it stands
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) as the
only entities to use chemical weapons as tools ofwarfare
in the twenty-first century. The Security Council must
respond to the outrageous Violation of international
law and basic human decency. The Council created the
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) for the express
purpose of exposing the perpetrators of those crimes.
The JIM. determined that the Al-Assad regime and
ISIS used chemical weapons in Syria. Both must be
held accountable for their actions. However, one nation
stands in the way of the Security Council fulfilling its
duty. That nation is Russia.

It was Russia that vetoed three Council draft
resolutions that would have renewed the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. It is Russia that has gone to
great lengths at the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in The Hague to prevent
the Al-Assad regime from being held accountable for
its actions. If the Russian Government is serious about
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
it will convince its client, Mr. Al-Assad, that he must

eliminate his chemical weapons and cooperate fully
with OPCW and the United Nations.

The Security Council tackles some of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security daily.
None is greater than the proliferation of nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons. The United States
works hard to ensure the non-proliferation of such
deadly weapons. We encourage the creation of a
security environment that benefits non-proliferation.
We believe all nations have a moral responsibility to
join in the creation of that environment.

