Mr. Gayan (Mauritius): May I, on behalf of my
country, be allowed to convey our deepest sympathy to
the families and relatives of all those persons who lost
their lives this morning in the air crash in Queens.

Let me also extend my congratulations to you,
Sir, on the manner in which you are presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council on the very important
subject of international terrorism.

The recent terrorist attacks in the United States
constitute a challenge to the whole international
community. They remind us of the urgent need for
concerted international action to eradicate this scourge.

There is broad consensus that the time merely for
sympathy for the victims of the terrorist attacks of 11
September has passed and that the time for action has
arrived. The action that States are under an obligation
to take is well defined in Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). There is an urgent need to take action,
since the terrorists will also be taking their own
measures to counteract the aforementioned resolution.
It is evident that the areas that deserve priority
treatment are, first, to track all of the financial
resources that are available to the terrorist networks
and to take them out of their reach; secondly, to
exchange information which will help in the
dismantling of terrorist networks; and thirdly, to ensure
that no State provides a haven to anyone associated
with the terrorist networks.

We should not quibble about the definition of
terrorism, because we all know that the senseless and
indiscriminate taking of innocent lives can only be the
work of terrorists. They have no cause to fight for, and
they make no demands prior to the perpetration of their
acts.

The 11 September attacks have seriously affected
the economies of poor countries, which do not have the
resilience of the major economies. Many millions of
children will die in Africa and elsewhere as a result of
those attacks.

Terrorism results in unthinkable suffering and
disrupts economic and social activities around the
world. Terrorists use the language of hate and reject the
dignity of human life, disregarding its value. The
international community must send a clear signal of its
determination not to be intimidated by terrorists.

Let no one entertain any doubt as to the
wickedness of terrorism. The international community
condemns any person who engages in terrorist acts in
the name of religion, faith or ideology. Indeed,
terrorism is the enemy of the most fundamental values
upheld by the United Nations, as well as by the
Commonwealth and other regional organizations.

The war against terrorism is not a matter of
choice but an absolute necessity. It must be won, and it
is incumbent on all of us to do whatever is necessary to
achieve that objective. The alternative is too terrible to
contemplate. While we are engaged in the war against
terrorism, the terrorists themselves are embarking on a
propaganda campaign to give a veneer of morality to
their criminal acts. It is critical that we win the hearts
and minds of all those who might become attracted or
infected by a terrorist propaganda campaign.

Poverty, hunger, disease, despair and lack of a
promising future combine to make a terrible cocktail
on which terrorists thrive, as it allows them to recruit
and to occupy the high moral ground.

As we take those immediate measures in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001),
we cannot afford to lose sight of the long term,
particularly with respect to trade and developmental
issues, which alone can rescue the poor countries from
the spiral of decline and deprivation.

African leaders met in Dakar and adopted a
Declaration against terrorism on 17 October of this
year. This confirms the strong commitment and
dedication of African States in the war against
international terrorism. We would like to commend
Abdoulaye Wade, President of the Republic of Senegal,
for this timely initiative. We are happy also to note that
regional efforts are being accelerated, with a View to
complementing international actions against terrorism.

My country has started proceedings towards the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1368
(2001) and 1373 (2001). In this respect, we signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism just yesterday, and we pledge to
ratify it at the earliest possible time.

We urge Member States to work towards an early
resolution of all outstanding issues, so that we can have
a comprehensive road map to deal effectively with
terrorism in all its aspects.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for the draft ministerial declaration
which we hope will be adopted at the end of this
meeting.

