Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I wish to
express the gratitude of my delegation to Mr. Holmes
for his valuable briefing and to the Belgian presidency
for organizing this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
fully aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered later this morning by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. Therefore,
I will limit myself to a few additional remarks.

Today's briefing of Mr. Holmes, as well as the
observations of the most recent Security Council
mission to the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and daily news
reports from the Middle East and other places confirm
the continued occurrence of gross violations of
humanitarian law and human rights, including
deliberate attacks against civilians, sexual violence
used often as a weapon of war, abductions, recruitment
of child combatants and other forms of grave
violations, perpetrated by State and non-State actors.

We believe that the international community must
do much more to protect the most vulnerable in armed
conflicts. There can be no excuse for inaction when
thousands of civilians are dying every week as a result
of armed conflict. It is clear that despite the existing
legal framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which was further strengthened last
year by the adoption of resolution 1674 (2006), serious
gaps remain in the practical implementation of agreed
norms and principles, including the responsibility to
protect. We welcome and support the intention of the
Secretary-General to initiate a discussion among
United Nations Members on how to translate that core
principle of humanity and human solidarity, which our
leaders endorsed at the 2005 World Summit, into
concrete action on a global, regional and national level.

In that respect, we were encouraged during last
week's discussions between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union in
Addis Ababa and Accra by the level of commitment on
the part of the African Union to deal with the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict through greater
involvement in peacekeeping and mediation efforts in
various crisis situations on the continent.

We believe that the partnership, consultations and
dialogue between the United Nations and regional
organizations on these issues should be further
strengthened and expanded, in line with the joint
communique of the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
Through joint action, we must find more efficient ways
to deal with humanitarian crises such as that in Darfur,
where civilians continue to suffer and die every day.

With respect to Darfur, which is the site of one of
the world's most grave crises and humanitarian
situations, Slovakia welcomes the recent agreement
that will, we hope, lead both to rapid and successful
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
hybrid operation in Darfur and to improved protection
of civilians in the region from violations of human
rights and humanitarian law. In that regard, we call
upon the Government of the Sudan to facilitate
deployment of the hybrid peacekeeping force and to
allow the monitoring and investigation of crimes,
including active cooperation with the International
Criminal Court. In addition, we hope that the recent
discussion between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council will contribute to closer cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union in addressing the increased humanitarian
suffering of civilians in the Central African Republic,
eastern Chad and Somalia, as well as the consequences
of criminal activities by the Lord's Resistance Army in
the Great Lakes region.

However, we must not forget about people in
other parts of the world, such as the Middle East and
Afghanistan, where the numbers of attacks on innocent
civilians - employing the most vicious killing tactics
and terrorist acts, including the use of chlorine - are
increasing day by day. We agree with Mr. Holmes that
that trend is profoundly worrying. It must be addressed
through effective action by all regional and global
stakeholders in order to contain it.

We are concerned about the level of impunity
with respect to grave violations of humanitarian law
and atrocities committed against civilians in armed
conflicts. I would like to underline that we are
especially concerned about the direct involvement of
Government military and security forces and
institutions in such criminal activities.

In that regard, Slovakia stresses the need for strict
application of a zero-tolerance policy with respect to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Impunity for
such crimes is unacceptable, and we must make sure
that the perpetrators of criminal acts are brought to
justice. In situations where national judicial authorities
- who have the primary responsibility for bringing the
perpetrators of crimes to justice - are not fully
capable or, in some cases, unwilling to address
violations of international humanitarian law, Slovakia
will continue to support active engagement by the
international community, including through
international and "mixed" tribunals, the International
Criminal Court and, when necessary, applicable
targeted measures by the Council in ensuring respect
for humanitarian and human rights law.

We are also concerned about the increasing
number of deliberate attacks against United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and other
humanitarian workers providing assistance to civilian
populations, as well as attacks against media personnel.
In that respect, we strongly condemn acts such as the
recent killing of a staff member of Medecins Sans
Frontieres in the Central African Republic and of two
Lebanese Red Cross workers at a Palestinian refugee
camp in northern Lebanon, the brutal killing of a Radio
Okapi national reporter in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and attacks against humanitarian personnel
and piracy threatening relief deliveries to Somalia.

We support all necessary steps and actions by the
international community to protect humanitarian
personnel, to establish safe corridors allowing for full
and unhindered humanitarian access and to provide
basic security for the work of the media, including
through full implementation of last year's Security
Council resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006).

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank and pay tribute to all humanitarian organizations
for their relentless efforts and to express our sympathy
to the families of those who made the ultimate sacrifice
for the cause of peace and humanitarian relief.

