The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh. After
my statement I will give the floor to Ambassador
Otunnu and to Mr. Annabi - if he wishes to take the
floor on behalf of Mr. Guehenno - if they have any
point to raise.

I first thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Gue'henno and Special Representative Olara Otunnu for
their presentations, which have set the background for
today's deliberations. We are engaged here in a
critically important phase of the Lusaka peace process.
The presence of Foreign Minister Leonard Okitundu
with us today testifies to his Government's abiding
commitment to the peace process and to cooperation
with the United Nations. We have noted his
Government's position on different aspects of the peace
process, particularly on the matter of child soldiers. I
am sure that his views will provide extremely
important inputs to the Council's decision-making
process.

I shall limit my observations to three specific
points of special interest to Bangladesh.

First, child soldiers. I was struck by Ambassador
Otunnu's observation that Congo is being robbed of its
future. Ambassador Otunnu, whose mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo my delegation had
pursued for the past few months, has brought us a grim,
alarming report. The children of that country represent,
as he reports, many faces of suffering: uprooted
children, street children, war orphans, those separated
from parents, child soldiers who are traumatized,
abandoned, malnourished, sexually abused.
Ambassador Otunnu's findings tell us most
unequivocally that the question of the children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to be
addressed as a matter of particular concern and high
priority.

He has made some practical recommendations,
particularly the five-point programme of action, which
has the support of all political sides. We should give
serious consideration to his proposals. The subregional
dimension of which he spoke with regard to the issue
of child soldiers also needs our attention. A report
published yesterday by the Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers says that more than 120,000 children are
currently fighting in Africa. Children are often seen as
cheap and expendable fighters. In that context, I once
again draw the attention of the Council to the proposal
made by the Prime Minister of Bangladesh at the
Security Council summit in September 2000 that of
child-soldier-free zones be declared in various parts of
the world.

The second point of interest to Bangladesh is the
inter-Congolese dialogue. The Security Council
mission considered the inter-Congolese dialogue to be
the centrepiece of the entire peace process. It would
address in a sustainable way the main source of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
welcome the decision of President Masire to convene a
preparatory meeting on 16 July. It should not be further
delayed. The parties should show pragmatism and a
constructive spirit in their negotiations on procedural
and substantive issues. Bangladesh concurs with the
view of the Council mission that the dialogue should
proceed, in all parts of the country, as speedily as
possible. It would also be symbolically important to
hold the dialogue within the territory of the Congo.

My third and final point relates to civilian
components and humanitarian need. The most
important matter before us at this stage is certainly the
preparedness of the United Nations. The Secretary-
General has been keeping us informed about the
requirements for the third phase, starting more
elaborately with his seventh report (S/2001/373). In his
present report too he draws attention to the need for
considerable expansion of the civilian components of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The
deployment of those components, including civilian
police, is extremely important in the context of the
need for the protection of civilians and related matters.
We believe that the Council should take the lead in
mobilizing necessary support in that regard.

The Council mission, in its report, underlined the
economic needs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and identified areas for attention, including the
opening of riverine traffic, the renovation of rail and
road networks and quick impact projects. It was
stressed that broader economic assistance should
accompany the peace process. It is time that the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations
system mobilized economic assistance to sustain peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Bangladesh drew attention to that humanitarian
imperative in April, when the Council considered the
seventh report of the Secretary-General. We hope that
the United Nations funds and programmes, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the international community are
seriously engaged in the planning that was urged about
two months ago. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have suffered the scourge of a
protracted war. We must not fail them as they stake
everything to secure peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Mr. Otunnu.

