Mr. Matjila (South Africa): It is always emotionally
difficult to talk about the Palestinian question, for it
makes South Africans relive their difficult past. I
would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

We are all aware of the expression that the
Roman Emperor Nero was reputed to have fiddled
while Rome burned. If the Council, and indeed the
international community, continue to deal with the
question of Palestine in the manner in which we are
currently doing so, history will no doubt judge us as
the abominable Nero. We are fiddling while the reality
of an independent, safe, secure and self-sufficient
Palestinian State is slowly dwindling. Compounding
the effects of the illegal Israeli occupation, earlier this
week the Governor of the Palestine Monetary Authority,
Mr. Azzam Shawwa, highlighted the dire financial
constraints on the Palestinian Authority, which makes
it very difficult to deliver basic services to its people.

On 22 November 1967, the Security Council
adopted resolution 242 (1967), which called on all
parties to end territorial claims and respect sovereignty
and for Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories.
In 2019, 52 years later, that has still not happened.
Two generations later, it has not happened. In reality,
Israel has illegally expanded its occupation with no
consequences whatsoever from the Council.

From 1967 to January of last year, 250 settlements
were constructed in the West Bank, housing 611,000
people, or 10 per cent ofIsrael's population, and moved
12 per cent of the Palestinian population from their
land. Since then, over the past 18 months that figure
has sharply increased, as the Council has heard.

Those historical injustices against Palestine and its
people must be addressed. The Council must uphold its
responsibilities mandated by the Charter of the United
Nations and act. It is long overdue for the Security
Council to reassume its responsibility and act decisively
to assist Israel and Palestine in finding a lasting peace
in the Middle East.

Over the years, established legal frameworks have
been agreed upon, including the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map
and resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. It is now time to put those guidelines
into action.

We have taken note of the Bahrain meeting, which
will be convened by the United States sometime
this year.

A vital aspect of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the Middle East is for the parties to talk
to each other directly and negotiate directly towards
finding a credible path to peace that is acceptable to
Israelis and Palestinians alike. Those direct discussions
must include all final-status issues, particularly with
regard to borders, the status of Jerusalem and the
return of Palestinian refugees. Eroding those core
issues through detrimental unilateral action severely
undermines previous peacemaking efforts and
damages the prospects for durable peace for Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The Security Council and its
partners in peace must exert every effort to bring all
sides to the negotiating table in order to allow them to
find long-term peaceful solutions.

With regard to the humanitarian and human rights
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, there
too we have all failed. Palestinians continue to live in
unacceptable environments where their movement is
restricted, their land and property are seized and they
have very little control over their own future. In Gaza,
Israel's illegal blockade has harshly and negatively
impacted the economic and social development of the
area. That has been further exacerbated by Israel's
illegal withholding of tax and customs revenues that
rightfully belong to the Palestinian Authority to
dispense as it sees fit. In that regard, South Africa calls
for the immediate lifting of the illegal blockade and the
release of all tax and customs revenues collected on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority.

On the West Bank, we see continued expansion of
illegal settlements and the confiscation and destruction
of Palestinian property and land in direct violation of
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Again, the Council has not acted to rectify that
injustice. The detailed reports of recent developments
regarding settlement expansion should at least compel
the Council to act.

As we heard last month and was acknowledged
by many members of the Council, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNWRA) plays a vital role in the lives of
most Palestinians through the provision of health and
education services and employment opportunities in
many fields. Its important work must be fully supported
and encouraged, and we hope the upcoming UNWRA
conference later this month will be supported. We place
on record our appreciation of those countries that,
under difficult circumstances, have continued to help
UNWRA, as Mr. Mladenov noted.

If you want to deny people means of self-reliance,
livelihood and future and turn them into desperate
beggars, take their land and restrict their movement.
That is what has been done and continues to be done
to the Palestinians. The Council has watched and
watched and talked and nothing has happened for
70 years, nothing.

On a positive note, we congratulate the State of
Palestine on successfully joining the International
Atomic Energy Agency as an observer on 18 June.
That is a further step towards full acceptance by the
international community of the reality that Palestine is
indeed a State.

The international community has acknowledged
that the only credible solution is one that is based
on the two-State solution, with the 1967 borders and
East Jerusalem as the capital of the independent and
sovereign State of Palestine, and the State of Israel.
Any peace plan proposed by anyone must acknowledge
those facts and not pre-empt them, and must ensure
a Palestinian State that has sovereignty, territorial
integrity and prosperity.

As we have repeatedly said in the Chamber, no
people can be oppressed forever. That will never
happen. They will resist and resist. Even ifthere is only
one left standing, that one person will resist. That was
true for all of us and it will be true for Palestinians.
If all but one Palestinian is killed, that one remaining
Palestinian will resist oppression and occupation. The
Council must take note of that.

Peace in Israel is a wish all of us pray for every
day, because we all pray for peace for Israelis. They
are our people. But it will happen only when Palestine
is free and enjoying peace. The Council should
assist both those two communities - Israelis and
Palestinians - in finding peace for the sake of their
children and future generations.

