Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which you
have conducted the work of the Council during the month
of November, which is coming to a close. I would also
like to express my appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, who presided over the
Council in the month of October.

The mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) - which was extended
through the Council's adoption of resolution 1212 (1998)
at its 3949th meeting, on 25 November 1998 - comes to
an end today.

The task of MIPONUH was to continue to assist the
Haitian Government by providing support and assistance
to ensure the professionalization of the National Police, in
particular through mentoring activities and strengthening
the capability of the central directorate to manage
international aid provided to it from bilateral and
multilateral sources.

MIPONUH and the various missions that preceded
it in Haiti, beginning with the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) on 31 March 1995,
which took over from the multinational force, have all
successfully carried out their mandates in a positive
environment. The Security Council, which authorized
them, can be proud of this fact.

However, much remains to be done. The battle for
democracy has not yet been won. We have come a long
way, and important and significant results have been
achieved, but threatening elements remain that could
reverse the trend towards progress.

Institution-building is being pursued, despite many
difficulties. Domestic problems and external pressures
threaten to weaken and undermine these institutions,
impeding their progress towards full development and the
achievement of professionalism.

The role of the Haitian National Police and the work
that has been done have been made even more difficult
by the magnitude of the problems affecting the well-being
of our people and the constraints that are hampering
development. These fundamental problems are both a
cause and a symptom of the delayed progress in the
country, and they stand in the way of a response to the
pressing needs of the great majority of the people.

 

In this context, I would refer to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1212 (1998), which invites United Nations bodies
and agencies, especially the Economic and Social Council,
to contribute to the designing of a long-term assistance
programme to my country.

The Economic and Social Council responded to that
appeal by adopting resolution E/1999/L.35, which is the
fruit of intensive work on the part of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti.

The groundwork has been laid for a new approach to
the assistance lent by the international community to
countries emerging from crises. In the case of my country,
we have a new challenge to meet, and a major one at that:
that of translating into reality the various recommendations
contained in the resolution adopted by the Economic and
Social Council.

In his report to the Security Council (S/ 1999/1 184) of
18 November, the Secretary-General, in discussing possible
assistance for Haiti after 30 November 1999, states that a
new mission could carry out the tasks currently handled by
MIPONUH and the International Civilian Mission in Haiti
(MICIVIH), with the aim of assisting the Government in
sectors that are of crucial importance for the promotion of
democracy, such as the police force, justice and human
rights.

The Secretary-General noted that it can be said that
MIPONUH has made a considerable contribution to
institutional development and to reforming the Haitian
police, and he added that the expiration of its mandate
marks the end of peacekeeping operations in Haiti. I would
add that it highlights the necessary role of society in the
peaceful settlement of its conflicts.

In the light of these considerations, the President of
the Republic of Haiti, Rene Preval, in his letter to the
Secretary-General dated 8 November, expressed thanks to
the United Nations for deploying the Mission, which has
made a valuable contribution to enhancing police
performance and the country's stability. However, to build
on the work already done, the international community's
support in this area will continue to be necessary.

Accordingly, the Republic of Haiti would like an
institutional support mission set up, whose members would
be neither uniformed nor armed, to support the
democratization process, assisting the Haitian Government
in strengthening the judiciary and professionalizing the
Haitian National Police.

Draft resolution S/ 1999/ 1202 on the transition phase
to the International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti
(MICAH), as well as the draft resolution establishing that
Mission, which is before the General Assembly in
document A/54/L.36, reflects these concerns, and we hope
that they will be approved by the respective bodies.

In conclusion, I wish to express the gratitude of the
Government and people of Haiti to all those who have
shown understanding and support in our difficult path
towards meeting the requirements of democracy,
development and justice, in particular the group of friends
of the Secretary-General on the question of Haiti, the
sponsors of the draft resolution before us.

