Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): After considering the Secretary-General's report
of 27 November of this year on violations of international
humanitarian law in the areas of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja
Luka and Sanski Most, my delegation can only express its
astonishment at the acts of barbarism, intolerance and
violence committed against the civilian population during
the war in the former Yugoslavia.

These genocidal acts, carried out in clear violation of
the most basic norms of humanitarian law deserve
repudiation by the international community and the
firmest possible condemnation by this Council. The report
points out that after the fall of Srebrenica on 11 July this
year Bosnian Serb forces, with the participation of their
leaders and Serbian paramilitary forces, carried out a
series of acts involving abuses against the lives and
human dignity of the people in the Srebrenica area, and
that the fate of thousands of its inhabitants is still
unknown. It is reported that there are eyewitness accounts
and other evidence that those same forces carried out
mass summary executions in places such as Karakaj,
Nova Kasaba and Potocari, among others.

Faced with such abuses of human life and human
dignity, my delegation believes that the international
community must not remain indifferent, but must react in
a vigorous and responsible way to ensure that the crimes
committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia do
not remain unpunished. We must support all the efforts
necessary for the investigation and determination of the
facts, and cooperate actively in the work of the
International Tribunal, to ensure that those thought to be
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights are brought to justice. Now that the
International Tribunal has issued charges against some of
those responsible for the atrocities, the Prosecutor's work
of gathering trial evidence should be made easier.

Eyewitness accounts of the disappearances in
Srebrenica, Zepa and Sanski Most must be corroborated;
there must be verification of statements about the
participation of Serb leaders and paramilitary forces, and
about forced expulsions, as well as of reports concerning
disappearances in the Banja Luka and Pridejor areas and
concerning the fate of those subjected to forced labour.

For these purposes, my delegation feels it essential
that access to all these areas be given to the relevant
United Nations agencies and other international
organizations and institutions, including the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Commission. It is also
necessary to insist that the Bosnian Serb leaders cooperate
so that the facts may be fully investigated. My delegation
rejects any attempt to hide or destroy evidence of
violations of international humanitarian law. We also
reject the presentation by third States of documents
intended in one way or another to distort the facts or
minimize the gravity of the acts committed.

We regret that neither United Nations personnel, nor
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) nor the International Committee of

 

the Red Cross have free access yet to displaced and
detained persons in the areas controlled by the Bosnian
Serbs. We urge the Bosnian Serb authorities to guarantee
such access immediately.

We believe that until the acts are determined and the
guilty are judged there will be no lasting peace in Bosnia.

Having said this, my delegation agrees with the draft
resolution, which the Council will soon adopt, and we will
vote for it.

