Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I am grateful for the inclusion in our programme of
work of a meeting on the Central African region. We
recognize the work and leadership of the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Kalomoh, who led the
assessment mission to the region and produced the
report before us today.

As the report makes clear, the problems faced by
the region will be difficult to resolve. Indeed, these are
persistent problems not only in Africa, but in several
parts of the world. The first of these - and the most
complex, given its repercussions in all areas - is that
of extreme poverty. The second is the proliferation of
and illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
explosives and munitions. That is an issue of great
sensitivity, given its impact on human rights, especially
among populations that need special protection, such as
women and children. The third problem, which is
related to conflict, is the massive flows of refugees.

Countries like Angola - your country, Mr.
President - Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda are already making efforts to consolidate their
internal stability. To that end, they need to improve
economic conditions and create institutions that
reinforce their Governments.

In our view, the recommendations contained in
the report with a View to designing and implementing a
comprehensive approach to conflict in Central
Africa - including aspects relating to ethnic disputes;
flows of internally displaced persons and refugees; the
illegal exploitation of natural resources; illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons; and the
use of children as combatants - must be taken into
account by the Council as it seeks solutions that have
not only a regional, but, as the report stresses, a
comprehensive dimension.

The national capacities of the countries of the
region must be strengthened with a View to promoting
good governance, including the consolidation of justice
systems and the formulation of human rights policies.
The support that can be provided by the United Nations
requires the participation of, and cooperation by,
African Governments, regional organizations and the
international community as a whole. In this way it will
be possible to continue to set priorities and determine
the actions that need to be taken in the region in order
later to create, optimize and coordinate effective

strategies and programmes that will help countries to
overcome the challenges faced by the region and
contribute to its development.

The Security Council has already begun to
incorporate actions to strengthen the institutional
capacity of States within the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. That trend should be continued and
consolidated. Direct cooperation with other regional
organizations and competent bodies is also necessary.

In Central Africa, a region where more than half
of the population lives below the poverty line and
which has nearly 3 million displaced persons, urgent
measures are required to prevent the existing
humanitarian crisis in the region from continuing to
deteriorate. It is necessary also to capitalize on the
benefits that can be provided by the region's wealth of
resources.

The international community has a commitment
to help the countries of the region, whose economic,
political and social development depends not only on
the will of Governments involved but also the
coordinated efforts of international, regional and
subregional organizations.

It is only through the joint and coordinated efforts
of a strategic partnership for development imbued with
a high degree of political will that it will be possible
successfully to resolve the problems which thus far
have caused so much harm to many African countries.
The Security Council must continue closely to follow
up activities to promote peace-building and to provide
its support to such efforts.

