Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Before I
begin, I would like to extend my deepest sympathies
and condolences to the victims and families who lost
lives and sustained injuries in today's terrorist attack at
the United Nations offices in Abuja. The Government
of the Republic of Korea condemns this attack and
stands by the people of Nigeria and the United Nations
during this difficult moment. At the same time, I would
like to reaffirm my Government's support for
continuing international efforts to eradicate terrorism
around the world.

At the outset, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations are considered to be
among the most visible areas of the United Nations.
They have evolved steadily over the past six decades to
successfully address diverse challenges that have
arisen from various conflicts. In particular, my
delegation is encouraged by the recent efforts of
peacekeeping operations in Cote d'Ivoire, which have
contributed to the successful democratic transition and
stabilization in the region, as well as in the Sudan
during the peaceful referendum procedures. However,
at the same time, we must admit that there is still a
long way to go to ensure greater success and harness
the full potential of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
As the New Horizon non-paper depicted in 2009,
the environment of peacekeeping operations has
changed significantly and quickly since the landmark
Brahimi report (8/2000/809) was published in 2000.
Peacekeeping operations have expanded more than
fivefold since 2000 in terms of numbers of personnel.
Additionally, mission mandates have expanded from
monitoring military ceasefires to the protection of
civilians, governance, human rights, the rule of law and
early peacebuilding. In this rapidly-changing
landscape, new challenges have continued to surface
and mandates have steadily become more difficult to
discharge. In this regard, my delegation would like to
make several recommendations with a View towards
the overall improvement of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

First of all, there should be an enhanced effort to
mobilize resources in the most efficient way while
simultaneously encouraging increased support from
Member States. Today, growing demand on United
Nations peacekeeping operations is not met with an
equivalent supply from Members States, which
sometimes leads to a lack of vital resources such as
military helicopters. This is a critical impediment to
the overall effectiveness and safety of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and personnel. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the conceptual idea of a
global field support strategy laid out in the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
A/64/633, which is expected to contribute to a
significant savings in peacekeeping operations and the
full utilization of existing capacity.

Secondly, it would be desirable to examine
plausible and achievable mechanisms for rapid
deployment. For example, the recent case of inter-
mission cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations Missions in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire could be
a good example to be further developed. At the same
time, Member States are highly encouraged to shorten
their crisis response time. With that in mind, the
Government of the Republic of Korea adopted
domestic legislation in 2009 that enables the
deployment of standby forces on short notice.

Thirdly, it is imperative to bolster the availability,
deployment and appropriateness of civilian capacities
across the board. With the expansion of non-military
components of peacekeeping operations, the role of
civilians has become more important in key areas such
as the rule of law, human rights and elections.
Currently, United Nations peacekeeping employs
approximately 22,000 civilians, including United
Nations volunteers, who constitute 18 per cent of
personnel across 16 missions. In this vein, my
delegation welcomes the recommendations in the
report of the Senior Advisory Group on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/85), which
aims at improving international civilian capacity.

Fourthly, there should be broader coordination
between the United Nations and receiving countries,
and between the United Nations and regional
organizations. This is particularly important when a
new mission is created or an existing mission is being
expanded, as mandates should be matched to the needs
on the ground and there should be a clear agreement on
the concept of mandates themselves. Considering that
the majority of the new demands for United Nations
peacekeeping operations are arising in Africa, my
delegation highlights the significance of coordination
efforts to strengthen the peacekeeping capacities of
African countries and the African Union.

Lastly, there should be enhanced awareness that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not separate
phases. Peacekeeping alone cannot cure all the
challenges facing post-conflict societies. A long-lasting
peace can be achieved only when peacekeeping is
transformed effectively into longer-term peacebuilding.
In this regard, my delegation encourages continuity
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions and
close coordination between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the various United
Nations bodies, including the Peacebuilding
Commission, in identifying the proper sequencing and
prioritization of activities.

Since its first contribution in 1993, the Republic
of Korea has been a strong supporter of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Today, it has around 640
troops and police in the field, which is the largest
number since the Republic of Korea became a Member
of the United Nations. My delegation takes this
opportunity to reiterate our steadfast support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Before concluding, my delegation would like to
extend our sincere condolences to the countries and
families whose peacekeepers have made the ultimate
sacrifice for the noble ideals of United Nations
peacekeeping, and to reiterate our respect for those

11-4815]
who continue to face the risks intrinsic in this
inherently difficult work.

