Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join others
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi
for his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/669) and for updating the
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste has made remarkable progress since
its independence over two years ago. We commend the
Government of Timor-Leste for the achievements it has
attained despite difficult circumstances. We also
appreciate the efforts of the Timorese leadership to
promote national reconciliation and to heal the deep
wounds of the past, both the internal and external.

Pakistan supports the efforts of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
to strengthen peace and assist institutional development
in Timor-Leste. We welcome the progress made by
UNMISET in the three programme areas where it is
mandated to support the Government - namely, first,
public administration and the justice system, as well as
justice in the area of serious crimes; secondly, the
development of law enforcement; and, thirdly, security
and stability in Timor-Leste. Those are critical tasks in
assisting the country in this crucial period of institution-
building. However, we agree with the observation
made in the report of the Secretary-General that

"UNMISET can meet only the most urgent
requirements [and that] [c]omplementary bilateral
efforts to strengthen Timorese public
administration, law enforcement agencies and
armed forces are essential for Timorese
counterparts to achieve the necessary capability
in an orderly and sustainable manner."
(5/2004/669, para. 46)

Pakistan believes that the continued support of
the neighbours of Timor-Leste is vital in that context.
The development of close and friendly relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia is, of course, of
vital importance and in the best interest of both
countries. We welcome the efforts by both sides to
improve their bilateral relations. We call on them to
continue to work in a constructive manner in order to
resolve their outstanding problems, in particular on the
demarcation and management of their common land
border. We hope that Timor-Leste's other neighbours
can also resolve their bilateral issues with this
emerging country, in order to allow it to attain its true
economic potential. In that context, we attach high
importance to the early finalization of the maritime
boundary between Timor-Leste and Australia and on
the sharing of petroleum and natural gas resources in
the region, resources that are so badly needed for
Timor-Leste's immediate and long-term economic and
social development.

In conclusion, I would like to share the optimism
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made by Timor-Leste on the road to what is
called self-sufficiency.

However, as the report states,

"it is clear that much remains to be accomplished
during the remaining months of the UNMISET
mandate and that the extent of its progress will
depend upon joint efforts by Timor-Leste,
UNMISET and the international community".
(5/2004/669, para. 43).

In our View, the long term stability and self-
sufficiency of Timor-Leste must not be taken for
granted. Without the necessary and sustained
international assistance from the international
community all the gains made in Timor-Leste could be
in danger of reversal. To facilitate the transition from
peace-making to peace-building it is important, in our
View, at this stage for the appropriate involvement of
all the organs of the United Nations and other elements
of the international community - including the Breton
Woods institutions and civil society - in assisting
Timor-Leste.

In this regard, we should examine the possibility
of setting up a composite committee with
representation from the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly to coordinate and oversee international
support for East Timor. At the very least, the Economic
and Social Council should consider setting up a
mechanism similar to the ones that have been created
for Guinea-Bissau and Burundi for this purpose.

