The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

Mr. Akbaruddin (India) I take the floor with
a sense of unease that stems from the old saying,
"Expectation is the mother of all frustration". Many
of us regularly articulate suggestions for enhancing
transparency, effectiveness and inclusiveness in the
work of the Security Council. In doing so, we begin
to harbour certain expectations from this organ. Yet
these suggestions, supported by many, remain largely
unimplemented. Notwithstanding persistent efforts,
sadly, progress on working methods of the Council is
best measured not by what has been achieved but how
much more remains to be done.

Today, following your advice, Mr. President, I limit
my focus to just two aspects that are always wished for
but never achieved. The first is the need to change the
processes followed in the subterranean universe of the
Council's subsidiary bodies. The subterranean universe
I refer to consists of all 26 sanctions regimes acting on
behalf of the Council. On the average, they cumulatively
take a thousand decisions a year. However, rare is the
occasion when the Chair of any of these bodies briefs
Member States or the media about the proceedings after
their meetings.

Mr. President, in your statement you mentioned
that you are conducting a press stake-out after every
session of informal consultations. You also referred
to the fact that informal wrap-up briefing sessions are
now becoming a practice. We compliment you on these
efforts, but I would ask why these efforts at transparency
do not extend to the subterranean universe, where more
decisions are taken than in formal meetings or informal
consultations. Why is it that we are blandly informed
of positive decisions of this subterranean universe and
never told about negative decisions when proposals are
not adopted?

When a draft resolution ofthe Council is voted upon,
all of us know who votes for what, and Member States
explain their positions. However, in the subterranean
world of subsidiary bodies, there is no explanation
given. No one says what the rationale for acceptance
is. Furthermore, a rejection does not even surface in
the public space. No one indicates who specifically is
not supporting a request. Indeed, proposals that do not
survive are buried without public acknowledgement
that they were ever considered.

In the subterranean universe, all decisions are
required to be taken by unanimity, a practice that is
not in vogue in the Council itself. The trend now
is to consider means to curtail the use of the veto in
the Council's own work, and many Council members
today support such efforts. However, in the subsidiary
bodies, all Council Members have extended vetoes to
themselves as members of sanctions committees.

In the subterranean universe of subsidiary bodies,
the adoption of principles of anonymity and unanimity
have absolved individual members of accountability.
Taking their cue from the membership of these bodies,
other Member States too may fail to implement many
of the decisions taken by these bodies. A look at the
implementation reports from Member States, available
on the web site of the sanctions committees, indicates
how outdated they are; in most cases they are of the
2003 vintage. We welcome the Council's adoption
of a new procedure for the selection of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies. We hope it is a harbinger of greater
change in the subterranean universe in its totality.

Let me detail the second aspect, which relates to the
lack of institutionalized interaction and consultation
between the Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries. This is a staple issue since the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) was issued in 2000. More recently,
on 31 December 2015, the Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/26, in which it noted that
the lack of effective dialogue among the Council,
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
had generated frustration on all sides and undermined
mandate implementation.

Yet let us look at the recent example of developments
concerning the United Nations peacekeeping mission
in South Sudan in the same six-month period. There has
been talk and suggestions about increasing the number of

troops, ofa possible expansion of mandate, deployment
of a rapid action brigade, measures for protection of
civilians and calls for an arms embargo. At no stage have
there been efforts at institutionalized consultations with
TCCs on any of these topics, as my country, the largest
troop-contributor to this peacekeeping operation, can
vouch. Consultations among Council, Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries remains an improvement
that many have asked for in various forums but which
remains to be implemented years after their necessity
was acknowledged. I would ask now: when will its time
will come?

The two areas mentioned by my delegation today
exemplify the chasm that exists between the Council's
working methods and the general membership's wishes
for comprehensive structural-functional reform. Despite
this chasm, however, India is committed to pursuing
the quest for far-reaching reform in order to make the
Council fit for purpose for the twenty-first century.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.


