Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing
and for his special attention to the 250,000 to 275,000
Syrians trapped in eastern Aleppo.

Let us put eastern Aleppo in some context. For
years, the Council has called on the Al-Assad regime
to end the brutal sieges that have inflicted suffering
on hundreds of thousands of Syrians, who have been
deprived of the food and medicine needed to survive.
The community of Darayya, outside Damascus,
besieged by the regime, received no United Nations
aid for more than three years. Communities in eastern
Ghouta received no United Nations deliveries for more
than two years. After long and painful negotiations,
negotiations that should never have been necessary
in the first place, the United Nations and its partners
barely managed to reach Syria's 18 besieged areas this
year. Often the United Nations was able to send only a
single convoy, and more often than not the Al-Assad
regime removed supplies from those convoys before
they could reach civilians.

It was actually hard to imagine how Syria's
humanitarian situation could get worse, and yet
Al-Assad's military advances around Aleppo,
undertaken with Russia's support, now threaten to
bring the suffering of the Syrian people to a new low.
We have spoken repeatedly and in great detail over the
past six months about the horrific starvation of Syrians
in the besieged areas of Madaya and Darayya. Eastern
Aleppo, by comparison, has up to seven times as many
people as those trapped in Madaya and up to 75 times
as many as in Darayya. Eastern Aleppo is quickly
falling victim to the Al-Assad regime's typical pattern
of starve-and-surrender tactics. Over the past month
the Al-Assad regime flagrantly violated the cessation
of hostilities by attacking Aleppo. The regime and
its supporters have cut off Castello Road, the only
remaining supply route for the more than 250,000
Syrians living in the eastern part of the city, severing
their access to food, fuel, medicine, clean water and
other essential supplies.
Brave and courageous humanitarian workers such
as those Mr. O'Brien described continue to try to
deliver medical supplies and aid on smaller roads at
great, great risk, but alternative options for delivering
humanitarian aid are diminishing rapidly. Airstrikes
by the Al-Assad regime and by Russia are making the
use of those other roads totally precarious. Russia, as
a co-sponsor of the cessation of hostilities, must halt
these attacks and persuade the regime to do the same,
and they must ensure the reopening of the Castello
Road. Russia, the Al-Assad regime and other groups
fighting around Aleppo should heed the call of the
United Nations for a weekly, 48-hour pause to allow for
the delivery of essential supplies.

Look at what people are going through: a doctor,
Samer Attar, who recently returned to the United States
from volunteering in Aleppo, described the scene in
clinics after attacks by the Al-Assad regime: "Patient
after patient, non-stop, was wheeled into the small
emergency room. I saw mutilated limbs, dismembered
bodies, dead children, screaming patients. People
literally bleed to death in front of you and there is
nothing you can do about it". Imagine being a doctor in
that circumstance.

Aleppo's residents are not even safe when they
get to a hospital. According to the United Nations, the
Omar bin Abdul Aziz hospital in eastern Aleppo has
been hit three times since June. Airstrikes reportedly
struck yet another hospital in the J ebel Saman district of
eastern Aleppo on 19 July, killing at least six civilians
and injuring 17, and, as we have heard just in the last
48 hours, we have seen reports that the regime has
bombed four more hospitals, including one that cared
for children.

Feras Badawi, a journalist in eastern Aleppo, told
Human Rights Watch, "We have not seen vegetables
in weeks, and airstrikes are not giving us a break".
Ibrahim Al-Leith, a volunteer first responder with
Syria Civil Defence, described the long lines forming
at shops, because "we are really expecting a famine in
a few days".

In another deeply alarming development, a video
circulated last week that showed rebel fighters beheading
a young boy in Aleppo. The brutal killing of this boy,
reported to be l2-year-old Abdullah Issa, is appalling.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms this
unconscionable act as well as the unlawful targeting of
children and the use of child soldiers by all parties to
this conflict. We note that the opposition has condemned
this crime and promised to bring those responsible for
his death to justice in a transparent manner, something
that we have never heard the Al-Assad regime do when
faced with similar allegations of atrocities. Instead,
despite countless videos, reams and reams of elaborate
photographic evidence and hundreds of thousands of
eyewitness reports gathered by credible independent
actors, we get from the Syrian regime time and again
only blithe, uncurious but always dogmatic denials - a
cold, cruel indifference to the fate of the Syrian people.

I would also note that the Russian Federation
has never once acknowledged even the possible
involvement of the Russian Air Force in the horrific
strikes that have resulted in significant civilian
casualties, nor has Russia acknowledged the huge
number of Russian strikes against opposition groups
that signed up for the cessation of hostilities - the
very groups, in fact, mentioned by the representative
of the Russian Federation. The Russian Federation is
in an extremely weak position to point fingers at the
United States in the Council. We look forward to Russia
opening just a single investigation into strikes that have
killed civilians.

The situation in Syria's other besieged areas remains
dire. Even excluding Aleppo, 196,500 more Syrians are
living in besieged areas than were in January. These
Syrians depend on sporadic aid deliveries, which are
all too often disrupted by the regime's bureaucratic
pretexts or by fighting on the ground. In no single
month this year has the United Nations been allowed
to reach even half of Syrians living in besieged areas.
United Nations Special Adviser Jan Egeland recently
warned that Madaya was on the brink of starvation.
And the regime continues to dispute the numbers in the
United Nations beneficiary list - a cynical attempt to
further reduce how much aid gets delivered, in the rare
instances that aid gets delivered all. The United Nations
should be determining what is needed, how much and
where i and not the regime, which has long practiced
collective punishment and indiscriminately branded
civilians as terrorists.

The regime's actions also continue to take a severe
toll on the health sector. This month alone, forces
loyal to Al-Assad twice removed medical supplies
from convoys bound for the besieged community of
Al-Waer in Homs. What exactly did the regime take? It
took midwifery kits to help deliver healthy babies and
treatments for diarrhoea. It is obscene.

In May, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls for the protection of
medical personnel and facilities. Yet hospitals, clinics
and medical personnel are still being struck regularly
by the regime and Russian forces. In recent days, it
was reported that air strikes conducted by the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant may have caused a large number of civilian
casualties in Manbij. The United States will carefully and
thoroughly review any and all credible information that
we can gather about the incident, including information
from organizations within Syria that document harm to
civilians. We are also now trying to investigate those
events. This is a process that is complicated by the
extremely limited access of Syrian civil society groups
and others to areas controlled by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We are determined to do whatever
we can to understand what took place.

The United States goes to great lengths to reduce the
risk of non-combatant casualties, and complies with the
law of armed conflict in its operations. It will continue
to do so. If we determine that civilians were harmed in
Manbij by our strikes, we will acknowledge it and look
at what steps can be taken, consistent with the policies
that President Obama announced in his executive order
of 1 July on pre- and post-strike measures to address
civilian casualties in United States operations. This is
an extremely important issue.

In conclusion, last week, Secretary Kerry travelled
to Moscow in an attempt to address the two main
forces undermining the cessation of hostilities - first
and foremost, the rampant violations by the Al-Assad
regime, including the targeting of both civilians and
groups that are supposed to be protected, as well as
offensives led by the Al-Qaida affiliate in Syria, the
Al-Nusra Front, which increasingly poses a threat to
our interests. In Moscow, the United States and Russia
agreed on a series of concrete steps that, if fully
implemented, could restore the cessation of hostilities
and create space for Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's
efforts to launch a genuine political transition process.
Our technical experts have been working on the details
for implementing such steps. Ultimate success is of
course far from assured, but we know that we have a
responsibility to try and exhaust all diplomatic options.

Moving forward requires a period of reduced
violence. If Aleppo remains under siege, it is hard to
see how that is going to work. As we speak, Aleppo's
residents are struggling to find food and medicine
for their families. Maher Abu al-Walid, a 25-year-old
resident, said in an interview, "We are not starving yet,
but we are all panicking now". He has to support his wife
and 7-month-year-old daughter, Sham, as food supplies
are running low and prices are increasing. Imagine for
just one moment what it must feel like to realize that,
within in a few days, every shelf at your local market
will be bare and that you may have no place to go and
no way to afford the food that your 7-month-old infant
desperately needs. All of us here must do our utmost to
ensure that Maher's fear does not become a reality - a
reality that far too many in Syria are already enduring.

