Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
shares the views expressed in the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). Belgium
would also like to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.

First, let me thank the Bolivian presidency of the
Security Council and Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for convening today's debate.

As mentioned in my country's statement to the
Council in December 2016 on this very topic (see S/PV.7758), the risk of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors is no longer
a working hypothesis but rather a reality in various
countries and regions. The allure and accessibility
of certain weapons of mass destruction and of
related chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
technologies and resources have increased among
non-State actors in their quest for the means to carry out
large-scale and indiscriminate attacks. It is therefore
essential to continue to work towards the most effective
implementation of existing provisions and instruments
used to combat the proliferation of chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear resources. The comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/2016/1038),
carried out in 2016 under the Spanish chairmanship
of the 1540 Committee, is an excellent starting point.
Everyone's vigilance and the proper collaboration and
transparency between States are necessary.

With regard to chemical weapons, Belgium, which
is preparing to commemorate the 100th anniversary
of the first large-scale use of mustard gas in the Ypres
region in 1917 during World War I, strongly supports
the work carried out by the OPCW. The multilateral
approach to the control of chemical substances must
be preserved, as it has demonstrated throughout the
OPCW's 20-year lifespan that it is able to considerably
reduce exposure to chemical weapons. Belgium
supports the work of the OPCW and regularly reviews
its own chemical facilities. The use ofchemical weapons
cannot go unpunished, whether carried out by States or
by non-State groups. In that regard, it is essential that
the Fact-finding Mission and the United Nations-OPCW
Joint Investigative Mechanism be able to continue their
work without external interference so as to shed light
on all of the chemical incidents that have occurred in
Syria and determine who was responsible. We firmly
believe that the Security Council should be unanimous
in its condemnation of each chemical-weapons attack
in Syria, both by the so-called Islamic State and by the
Syrian regime.

As regards the fight against nuclear proliferation,
Belgium has taken measures to secure existing sensitive
materials and to reduce their quantities, often thanks
to the support of new technologies. It is also acting
to raise awareness among industry professionals. Our
experts are also heavily involved in research that is
geared towards the development of nuclear fuel that
has a lower risk of proliferation than traditional fuel.
Belgium remains vigilant in its control of medical and
industrial radioactive sources and works to reduce the
risk of proliferation around the world, particularly
through its support for scientific research.

Despite the difficulties involved in implementing the
Biological Weapons Convention, progress is possible in
combating the proliferation of biological resources. The
peer-review approach, to which Belgium contributed
through the Benelux countries' peer review in 2015,
has proved useful both in strengthening mutual trust
in implementing the Convention and in building the
capacity of the various States and experts participating
in such reviews. Belgium takes this opportunity to pay
tribute to Morocco, which successfully organized a peer
review in May this year, with financial support from the
European Union. We should also note the development
of industrial standards in the biotechnology sector,
as well as codes of conduct - developments that can
strengthen that sector against the unwanted proliferation
of biological resources.

Belgium believes that the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction into the
hands of non-State actors can be effective only if it
combines various approaches and includes a higher
number of actors. Where multilateral initiatives exist
and have proved to be effective, they must be strongly
supported, and we must continue to adapt them to future
challenges, in particular technological challenges.
However, such multilateral and State-centred initiatives
are not sufficient. Regional approaches, both formal and
informal, can also play a fundamental role in the fight
against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
proliferation. Approaches such as those supported
by Council Decision 2017/809 of the Council of the
European Union in support of resolution 1540 (2004)
can indeed help to strengthen cooperation, build trust
and transparency, foster the strengthening of expertise
and disseminate best practices.
In conclusion, Belgium would like to stress that the
role of economics in the implementation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear safety and security
norms is key to non-proliferation. State regulation and
voluntary standards and certification by commercial
entities can be mutually strengthening. However,
given the amount of uncontrolled material at risk of
proliferation and the limited amount of available public
resources, we should favour an approach that involves
all sectors of society in combating proliferation.

