Mr. Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure to convey to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish
also to pay tribute to your predecessor for his stewardship
of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today at the request
of the Arab Group at the United Nations, which cannot
remain silent about the ongoing events in the occupied
West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Holy City of
Jerusalem, the first Kiblah and the site of the third Grand
Mosque, in the wake of the opening by Israel of the
tunnel constructed under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

The Council's accession to that request shows its
appreciation of the threat of the tunnel project to the
physical safety of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It also shows the

 

Council's sensitivity to the current critical phase of the
peace process in the region. Furthermore, it reflects the
Council's perception of the gravity of the situation in the
wake of the conflagration sparked by Israeli measures that
constitute a stark challenge to and a repugnant provocation
of the sentiments of the Palestinian people - indeed, a
provocation to all Arabs and Muslims throughout the world.

These measures are taken within an overall plan of
action by Israel to judaize Jerusalem, change its Arab
character, alter its legal status and suppress its Islamic
physical features and cultural heritage. Indeed, they are part
of a series of steps intended to impose new facts on the
ground in a bid to depopulate Jerusalem of its Arab
citizens, build new settlements and expand the existing ones
inside the city and in its surrounding areas.

All of these Israeli measures are not the outcome of a
policy that came into being overnight. They are, rather, the
direct result of a long-term and focused plan of action that
took concrete and unmistakable shape following the
assumption of power by the new Israeli Government, which
is pursuing an aggressive expansionist policy in violation of
the agreements concluded by the former Government of
Israel. Those agreements provide for negotiations on the
determination of the status of the City of Jerusalem in the
course of the final stage of talks. Thus, Israel has reneged
on its legally binding obligations under the Oslo agreement
as well as disregarded the Security Council resolutions
regarding the City of Jerusalem.

These Israeli actions are the culmination of the new
strategy and plan of action being pursued by the
Government of Israel to pre-empt the provisions of the
accords reached, to back away from obligations, to expedite
settlement activities, to seize and annex more Palestinian
land and displace more Palestinians, to disassociate itself
from the land-for-peace principle and to shift towards
inadmissible notions that seek security for Israel through
territorial expansion, irrespective of the cost or the
consequences.

The final communique adopted by the Arab summit
meeting held at Cairo last June endorsed the peace process
as a strategic choice anchored in international treaties,
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid formula and the
principle of land for peace. Therefore, no one should be
surprised at the angry reaction now unfolding following the
discovery by the Arab and the Muslim nations, as well as
the international community, that the policies of extremism
are supplanting reason and vision and that oppression and
aggression are replacing legally binding obligations and
signed agreements.

Therefore, while Kuwait condemns these grave
Israeli measures that may well destroy the peace process,
it calls upon the Security Council to adopt without delay
a draft resolution to force Israel to close the tunnel and to
reverse all actions and practices that have led to these
highly volatile situations. We also call upon the Council
to fulfil its responsibility regarding the restoration of the
peace process and to put it back on track by a reversal of
the Israeli designs so as to avoid a return to the cycle of
tensions and fighting. The Council should also reaffirm its
previous relevant resolutions and its backing of the
accords reached in order to safeguard the peace process
and to halt its drift towards collapse.

It is our fervent hope that reason and wisdom will
prevail with the unanimous adoption of a draft resolution
that reflects the sensitivity and significance of the current
situation and displays the Council's sense of
determination to fulfil its obligations in regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such a
draft resolution would demonstrate the response of the
Council vis-a-vis actions that undermine peace. A
collective and unanimous position on the part of the
Council would demonstrate in no uncertain terms its
resolve and will. The Council should not allow the
aspirations of peoples for just and comprehensive peace
to evaporate as a result of an aggressive drive by Israel
which, if left unchecked, would bring about wide-scale
destruction and despair.

To be attained and maintained, viable peace requires
justice and equity based on the rule of international law
as embodied by the Council. Equally, it requires courage
and bold initiative. The Council is undoubtedly duty-
bound to fulfil its role towards that end.

