Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is very good to see Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock on the screen. I just want to say that we still have one coronavirus-free seat here and that it would be great if perhaps next time one of them could be here in our midst. I wish to echo what Martin said at the beginning when he described how we are currently witnessing this airlift of hope. I would also echo what he said with regard to the relief and comfort that this brings to not only those in the planes but also to their families and friends. I thank him, his Deputy, his team and in particular the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and President Maurer. It is incredible what the ICRC is doing not only there but also in other places around the globe. We share Martin's wish that on the basis of this airlift of hope, we can now build momentum and confidence that we can actually embark on a road to peace and start with a final agreement on a joint declaration on the shooting war, or as Mark Lowcock said, that we have a nationwide ceasefire. We and the parties owe that to the people. In that regard, I would like to commend Mr. Griffiths, as I did last time, for his ongoing meetings with members of civil society and women. We have to involve them and listen to them. As Ms. King repeated earlier, civil society says that enough is enough. That is in contrast with what is developing with the airlift and what is happening in Ma'rib. We see a deterioration of the situation in Al-Hudaydah, which is alarming, and Taiz. With regard to Taiz, I support the Special Envoy's efforts to work with civil society and highlight what civil society does with regard to schools and education, for example. Women's participation in all peace talks, at both the local and national levels, are very important. Mr. Griffiths mentioned how much more enduring peace agreements are when women participate. On the humanitarian front, we are repeating ourselves. Nevertheless, we must repeat it - Yemen is the worst humanitarian situation of all the conflicts we deal with here in the Council. The people are suffering and, as Mr. Lowcock has highlighted, famine is looming. His overview was dire. As in many conflicts, women, children and marginalized people are the ones suffering the most from this conflict. Some might remember that under the German presidency in July we had Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi, Chairwoman of the Arab Human Rights Foundation, as a briefer (see S/PV.8753). She highlighted the fate of people with disabilities. Before she left, she pointed to us and said that we can do more and we can do better. I still have that ringing in my ears. I would therefore like to plea with colleagues who are standing in the way of highlighting the dire situation of persons with disabilities in the statement that we are preparing. I hope we will be able to agree to highlight the fate of people with disabilities. On humanitarian aid, we heard Mr. Lowcock's figures. I am happy that some are now paying. The last time we spoke about this issue I pointed particularly at the members of the coalition. I am very happy to hear that Saudi Arabia is now contributing financially. We hope that the United Arab Emirates will do likewise. Germany has disbursed all $150 million it committed towards the Yemen humanitarian response plan. In addition, we are contributing $100 million to the World Food Programme and the United Nations Office for Project Services. I mention to Mrs. Craft, incidentally, that Germany is the second-largest donor to the World Food Programme, which we believe does a wonderful job. We all recall when David Beasley briefed the Council on the situation in Yemen (see S/2020/930). With regard to the distribution of support, I would like to echo what others, like Mrs. Craft, said today, that it is unacceptable that the Houthis are blocking humanitarian aid. I recall that Mr. Beasley emphasized how the Houthis were diverting humanitarian aid. However, I would also like to point the finger a bit to the other side. Mr. Lowcock mentioned that some humanitarian aid is not reaching Al-Hudaydah because the Government of Yemen is blocking it due to certain questionable import duties. I would like to plead here for the Government of the Yemeni people to not withhold humanitarian aid to its people. Perhaps the Yemeni Ambassador would like to say something in that connection.
