Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Serry for his thorough briefing. I will begin
remarks today by addressing Israeli-Palestinian issues
before turning to Syria and Lebanon.

The United States recognizes that the path to a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East
is littered with obstacles, but we also believe that the
goal is as essential as the process is turbulent. For
this reason, we will continue to support negotiations
between the parties. However, ultimately, the choice
is up to the leaders and their people. None of us can
make the difficult decisions required for peace, and the
parties have decided to take a pause in the negotiations.

We have clearly reached a difficult moment, but we
continue to believe that there is only one real viable
solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: two States
living side-by-side in peace and security. And if the
parties are willing to go down that path, we will be there
to support them. In that connection, we are grateful
for the strong support the negotiations have received
from the League of Arab States, the European Union,
the Quartet and other key partners. We will continue to
look to them in the weeks and months ahead.

Regarding the recent announcement by Fatah
and Hamas that they intend to form a technocratic
Government to prepare for new elections, the timing
of the announcement was clearly unhelpful in terms
of efforts that were under way between the parties to
reach an agreement on extending the negotiations.

The United States and the other members of
the Quartet have been clear about the principles that
must be accepted by the Palestinian Government in
order for it to achieve peace and build an independent
Palestinian State. Those principles have not changed.
Any Palestinian Government must unambiguously and
explicitly commit to non-violence, recognition of the
State of Israel and acceptance of previous agreements
and obligations between the parties. President Abbas
has been committed to these principles and has declared
that any Government he forms will be committed in the
same way. If a new Palestinian Government is formed,
we will assess it based on its composition and actions
as well as its adherence to these principles.

We continue to oppose unilateral actions that seek to
circumvent or prejudge outcomes that can be negotiated
only between the parties, including efforts to enhance
Palestinian claims to statehood absent a negotiated
final-status agreement. Similarly, we continue to view
Israeli settlements in the West Bank as illegitimate,
and oppose any efforts to establish new settlements,
expand existing ones or legalize settlement outposts.
Our positions on other aspects of the process are also
well known and have not changed.

The United States remains deeply concerned by the
up-tick in tensions and violence at the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif compound around the Passover and
Easter holidays, and urges all parties to redouble
efforts to reduce tensions while maintaining the status
quo. We continue to maintain high-level engagement on
that issue. My Government also condemns other acts
of violence, including rocket strikes into Israel from
the Gaza Strip, the 14 April murder of an Israeli police
official, and settler attacks and demolitions directed
against Palestinian civilians in the West Bank. We call
upon all concerned to avoid incidents that might make
further disturbances likely. We look to the authorities
on both sides to investigate and hold accountable
persons responsible for acts of violence. We also call
on both sides to respect the terms of the November 2012
ceasefire involving Israel and Gaza.

In addition, the United States remains troubled
by the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Several
United Nations relief projects, which are important
to improving the conditions there, are still awaiting
Israeli approval. We urge all parties to continue to
work together to increase the access of humanitarian
supplies into that area.

Let me now turn to Syria, where the devastating
conflict is now in its fourth year and where the
violence continues, the number of refugees is still
going up and the flow of humanitarian aid remains a
trickle compared to the overwhelming need. Earlier
this month, many of us attended a presentation during
which we saw graphic photographs depicting the
torture and industrial-style killing of some 11,000
Syrian detainees. Those photographs illustrate but a
small fraction of the horrors inflicted by the Al-Assad
regime. We must add to that the victims of chemical
attacks and barrel bombs, the families deprived of food
by the Government's starve-or-surrender policy, the
patients forcibly removed from hospitals and the many
thousands of people who have disappeared or remain
in detention.

I realize that those facts are all too familiar
to Council members and the broader international
community, but I stress them because we must never
become resigned or inured to the devastation that is
taking place daily in Syria and to the Syrian people.
We must keep this litany of horror before us and remain
steadfast in our determination to end the killing and to
hold the perpetrators of those crimes accountable.

At the same time, we should be neither surprised
nor deceived by the Syrian Government's cynical
choice of this inopportune moment to schedule a
presidential election. Although we all look forward to
the day when meaningful balloting can take place in
Syria, that day is not 3 June or any time in the near
future. Although credible elections have been held in
the midst of conflict, such a process is inconceivable
in Syria today, where the regime has crushed political
dissent and nearly half of the population is displaced
by war, including millions of potential voters who have
been forced to flee the country. Inside Syria, do we
reasonably expect the 242,000 people in besieged areas,
or the more than 3.5 million in hard-to-reach areas, to
vote in those elections, when the regime systematically
denies them access even to food and medicine? Does
anybody expect the regime to enfranchise those it has
decided to starve?

Regime-sponsored elections are inconsistent
with the United Nations-led Geneva process and
threaten to further undermine the prospects for a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. My Government
joins with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Joint
Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi in calling
on the Government to postpone the balloting and
to instead focus on the steps clearly defined in the
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) to create an
atmosphere in which a positive electoral process might
move forward.

The humanitarian situation, which has been
calamitous for many months, has grown even worse
of late. The regime's failure to implement resolution
2139 (2014) has wasted valuable time and claimed
many more lives. The conditions remain dire across
the country, but most notably in Homs, Aleppo and in
areas near Damascus, such as the Yarmouk Palestinian
refugee camp. We should all be clear about where the
fault for that deterioration lies. It is the regime that,
with the stroke of a pen, could allow cross-border
assistance to reach millions in need. But it does not. It
is the regime that continues to pound Syrian civilians
with ruthless barrel bombs. It is the regime that has
coldly integrated the denial of humanitarian assistance
into its ever-expanding arsenal of weapons against the
Syrian people.

In addition, as my Government and others have noted,
we have indications that a toxic chemical - probably
chlorine - was used in an attack this month against
the opposition-dominated village of Kafr Zita. Those
reports and others are extremely serious and are of
profound concern to the international community. We
welcome today's announcement that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is sending a
mission to Syria to determine the facts on alleged gas
attacks. Syria must immediately and fully cooperate
with such fact-finding, and anybody responsible for
such attacks must be held accountable.

Finally, with respect to Lebanon my Government
remains concerned about the fragile security situation,
including tensions along the blue line, repeated cross-
border violations by Syria, ongoing sectarian violence
and Hizbullah provocations, such as last month's attack
against Israeli soldiers in the Shebaa Farms region. The
United States urges calm and hopes that all parties will
refrain from violence and adhere to the Government's
disassociation policy, as enshrined in the Baabda
Declaration. We urge as well the full implementation of
all Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), which require the
disarmament of militia.

Lebanon's leaders face the challenge of working
together to address the host of security, economic and
humanitarian problems confronting the country. As we
have discussed, that challenge is exacerbated by the
needs to host the now more than 1 million refugees from
Syria living within Lebanon's borders. As a member of
the International Support Group for Lebanon, we urge
the international community to respond to that epic
humanitarian crisis by providing robust financial and
other backing through the various funding mechanisms
that are available.

On the political side, it is important for the Cabinet
to continue to steer Lebanon on the sustainable
course of moderation. Lebanon's political leaders
have a responsibility to their citizens and to their
country's Constitution to conclude the recently
initiated presidential selection process by 25 May.
That is a Lebanese undertaking that should, and must
be determined by Lebanon alone, free from outside
interference. Both presidential and parliamentary
elections must be conducted in a free, fair and timely
manner.

At Wadi Araba 20 years ago, Jordan's King Hussein
asked us to envision a Middle East in which there would
be "no more death, no more misery, no more suspicion,
no more fear, no more uncertainty of what each day
will bring". That vision, at that time, seemed far more
within our grasp than is the case today. Our task - and
it is an urgent one - is to reverse course and restore
a sense of progress and hope to the region. To that
goal, I pledge my own Government's best efforts and
respectfully welcome others'.

