First of all, El Salvador thanks the Security Council for its continued attention to the threats to international security posed by terrorism and organized crime, as a whole, My country reaffirms its commitment and unconditional support for all initiatives to combat terrorism and organized crime with a view to promoting international security, the culture of peace and the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. I take this opportunity to reiterate my country's deep solidarity with the victims of acts of terrorism and their families. El Salvador condemns all acts of terrorism, regardless of their motivation and whomever commits them, and calls for the ongoing commitment of the United Nations system and the Secretary-General to eradicate this practice and assist the victims and survivors of such acts. My country appreciates the preparation and presentation of the report on measures taken by Member States to hinder the financing of terrorism (S/2020/754), as it constitutes an important source of information on measures and good practices undertaken by States and the Organization that could help promote better capacity-building for the prevention of the various manifestations of terrorism and organized crime. While their objectives may differ, criminals and terrorists share the need to act outside the law by taking advantage of its gaps to fulfil their missions and avoid being brought to justice, a practice that is common in different countries and regions of the world. There is a wide variety of types of interactions between organized crime and terrorism, Understanding them can provide very useful guidance on their varying manifestations, depending on their geographical, regional and national contexts. These actions are undertaken not only to generate income but also to instil fear and recruit new followers. This link is complex, fluid and ever-changing. El Salvador recognizes that terrorism constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security and that all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. In that regard, all counter-terrorism efforts must recognize those complexities and develop common strategies to effectively address that challenge. Despite having reached peace agreements in 1992, El Salvador suffered considerable damage to its social fabric, as well as economic and social marginalization that created conditions for the emergence of a new form of organized crime: gangs. The phenomenon of gangs was poorly addressed by different Government Administrations. Over time, gangs became organized structures with diversified operations such as extortion, control of territories and of the local drug market, thus becoming a growing threat to the rule of law. With regard to the national legal framework, El Salvador approved the Special Law against Acts of Terrorism, which recognizes and defines gangs as criminal organizations and terrorist groups. Faced with that reality, the Government of El Salvador has prioritized its territorial control plan, a comprehensive and firm response to protect the Salvadoran population from those terrorist groups and from the various forms and manifestations of organized crime. The plan aims at restoring and guaranteeing the security of Salvadorans, rebuilding the social fabric, recovering territories and public spaces and empowering young people. A year into the implementation of the territorial control plan, El Salvador has seen a historical reduction of homicides, including days with zero homicides. At the international level, El Salvador considers extremely timely the promotion, implementation and universalization of international commitments, such as conventions on transnational organized crime, corruption and drugs, as well as instruments against terrorism, and principles, norms and standards of the United Nations on crime prevention and criminal justice. At the same time, my country considers it crucial to enforce human rights obligations in the context of the fight against terrorism, including the right to privacy and freedom, minority rights, children's rights and compliance with the Geneva Conventions and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. My country also welcomes vital coordination within the United Nations system to combat this scourge. El Salvador recognizes that the fight against terrorism transcends national borders. Further work must be done to strengthen regional and international cooperation mechanisms to prevent and combat terrorism, focusing on an agile exchange of information and good practices, standardizing legal frameworks and using new technologies to fight organized crime. Regional and international cooperation has an important role in preventing and combating terrorism. In that connection, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador made a call during the third Hemispheric Ministerial Conference on the Fight Against Terrorism, held in January in Colombia, in which she highlighted the need for an agile exchange of information and good practices, standardizing legislation and strengthening legal frameworks when necessary, and using new technologies and computer platforms to fight crime. In that sense, El Salvador expresses its wish to secure the support and cooperation of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Their full cooperation is needed to help us effectively counter all the threats posed by terrorism and organized crime. The development of new technologies represents a great opportunity to promote the economic and social development of States. However, such information systems are vulnerable to attacks by people who try to manipulate those communication networks for ideological purposes or for their own benefit. As criminals and terrorists exploit new technologies, efforts and resources must be invested to work on specialized guidelines for the development and implementation of laws that help prevent this type of crime and to bring to justice those who operate outside of the law. The fight against terrorist groups has not diminished during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as cyberattacks and attacks against national health infrastructure have increased. This once again underscores the importance of addressing this issue and of strengthening national capacities. Even with the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic, El Salvador continues to work not only to hold on to the areas recovered from gangs but also to significantly reduce extortion, drug trafficking, femicide, forced disappearances and other manifestations of terrorism and organized crime. Finally, El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and to developing the measures established therein as the most effective way to end the threat of terrorism, while ensuring full respect for the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
