Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to speak in
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The Council needs
to address a number of critical issues under this
agenda item. The prospects for a two-State solution
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict seem to be fading,
and hard-won security gains for both sides are in
jeopardy while settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories continue. Those settlements are
illegal, in particular under the Geneva Conventions,
and the Council has expressed itself accordingly in its
resolution 2334 (2016).

Liechtenstein shares the concern of many that we
are currently moving further away from a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. We call on all involved
to fully respect the international legal framework,
including the one established by the Security Council,
and to recommit to the two-State solution as the only
viable and sustainable avenue to peace in the region.

The crisis in Syria has again occupied the Council
throughout this month, once again without result,
unfortunately, for the people of Syria, who continue to
suffer mass atrocities in plain sight. The inability of the
Counciltoputanendtothoseatrocities,letalonetoprovide
some form of accountability, are in stark contravention
to its designated role to maintain international peace
and security, with particular responsibilities bestowed
upon the five permanent members. But the failure of
the Council to act, which comes at the expense of the
Syrian people, also constitutes a serious political and
institutional challenge for the United Nations. Recent
efforts, notably among the Council's elected Members,
to bridge the political divide are a welcome effort to
help restore the functionality of the Council, so far,
unfortunately, without any tangible results.

By signing the Accountability, Coherence and
Accountability code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, 112 States, including a
majority of the Council members, have committed
to preventing and ending mass atrocity crimes. The
Council was, however, unable to formulate any response
when one of the oldest and strongest norms of warfare
was repeatedly violated - the absolute prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons at all times and
in all circumstances - not to speak of the many other
instances of well-documented war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Syria. Liechtenstein
will continue its advocacy to broaden support for and
strengthen the implementation of the Code, which
we consider to be an important contribution to the
Secretary-General's effort to put prevention at the
centre of the United Nations.

Since its beginning, the Syrian conflict has
been characterized by pervasive impunity, and such
impunity continues to fuel it. Within the United
Nations membership and among civil society there is
a growing momentum towards - finally f ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed in Syria. The
General Assembly has shown resolve by creating, on
21 December 2016, an accountability mechanism for
Syria, the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious
Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The need for
such a mechanism was illustrated even more forcefully
last week when yet another draft resolution on Syria
failed to be adopted because ofa veto. The "Triple IM"
offers the only promising path towards accountability
for the crimes committed and towards justice for the
Syrian people and a sustainable peace for the country.
We call on all States to continue their political and
financial support for the Mechanism.

