Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Azerbaijani presidency for organizing this open debate
on a subject that is ofparticular importance to the entire
membership of the United Nations, and for preparing
and circulating the concept paper (S/2013/6l3, annex)
on the implementation of note S/2010/507.

This debate has been very timely in terms of
re-addressing the issues on the working methods of
the Security Council, as we are fast approaching again
a time of change in the membership of the Council.
I would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Perceval for her work and efforts in her
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

Turkey attaches great importance to the efforts to
improve the Council's working methods, which is an
important component of the comprehensive reform of
the Council. We have long advocated that the Council
is in need of a change in terms of its structure and
representation, as well as its working methods.

The world is constantly changing and a number of
developments are unfolding before our eyes with each
passing day. That is why it is our sincere wish that
the Council adapt itself to the current realities of the
global political, security and economic scene. As it is
our common responsibility to maintain the credibility
of this body, we should spare no effort to enhance its
efficiency and transparency, and work sincerely to
ensure that its work is inclusive and effective. In that
sense, Turkey welcomes the steps taken in recent years,
particularly through the milestone presidential note
S/2010/507 and the subsequent complementary notes.
On the other hand, there is still much to be done in
terms of the implementation of the measures set out in
those notes.

First and foremost, Turkey believes that the
Council's dialogue with non-Council members should
be further improved. The entire membership expects
more effective and frequent use of public meetings,
informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings. That will enable better communication and
interaction, and provide more opportunity to the wider
membership to have more focused involvement in the
issues ofcommon concern. With regard to enhancing the
transparency of the Council, we welcome the recently
increased use of wrap-up sessions and encourage all
members of the Council to hold such meetings at the
end of their presidencies. At the same time, we are
cognizant of the need for the Council's to conduct its
own deliberations for decision-making.

Secondly, we need a better structured dialogue and
communication between the Council and other United
Nations bodies and regional organizations. A regular
and more substantive exchange of views among the
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, and the Peacebuilding Commission
would not only enhance the efficiency of the United
Nations system, but also augment the transparency,
openness and inclusiveness ofthe Council itself. We also
think that the Council should expand its consultation
and cooperation with other international and relevant
regional organizations, such as the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the League of Arab States.

Thirdly, we are of the View that the Council should
make better use of measures under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. Without any prejudice
to its right to mandate measures under Chapter VII, the
Council, as the primary responsible organ of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should give some thought to utilizing different
ways to reach a peaceful settlement of disputes. In that
sense, we welcome the horizon-scanning briefings
provided by the Secretariat. We believe that those
briefings are important in terms of conflict prevention
and wish to see such meetings in all upcoming
programmes of work of the Council.

Finally, I would like to touch upon an aspect
related to the Council's internal practice, which is
again of particular importance. While taking note of
presidential note S/2012/937, Turkey believes that the
Council should act in due transparency and inclusivity
in the appointment of the chairs of the subsidiary organs
and the selection of the penholders.

While fully acknowledging the positive
developments related to the working methods of the
Security Council, we believe that there is always room
for further improvement. In the end, all Members of
the United Nations deserve a more democratic, more
transparent and more efficient Security Council, which
we believe is also a requirement for maintaining the
credibility of our Organization, the United Nations.

