Mr. Strang: I thank the you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the important issue of international judicial
cooperation in terrorism cases in connection with
resolution 2322 (2016).

Terrorism cases are almost inevitably transnational
in nature, and therefore efforts to bring these
individuals to justice within a civilian rule of law
system require the sharing of evidence across
jurisdictions. That is particularly true for those cases
involving the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
whether those individuals are travelling to conflict
zones or returning to their own country or to a third
country, where there will inevitably be evidence with
third countries, including evidence related to their
travel, evidence related to the financing of their travel,
evidence related to their communications and evidence
related to their recruitment or efforts to recruit others
through social media, and of course any Victims can be
of any nationality. These important pieces of evidence
will be located with immigrations officials, travel
agencies, airlines, banks or on computer servers, in
different jurisdictions, where international cooperation
between judicial authorities will be required to ensure
that relevant evidence can be gathered in a form that
can be used in court.

Iwould like to focus on today on a key part ofmaking
that system work - the role of central authorities, which
is recognized in paragraph 13 of the resolution. Central
authorities are the national entities responsible for any
mutual legal assistance - the sharing of evidence and
extradition of individuals. At the International Institute
for Justice and the Rule of Law (IIJ) in Malta, we have
gathered together representatives of central authorities
from North, East and West Africa, the United States
and the Middle East, Senegal and Egypt. We have had
civil law, common law and other legal traditions present
to discuss and agree on some basic principles and best
practices. My briefing today reflects the collective
wisdom of a variety of Member States, as well as my
own experiences as a career prosecutor.

First, all members must establish a central authority.
Various United Nations conventions expressly call
upon each Member State to designate a central
authority within their government to facilitate mutual
legal assistance requests and extraditions. Sometimes
States attempt to create multiple central authorities for
different crimes - one for terrorism, one for corruption.
We find that this is generally not a helpful approach.
It is better for Member States to designate a single
central authority in order to concentrate experience
and resources, reduce bureaucracy and overlapping
authority, and ensure visibility and accountability for
all incoming and outgoing requests. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and others have encouraged
the creation of regional criminal information-sharing
platforms. These can be helpful, but it remains critical
that Member States joining such platforms name their
existing central authority as their point of contact to
the platforms.

But it is not merely enough for a Member State to
establish an office that is called a central authority. A
central authority must be able to function effectively.
Without proper resources and dedicated expert and
administrative personnel, the work of a central
authority will be ineffective. Central authorities
should serve to ensure that requests for mutual legal
assistance from domestic law enforcement and judicial
authorities are sufficient and comply with the terms
of applicable law, treaty or convention before such
requests are transmitted. While staffing needs will
vary, some Member States receive and send thousands
of requests each year, and others far fewer, but there
still must be experienced practitioners - emphasis on
practitioners - assigned to the central authority.
Success in the area of judicial cooperation among
Member States is naturally based on trust. That trust
is built on experience and relationships. Member
States must encourage their respective central
authorities to have regular and direct discussions with
their international counterparts. Moreover, direct
communication among central authorities permits
international counterparts to discuss the status of
pending requests and to seek together to overcome
challenges that may arise in satisfying such requests.
That experience builds trust.

Investigations and prosecutions in terrorism
cases in particular demand quick and confidential
assistance between national authorities. It is therefore
a good practice to send such draft requests to receiving
central authorities to allow them to begin reviewing
that request. Such direct communication can often
be made effectively initially through e-mail or by
telephone. The use of diplomatic channels, however,
can sometimes delay effective investigations and the
collection of evidence for use in court, and therefore it
was the sense of the central authorities participating in
our programme that it should be discouraged.

Acentralauthorityshouldmaintaintheconfidentiality
of mutual legal assistance and extradition requests in
order to protect the integrity of terrorist investigations
and prosecutions. Naturally, premature disclosure of a
request may not only disrupt a terrorist investigation,
including inadvertent notification to the targets of the
investigation, who could hide or destroy evidence,
move the proceeds of crime or flee the jurisdiction.
Therefore, Member States must take steps to treat each
request as a confidential matter. If the receiving central
authority is required under its own domestic law to
notify a party ofa request, it should certainly notify the
sending authority in advance to avoid compromising an
ongoing investigation.

Member States should actively determine whether
or not they need to adjust their domestic law to
ensure that such notification is not legally required.
Member States should also empower their respective
central authorities to take action directly or lead
the coordination of the execution of requests. A key
component of an effective central authority is its ability
to act with authority to ensure the prompt execution of
requests. If a central authority lacks the competence to
act, then efforts at effective cooperation will be quickly
frustrated. Member States therefore should empower
their central authorities to execute requests directly
wherever possible or, when they lack legal authority to
execute the request directly, central authorities should
coordinate directly with the other competent entities
within their Government to execute such requests.

A word about what central authorities should not do.
They should not limit the police to police or other forms
of cooperation between governmental law enforcement
entities. Instead, they should support it. Some forms of
assistance will inevitably require formal requests for
mutual legal assistance in order for the information
received to be used in court. Where formal mutual legal
assistance is not required, central authorities should
encourage, where possible, the use of other channels of
law enforcement sharing, such as those mentioned by
my colleague from Kenya, including police to police
channels, INTERPOL and others. Central authorities
should be able to discern when formal versus alternative
channels to gather evidence or provide assistance are
appropriate, and facilitate assistance through formal
mutual legal channels without limiting assistance
through other law enforcement channels. The goal is
to provide evidence that can be used in a court of law.

Let me add a word about extradition. It is naturally
a little more complicated than the sharing of evidence,
as countries often have greater restrictions on
extradition, particularly of their own citizens. Requests
for extradition must comply with relevant treaties and
domestic law, including requirements, such as dual
criminality, which is not always necessarily present in
the case of mutual legal assistance requests. But here,
too, the strong central authority has a role to play. It
should be able to ensure that extradition requests from
domestic law enforcement and judicial authorities are
sufficient and comply with applicable law, treaty or
convention before such requests are transmitted.

Member States should also empower their central
authorities to facilitate the judicial aspects of extradition
requests. Extradition proceedings typically involve
a judicial phase for which legal expertise is vital.
Member States therefore should empower their central
authorities to permit them to facilitate the judicial
aspect of extradition. Otherwise, efforts at effective
cooperation will be soon frustrated. Central authorities
should therefore act as a node of coordination at a
minimum within the Government to follow the status of
pending extradition requests and regularly advise their
international counterparts on developments.

We at the International Institute for Justice and the
Rule of Law have developed 10 general principles in
support of developing strong central authorities, but
let me emphasize, in conclusion, what is and is not at
stake. Effective international cooperation in terrorism
and in other criminal matters does not threaten
national sovereignty; it ensures that it continues to
work. Therefore, I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to speak today.

