Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting. We thank Mr. Mladenov
and Ms. Hary for their detailed briefings.

Peru is following with deep concern the
developments in the situation in Palestine. We regret
the ongoing hostile dynamics and the unacceptable
and unsustainable stalemate in the peace process.
We are particularly alarmed by the new escalation in
Gaza and its impact in terms of fatalities and injuries.
Peru condemns the indiscriminate attacks by Hamas
and other extremist groups against Israeli territory as
well as Israel's disproportionate responses against the
Palestinian people.

In such circumstances, we urge the parties directly
involved to cease, investigate and punish all violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, all
terrorist acts and all attacks against civilians. We must
move towards specific steps in that direction.

We also regret the relentless expansion of
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the development of legislation
that seeks to give them a legal status. That settlement
policy is closely linked to the increase in demolitions

and evictions as well as to the rise in violent incidents
against Israeli settlers, who are seen as perpetrators in
some cases and victims in others.

We note with concern that unilateral statements
on such illegal practices may further undermine the
territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and the
increasingly remote prospects of achieving a two-State
solution. Such practices must stop in line with the
relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which are binding.

To that end, we emphasize the urgent need to end
the blockade of the Gaza Strip. That involves the prior
restoration of control over the area by the Palestinian
Authority and providing Israel with the necessary
guarantees for its security. We also believe it important
to align humanitarian assistance with development
plans that offer hope and opportunities to young people.

We must also reiterate the need to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with steady and predictable
funding and to mobilize to that end the support of the
international community, particularly that of countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability in the region.

In the current fragile situation, we believe that
the Council must speak clearly by demanding that the
parties act with moderation, prevent further escalation
and support the resumption of meaningful dialogue in
order to achieve the only viable solution - that of two
States living side by side, with secure and mutually
recognized borders.

