Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank Benin for convening
this open debate of the Security Council on small arms
and light weapons.

The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
states that Governments bear the primary responsibility
to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. However, in order to become fully effective,
the efforts of Governments should be supported and
complemented by multilateral organizations, and the
Security Council has thus a clear role to play.

In his report of 20 September 2002, the
Secretary-General included a set of recommendations
on ways and means whereby the Security Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons in situations
under its consideration. Those recommendations are
still valid. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the initiatives undertaken to implement
those recommendations shows that important progress
has been made in several key areas.
I would like to take this opportunity to focus on a
few aspects where Switzerland sees a concrete role for
the Security Council.

First, it is our View that the Security Council
should include in all peacekeeping mandates the
requirement to gather information, including on
weapons markings, on all small arms and light
weapons that are collected or seized in the context of
those missions, including disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes. The Council
should also enable peacekeeping operations to initiate
tracing requests in relation to those weapons. To
accomplish these additional tasks within the framework
of peacekeeping operations and DDR programmes, the
necessary resources have to be included in the regular
peacekeeping budget.

Secondly, compliance with arms embargoes and
sanctions regimes is crucial. Switzerland is of the view
that the enforcement of arms embargoes could be
greatly improved by providing peacekeeping
operations and sanctions committees with a mandate to
initiate tracing requests with regard to illicit weapons
found in the course of their investigations. This could
contribute to identifying networks that illicitly supply
weapons and materiel under embargo.

In this context, two measures should be
encouraged. First, it would be good to have training for
United Nations staff deployed to countries under arms
embargoes on the monitoring of such embargoes and
on related aspects, such as the collection of baseline
data on and the identification of seized weapons. The
second recommendation is that there should be
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
relevant international organizations, such as the World
Customs Organization and the International Civil
Aviation Organization.

Thirdly, Switzerland is convinced that close
cooperation between the United Nations and Interpol is
of crucial importance for the efficient identification
and tracing of illicit small arms and light weapons.
Ties with Interpol could be strengthened by assigning a
law enforcement component to peacekeeping
operations and sanction committees that have the
competence to interact with Interpol, including their
access to all Interpol databases relevant to the tracing
of illicit small arms and light weapons. Furthermore,
Switzerland calls for the conclusion of a cooperative
agreement between the Security Council and Interpol
that could serve as a framework for cooperation in the
field of tracing illicit small arms and light weapons.
That cooperation agreement could be complemented by
a protocol covering the technical details on a case-by-
case basis. The existing Memorandum of
Understanding between Interpol and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo on
cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice
might serve as an example for that purpose. We are of
the View that the presidential statement to be adopted
at the end of today's debate would gain from
mentioning the need for increased cooperation with
Interpol in tracing small arms and light weapons.

Fourthly, it has been clearly established that the
illicit exploitation of natural resources constitutes one
of the privileged sources of financing fuelling the illicit
trade in small arms. We are starting to profit from
accrued experience in the field of controlling the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, in particular through
the Kimberley process. Switzerland suggests
formalizing the panels of experts so that they can
contribute more substantially to the work of the
Council and thus allow it to identify minimum norms
and standards that would guide the exploitation of
natural resources in conflict zones.

We invite the Security Council to ask the
Secretary-General for a specific report on the
exploitation of illicit natural resources in conflict
situations, including its links with the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. Furthermore, we think
that a more integrated approach to the question of
small arms and light weapons would benefit from solid
research and support in civil society. In this context,
we recall the studies made by the Geneva-based Small
Arms Survey, and we inform Security Council
members that its annual publication this year will be
devoted precisely to the role of small arms and light
weapons in current conflicts.

In closing, Sir, let me recall - as a member of
the Human Security Network - the urgent need to
take concerted action to combat the devastating
humanitarian effects of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. The uncontrolled proliferation and
misuse of these arms remain a major cause of human
suffering around the world, and they represent a
serious threat to human security. Only if the Security
Council, Member States and civil society join in their
efforts will we reach our goal of making each and
every person and their respective communities safer.

