Mr. Jenea: Some two months ago, the Secretary-
General visited Jerusalem and Ramallah to support
collective efforts to stop the violence that had begun to
erupt in Israel, the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and Gaza.

It is sad that over the past few weeks, despite a
decline in attacks, the bloodshed has not stopped. with
some 7 Israelis and 34 Palestinians having been killed
during the reporting period. Stabbings, vehicle attacks
and shootings by Palestinians targeting Israelis continue
to claim victims on an almost daily basis - including,
just two days ago, serious injury to a one-and-a-half-
year-old baby, one of eleven victims of a car-ramming in
Jerusalem - as suspected assailants are shot and killed
in return and clashes continue to result in Palestinian
deaths. Hebron continues to be a hotspot and the most
volatile component of the current escalation.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I reiterate
the United Nations firm condemnation of all terrorist
attacks. Leaders on all sides have the responsibility to
stop incitement and to consistently and unequivocally
stand against acts of terror and violence in all its forms.

The current circumstances should not be accepted
as the new normal. Israelis and Palestinians should
not be resigned to living under the threat of violence.
However, a comprehensive strategy to limit that threat
cannot rely uniquely on enhanced security measures;
it must also address the primary elements motivating
Palestinian anger. I am pleased to report some positive
developments in this regard. Tensions have calmed
around the flashpoint of Al-Haram al-Sharif/Temple
Mount, and efforts are under way to implement the
understandings reached between Israel and Jordan The
situation remains precarious and requires both sides to
maintain an active and open communication.

Perceived impunity for settler violence against
Palestinians has also driven Violence. On a positive
note, four months after the Dawabsha family was
brutally murdered, a number of arrests have been made.
I take this opportunity to underscore the need to charge
and swiftly bring the perpetrators of that terrible crime
to justice. At the same time, grave concerns persist on a
range of issues that continue to undermine prospects for
ending the violence and rebuilding trust. The injustices
associated with an occupation that shows no prospect
of ending feed into a perspective - particularly among
young people - that they have nothing to lose by
sacrificing their lives.

Palestinians continue to endure extensive movement
restrictions, intensified by the ongoing violence,
that negatively impact access to basic services and
livelihoods. Ongoing demolitions against Palestinian
communities in the Jordan valley, such as in Al-Hadidiya
village a few days ago, remain troubling - all the more
so as the relief provided to these households has been
repeatedly seized by the Israeli security forces, despite
the onset of winter. Israeli authorities have also carried
out two punitive demolitions against the families of
those convicted or accused of attacks. Such acts are a
clear violation of international law, aggravate an already
tense environment and may be counterproductive.

Turning to Gaza, during the past month, Palestinian
militants fired lO rockets towards Israel, two of which
impacted Israeli territory, Without injury. Palestinian
militants in Gaza also conducted cross-border shooting
at the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) on two occasions.
The IDF retaliated with four airstrikes. The United
Nations reiterates its condemnation of the firing of
rockets by militants from Gaza towards Israel. These
indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas must stop.

Despite persistent security, governance challenges
and funding shortages, the reconstruction process is
advancing. More than 90 per cent of damaged schools
and hospitals have been repaired, while repairs have
either been completed or are ongoing on about half
of all partially damaged homes. The key challenge
is reconstruction of those homes - indeed, those
neighborhoods - that were completely destroyed
during the war, and in that regard progress has been
slow. Reviving the economy and productive sectors
also remains a major outstanding task. Donors
need to accelerate efforts to translate pledges into
disbursements, particularly for housing reconstruction.
And let us not forget that repairing the damage from
the most recent hostilities will not fix the underlying
chronic problems of Gaza.

Last week's global launch of humanitarian funding
appeals included a $57l-million projected funding
needed for Palestine. It covers a range of interventions
from the provision of legal assistance and the safe
disposal of unexploded ordnance in Gaza to the
provision of basic services, such as water and health
care. The appeal represents a l9-per cent reduction as
compared to 2015, but remains elevated due largely to
Gaza's significant humanitarian needs in the aftermath
of the 2014 hostilities.

A political horizon to end the conflict now seems
more distant than ever. Leaders on both sides cannot
continue to ignore the underlying causes perpetuating
violence and fueling extremism on all sides. It is
extremist voices that currently resonate - voices that
want to capitalize on the darkest of human emotions,
while seeking to sabotage any genuine effort to rebuild
trust. But where are the voices urging restraint? Where
are the proponents of peace, tolerance and a shared
Israeli-Palestinian future? How can we begin to shift
the momentum back towards these advocates of reason?
These questions demand answers, first and foremost,
from Israeli and Palestinian leaders. It is for them to
choose whether they will show leadership in building
sustainable peace and security, or allow the future of
their people to drift in uncertainty as radicalism and
extremism take over.

Welcome Israeli statements committing to a
two-State solution have yet to be followed by actions
demonstrating the sincerity of that commitment. The
settlement enterprise continues to deepen its roots
within the occupied West Bank. The transition to
greater Palestinian civil authority contemplated by
prior agreements has yet to begin. Progress in the areas
of housing, water, energy, communications, agriculture
and natural resources are lagging.

In the course of the past several months, the
United Nations and its international partners have
consistently advocated for Palestinian unity as well
as for fundamental changes in Israeli policies on the
ground. Such changes should bring about tangible
improvements to Palestinian lives by strengthening
Palestinian institutions, security and its economy.
Without such steps, it is difficult to see how the parties
can return to meaningful negotiations so as to reach
a just and sustainable solution to this long-standing
conflict.

Even as we speak, the envoys of the Middle East
Quartet are in Israel and Palestine. They continue their
efforts to promote significant steps on the ground,
consistent with prior agreements that can restore hope
to the Palestinian people and preserve the viability ofa
negotiated two-State solution. In addition, we continue
to look to the Security Council for any additional
guidance on developing a new peace architecture for
resolving the conflict.

Turning to Lebanon, let me reiterate the United
Nations support for the leadership of Prime Minister
Tammam Salam under difficult conditions. While
Lebanon remains resilient in the face of serious
challenges emanating from the conflict in Syria, the
political paralysis in the country is preventing it from
managing those challenges effectively.

We note the discussions in Lebanon on the question
of the presidency, which has now been vacant for over
18 months. The Secretary-General has consistently
stressed the importance of Lebanese parties showing
flexibility to enable the election of a president without
delay. We sincerely hope that the current efforts can
lead to an opening that will enable the institutions of
State to function effectively.

In the wake of last month's attack in Beirut by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), we further
urge the international community to redouble support
for Lebanon's security and stability. The release, two
weeks ago, of the members of the Lebanese Armed
Forces and security services held hostage by the
Al-Nusra Front since August 2014 is a welcome
development. We hope for the speedy release of the
remaining hostages held by ISIL.

Meanwhile, the situation along the Blue Line and
in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained relatively calm.
Both parties continued to work with UNIFIL through
the established liaison and coordination arrangements.
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued on a
daily basis.

Overcoming today's challenges in Israel and
Palestine will require unprecedented vision by Israeli
and Palestinian leadership to see beyond today's The President: I thank Mr. Jenca for his briefing.
confrontations and take hold steps to create a peaceful
future. I call upon them to let go of their immediate
political fears and focus on the greater good ofachieving
a sustainable long-term peace for the Palestinian and The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
Israeli peoples. The United Nations remains committed

to supporting those efforts in every possible way.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
