Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Soliz for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and for his positive
remarks regarding African Union Member States with
respect to the matchmaking platform they were part of,
which he said is a genuine platform.

I would also like to thank his team and the United
Kingdom for the work they have done in finalizing
the sixteenth programme of work of the Committee
for the coming year. We believe that the programme
of work will be instrumental in ensuring the full
implementation of resoltuion 2325 (2016) and serve as
a basis for the work of the Committee in the upcoming
comprehensive review.

We trust that the outreach activities planned in
the programme of work will contribute to the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions on
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
encouraging Member States that have not presented
their initial report to do so. Moreover, we welcome the
integration ofa regional dimension into the programme
of work, as it would enable regional organizations,
such as the African Union, to contribute to the work
of the Committee and its broad objective of preventing
the proliferation of nuclear chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery. No doubt this
would also ensure the continued engagement of the
African Union and its member States in addressing the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
by terrorist groups, including in areas affected by
armed conflicts.

We hope that the Committee will continue to
enhance its cooperation with the African Union in
relation to the African nuclear-weapon-free zone and
thereby contribute to further strengthening the regional
non-proliferation framework. Ethiopia also welcomes
planned activities aimed at further strengthening the
assistance framework, as they would help in improving
the matching strategy, that is, the provision of effective
and targeted assistance aimed at responding to the
proper request. We are hopeful that the assistance
template would be finalized and become operational
within the time frame and would help enhance the
effectiveness of future regional assistance conferences,
similar to the one held in Addis Ababa last year.

Finally, I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to working cooperatively with the Chair
and the other members of the Council to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the related resolutions that have been adopted since,
including resolution 2325 (2016), in the programme of
work. We are also committed to engaging constructively
in considering the efficiency and effectiveness
of the Special Political Mission that supports the
1540 Committee.

