Mr. Garcia Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, for
your very skilful stewardship in the Security Council
presidency this month, and to thank you for having
taken this initiative to bring us together to consider
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, as well as other intergovernmental
bodies, in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The legal framework set out in Chapter VIII of
the Charter has acquired particular importance since
the end of the cold war. Indeed, over the past 15 years
the Security Council has been incorporating into its
tasks and mandates joint actions with international
regional and subregional organizations. The fact that
the majority of the 16 current peacekeeping operations
involve the participation of regional organizations
shows how strong that new relationship is. Resolution
1631 (2005) reflects that evolution and provides us
with a useful inventory on the basis of which we can
expand and reinforce areas of cooperation.

We believe that the international system is
currently characterized by both globalization and
fragmentation, and that the interaction of those two
phenomena has called into question governance within
many States. Peru is aware of that reality, which is why
we have accorded priority to the fight against
marginalization and exclusion, which affects the
stability of the international system and, in the final
analysis, international collective security itself. That
particular dynamic means that States must adopt
modern approaches that make it possible to ensure
democratic governance internally and, from an external
perspective, contribute to regional stability.

In that respect, international, regional and
subregional organizations are called upon to play a
special role in the way that conflicts are prevented,
dealt with, and resolved. Their capacities for dealing
with structural problems, providing information,
analysis and crisis management and carrying out peace
operations and institutional and material reconstruction
must be utilized and, in many cases, strengthened.

In this context, it is important for regional
authorities to develop the own mechanisms. For
example, we have established the Andean Zone of
Peace, which seeks to resolve subregional conflicts in a
peaceful manner and effectively prohibits nuclear,
chemical, biological and toxin weapons and
antipersonnel landmines. Peru also encouraged the
establishment of the South American Zone of Peace
and Cooperation with a View to building trust and
ensuring an ongoing dialogue on security and defence
aimed at the gradual reduction of arms acquisitions.

One good example of the potential of the joint
approach can be seen in the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. That is a typical
peacekeeping operation, carried out in compliance with
a Security Council mandate, and which thus has
legitimacy that the United Nations Charter grants to the
Blue Helmits for those tasks. It is also evidence of the
capacity of the countries of the region to administer
that United Nations mandate through regional bodies
such as the Organization of American States (OAS),
the Caribbean Community and the Rio Group, which is
a mechanism for political consultation and dialogue.

In the case of Haiti, the OAS has played an
important role at the institutional level, and we believe
that the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
and regional and subregional organizations such as the
Inter-American Development Bank should join that
effort and help to promote an international
environment that reinforces stability, supports
development projects that expand production,
facilitates trade, generates jobs and makes viable the
voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons.

The Rio Group, for its part, since the
establishment of its military presence, has made it
possible to coordinate the peacekeeping effort. That
has not only made a significant contribution to
restoring peace in Haiti, but it has also made possible
the development of the joint working capacity of the
armed forces of the region. It has thus become a
mechanism for confidence-building that opens new
prospects for military cooperation and promotes mutual
knowledge and understanding.

The General Assembly and the Security Council
have given the Peacebuilding Commission
comprehensive responsibility for the post-conflict
phase. I would like to stress, however, that regional
and subregional organizations for integration and
economic development must be involved so as to help
define political objectives and priority areas for
reconstruction.

Here, we believe that multinational entities,
grouped together, for example, in the Global Compact,
should also be involved to contribute economic, social
and political viability to the rebuilding efforts carried
out by the nationals of each country and by the
international community.

In conclusion, I would like to say that regional
and subregional mechanisms must cooperate with each
other and undertake multilateral activities at the global
level so as to strengthen the purposes and principles of
United Nations, with due attention given to the needs
of each particular region.

Peru expresses its support for the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
debate.

