Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
invited us to this meeting. I would also like to
acknowledge and confirm the various points made by
the previous speakers, especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Seger in his capacity as Chair of the
Burundi configuration. I can only agree with their
remarks on the various issues addressed.

Here I would also like to welcome the
appointment of Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly to support
the United Nations Office in Burundi. I believe that
this has strengthened the team for the good of our
country.

Following the 2010 electoral process, which was
carried out successfully under international
supervision, Burundi established institutions to conduct
the second legislature under Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
President of the Republic. We would like to recall here
that the 2010 electoral process was a success thanks to
the spirit of dialogue that prevailed between the
Government and its partners, a spirit that was forged
through the implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding, which was drawn up by
the political parties, civil society, the Parliament and
the Government.

The first stage of this success was the consensus
as to the composition of the National Independent
Electoral Commission, which organized the elections,
and on the electoral code, which guided the
Commission and the parties who competed during the
electoral process. In parallel with the Independent
Electoral Commission and the electoral code, the spirit
of dialogue also inspired the establishment of a
permanent forum for dialogue among the political
parties, which is today supported by the ministers
responsible for the interior and good governance. This
forum for dialogue has recently been expanded by the
creation of the institution of the ombudsperson, a
mediator between the Government and citizens.

With respect to good governance, a major
Burundian delegation has just returned from Geneva,
Where it had constructive talks with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on setting up
mechanisms for transitional justice. As a result of this
visit, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
promised to assist with this process until its
completion. A first team of experts will thus be sent
on-site in June. The truth and reconciliation
commission is to be set up in 2012, followed by the
establishment of a special tribunal for Burundi. These
are to be the two transitional justice mechanisms.

At the same time, the process of setting up the
independent national human rights commission, in
accordance with the Paris Principles, is also moving
ahead very quickly. The President of Burundi has just
convened by decree a special session of the National
Assembly to elect the members and the bureau of
Burundi's human rights commission, which is to be
held from 17 to 19 May.

We would also like to announce, as mentioned by
previous speakers, that the independent expert to
provide backing for the Government of Burundi in its
efforts to improve the human rights situation is now
visiting the country to prepare his last report before the

ll-34l43
human rights commission begins its work. The
commission will then be responsible for reporting on
the situation of human rights in Burundi.

In the area of security, an extensive programme to
bring defence forces back to their barracks and to
deploy the national police has been carried out. This
programme was followed by activities to promote
ethical and principled behaviour among the military
and the police. The programme to disarm the civilian
population, through the commission created for that
purpose, has made progress and has enabled the
retrieval of 83,287 weapons and 620,000 rounds of
ammunition from the population, as well as the
destruction of 41,320 weapons and 398,000 rounds of
ammunition.

At the same time, we have also established the
legal and institutional framework allowing us to
manage effectively and secure the weapons held by
public servants. However, all of the weapons held
illegally by the population have not yet been collected.
This explains the acts of banditry that have taken place
here and there in the country.

On behalf of the Government of Burundi, I would
like to take this opportunity to make a new appeal to
all of our partners to assist us, to preserve the
achievements and progress that have been made in
various areas and to help us face the challenges that
remain to be tackled.

