Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank Alvaro de Soto for his
briefing and for his comments. We wish him every
success in carrying out his mission, which is both
difficult and important.

Permit me to begin by indicating that my
delegation subscribes fully to the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of the United Kingdom on
behalf of the European Union.

Several weeks before the Israeli disengagement
from Gaza is to begin, the situation in the Middle East
unfortunately remains a subject of great concern. As
that important stage approaches, every effort must be
made to ensure that there is not a new spiral of
violence. The ceasefire is one of the most valuable and
most fragile achievements of recent months. Its
preservation requires that the parties show the greatest
restraint and that they resume their dialogue and
cooperation, including in the area of security, to put an
end to the violence.

France therefore most strongly condemns the
suicide attack committed in Netanya exactly a week
ago and the rocket and mortar fire that claimed the
lives of Israeli civilians. We call upon the Palestinian
Authority to intensify its efforts to restore public order
in the Palestinian territories. That is an absolute
imperative a few weeks before the withdrawal from
Gaza begins. For its part, Israel must show restraint
and, in particular, must put an end to its policy of
targeted killings, which can only exacerbate the spiral
of violence.

As Alvaro de Soto rightly said, a successful
Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip is in everyone's
interests. But the Palestinians' political future must not
be limited to the withdrawal; that must be an initial
step within the framework of the road map. In that
connection, the Quartet must fully play its role of
engaging and assisting the parties in carrying out their
obligations under the road map. We therefore favour
the holding of an international conference at the
appropriate time.

With regard to the security barrier, we fully
recognize Israel's right to take forceful measures to
protect its citizens against terrorism. But the route
decided upon for the security barrier is now giving rise
to many concerns. In fact, the barrier extends into
Palestinian territories several kilometres to the east of
the Green Line, contradicting the relevant provisions of
international law, as the International Court Justice
stated last year in its advisory opinion. The
construction, if it were to be irreversible, would
constitute a de facto annexation of a substantial part of
the West Bank. It would seriously compromise the
prospects for a negotiated solution to the conflict by
prejudging the border of a future Palestinian State and
indeed by making the building of such a State
physically impossible.

The construction of the wall is giving rise to
large-scale dispossession. It puts thousands of
Palestinians in a very precarious situation. The wall
socially and economically destabilizes entire regions
and threatens the economic and geographic viability of
a future Palestinian State.

We therefore call upon the Israeli Government to
halt the construction of the barrier within Palestinian
territories, including around East Jerusalem, and to
dismantle the existing sections there, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of international law. The
European Union will not agree to any non-negotiated
modification of the borders established before 1967.

