Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame' for his sobering, but always clear, assessment of
the volatile situation in Libya and, more important, for
his successful efforts to halt the most recent escalation
of violence.

I will focus my statement on the security situation
in Tripoli, its connection to the political process and the
humanitarian situation for the civilian population.

First, we are deeply concerned about the escalation
of violence in Tripoli last week, which resulted in many
civilian causalities, including children among the dead
and injured. We join the Secretary-General and others
in condemning all violence and indiscriminate shelling
by armed groups. Those acts constitute violations of
international humanitarian law and violations or abuses
of international human rights law.

The ceasefire brokered by the United Nations
must now be actively supported. We urge all parties to
respect and implement the agreement, including to end
all hostilities, protect civilians and re-open the Mitiga
airport. Safe and unhindered humanitarian access must
also be ensured, and those civilians who wish to leave
must be allowed to do so.

Countries with influence over the parties must
ensure that they deliver on their commitments, and
those groups that did not attend the mediation meeting
yesterday should be urged tojoin the ceasefire agreement
immediately. We remind those who threaten peace and
stability in Libya that they will be held accountable.
We remain open to exploring the use of the sanctions
instrument in that regard.

The continued flow of illegal arms risks fuelling
the escalation of violence and increases the suffering
of the civilian population. As Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, I therefore call on all
Member States to honour their obligations under the
relevant resolutions and fully implement the sanctions,
including the arms embargo.

Secondly, recent developments demonstrate the
lack of commitment and progress by some towards a
political solution, as well as the dangers ofthe continued
security vacuum. Actors that benefit from instability
and the status quo are actively hindering the political
process. That cannot be accepted and must be countered.
We now hope that the ceasefire agreement can be built
upon to further the broader political process.

Efforts to provide the conditions needed for free,
fair, inclusive and credible elections, which are crucial
for the democratic process in the country, must be
stepped up. In that regard, we call on the House of
Representatives, as others have done, to honour its
commitment to help ensure a legal basis for elections. We
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to push ahead and exhaust all legal avenues
and options to move the political process forward.
Efforts to promote transparency, accountability and
unity of the financial institutions are also an important
part of that. The Special Representative set that out
extensively and clearly again today. The Council must
stand fully behind the Special Representative in those
important endeavours.

A sustainable political process in Libya requires
the full and equal participation of women. To that
end, we encourage the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) with networks
of politically active Libyan women, with the aim to
promote the nomination of women for the elections.
Another meeting of the Council's Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security will be
convened on Libya this fall to follow up on how the
Council can best support those efforts.

Thirdly, we welcome UNSMIL's reporting on
international humanitarian law and human rights. The
dire situation in Libya's detention facilities, mentioned
by many today, including its migrant detention centres
and prisons, continues to be ofdeep concern. The reports
on arbitrary detention, torture and sexual and gender-
based violence - for instance, in Mitiga, Zuwarah,
Abu Salim and eastern Libya - are unacceptable. Such
violations and abuses must immediately come to an end.

Humanitarian access mustbe ensured and violations
must be investigated, including of alleged summary
executions, and those responsible for such crimes must
be held to account. The Libyan authorities must also
fully implement the human rights due diligence policy
and ensure proper vetting processes.

Now is a decisive moment for Libya. The Security
Council and the broader international community must
rally behind the Special Representative, support the
urgent implementation of the United Nations action
plan and respect the leading role of the United Nations
in the mediation efforts. It is crucial that we continue
to stand united in our support. We therefore support
the issuance of a press statement, as suggested by the
representative of the United Kingdom today, to refelct
the unity of the Security Council and its support for the
efforts of the Special Representative.

