Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We have
listened carefully to the detailed statements made by
the representatives of the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom on the incident that took place in
Salisbury on Sunday, 4 March. It is truly regrettable
that the Security Council has held meetings on two
consecutive days to discuss the use ofweapons of mass
destruction in two different countries (see S/PV.8221).

The State of Kuwait is deeply concerned about the
challenges facing the non-proliferation regime in our
world today. We very much regret the attack perpetrated
against Mr. Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia,
in the British city of Salisbury. The State of Kuwait
stands with the United Kingdom and supports all the
procedures and measures it has undertaken as part of
the investigation into that case. We welcome the appeal
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to participate in the investigation
as an impartial and independent international body
specialized in that area in order to reveal the details of
the incident. At the same time, we would like to express
our sympathy and condolences to the victims. We wish
Mr. Skripal and his daughter and those who were injured
from the police and the public a speedy recovery.

The State of Kuwait holds a principled and
firm position condemning and prohibiting the use,
production, acquisition, stockpiling or retention of
chemical weapons, as well as their direct or indirect
transfer, in line with article I of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The State of Kuwait has been party to the
Convention since 1997. We said the same during the
urgent meeting convened by the Security Council on
14 March to discuss this issue (see S/PV 8203). The State
of Kuwait believes in the importance of complying with
international law and norms, and in the importance
of maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Kuwait urges all the relevant parties to cooperate in the
ongoing investigations in this case through the OPCW,
in accordance with the articles and provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

