Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
post of president of the Security Council for May and to
express our confidence in the success of the work of the
Council under your skilled guidance. Allow me also to
thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the preparation and
submission of the most recent report on the situation in
Tajikistan, and which contains important and relevant
assessments of the developments in that country and a View
of the United Nations further role in the post-conflict
period.

Over the last seven years, the United Nations has been
playing an active and important role in the establishment of
peace and national accord on the land of Tajikistan, which
has been rent by civil war. Staff members working in the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), sometimes under difficult and dangerous
conditions, have made efforts to ensure the establishment
of peace in that country. We will continue to cherish the
sacred memory of those courageous staff members of the
Mission who gave their lives in serving the cause of
peace in Tajikistan.

The most recent events in the political and public
life of Tajikistan clearly show that the country has made
substantive progress towards the democratization of its
society and the establishment of peace and national
reconciliation, as well as towards the establishment of
favourable conditions for the rehabilitation of an economy
devastated by many years of war. These events represent
an important contribution to the implementation of the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan, which was signed on 27
June 1997.

However, while paying due tribute to the significant
progress that has been achieved in the political process,
as well as in the implementation of the agreements on the
establishment of peace, we believe it necessary to note
that a great deal still remains to be done. As an example,
we might note that the Protocol on Military Issues - in
particular, its provisions on disarmament, demobilization
and the reintegration of opposition fighters - has, up to
now, not been fully implemented.

We share the View that the continuation of an
insecure situation, both within Tajikistan and throughout
the Central Asian region, is being promoted by armed
elements that are continuing to operate on the territory of
Tajikistan and that are not under the control of the
Government. We also support the view that, as a result of
internal factors and of the continuing unstable situation in
the region, in particular in neighbouring Afghanistan, we
cannot at present exclude the possible threat of increased
instability in the future.

In this regard, we hope that all parties to the peace
process in Tajikistan will make all the necessary efforts
to bring about the comprehensive and effective
implementation of the agreements for the establishment of
peace and national accord.

For these reasons, Uzbekistan welcomes the proposal
of Secretary-General Kofi Annan to establish a United
Nations office for post-conflict peace-building and the
strengthening of peace in Tajikistan.

 

Uzbekistan, more than any other country, has been
directly interested in the speedy cessation of hostilities in
brotherly Tajikistan. From the very first days of the
conflict, my Government expressed serious concern about
the situation in this neighbouring country and made all
possible efforts to ensure successful progress in the peace
process. This position was based above all on the fact that
for many centuries the peoples of Central Asia have had the
closest possible spiritual, cultural and socio-economic ties.

Given this situation and the desire to provide direct
assistance to international efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to the Tajik conflict, Uzbekistan became a member
of the Contact Group, which was founded at the request of
the Tajik parties in order to observe the implementation of
the General Agreement and to render specialized assistance,
consultative help and good offices.

Within the framework of its activities as part of that
group, and as one of the Guarantor States, Uzbekistan sent
food products, medicines and essential goods to Tajikistan;
it provided as much assistance as possible to help refugees
return to their homes; and it provided other needed
humanitarian assistance.

Within the framework of international efforts
undertaken under the aegis of the United Nations, the
Republic of Uzbekistan actively participated in the drafting
and adoption of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and, on an ongoing basis, co-sponsored these
resolutions. Uzbekistan also consistently welcomed and
supported Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements concerning the situation in Tajikistan.
Today, Uzbekistan would like once again to reaffirm
its readiness to continue to provide support for the peaceful
and stable development of Tajikistan. This commitment was
already noted in the statement of the Contact Group of 18
April of this year.

