Mr. Riicker: First of all, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council for your invitation here today to brief the
Council on where we stand in Kosovo. I would also
like to welcome the Council's invitation to Prime
Minister Ceku to be present here today at this
important discussion on Kosovo's future.

Status continues to dominate the agenda of
everyone concerned with Kosovo. Of course, after
more than seven years of international administration
and of local capacity-building and after Kai Eide's
finding that the status quo is not tenable, the timelines
attached to the process are of particular importance.
Anxiety has clearly risen, following the decision to
delay the proposal on status until after the Serbian
elections on 21 January. Keeping momentum in the
status process will thereafter be a key factor in heading
off a feeling of uncertainty regarding the way ahead,
which would be a potential source of instability.

At the same time, important work on standards
continues as a top priority of both the Kosovo
Government and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
sometimes have the impression from our international
interlocutors that, with all the focus on the status
process, the implementation of standards has been
forgotten or pushed aside. That is not at all the case.
Standards remain at the core of our daily work, with
particular concentration on the 13 priority areas set by
the Contact Group earlier this year, most of which have
been fulfilled by the Kosovo Provisional Institutions.

The Government, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Ceku, has continued to demonstrate effective
leadership on standards implementation, strengthening
central and local government institutions and
transitioning governance-building and reform to the
longer-term platform of European integration through
the European Partnership for Kosovo. The Assembly
has passed and I have promulgated key legislation
prioritized by the Contact Group, including a law
firmly establishing the equal official status of the
Albanian and Serbian language throughout Kosovo and
laws on religious freedom and cultural heritage,
06-6573]
containing provisions of particular importance to the
Serbian Orthodox Church. The Kosovo Government
has also undertaken steps to ensure freedom of
movement by agreeing to take over the responsibility
from UNMIK to operate the freedom of movement bus
and train system.

One noteworthy area of progress has been the
effort to create the conditions for returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). This week, the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC) will complete a six-month
project in the village of Svinjare, near Mitrovica, to
repair damage to homes and improve local
infrastructure. That has been one of the largest and
most high-profile projects undertaken by the KPC, and
its successful completion demonstrates the KPC's
ability and willingness to serve all the people of
Kosovo. Despite the success of the project, the Kosovo
Serb IDPs have still not returned to Svinjare. I appeal
to Belgrade to encourage them to do so. Nonetheless,
the criteria on which the Institutions of Self-
Government should be judged are their actions to
create the conditions for returns.

Another example: in Babus, another village, the
keys to 83 reconstructed houses will be ready to be
handed over on 20 December. However, the non-
governmental organization implementing the project
has raised serious concerns with UNMIK that most of
the beneficiaries may not actually return. In short, good
efforts will have limited impact if more is not done -
particularly by Belgrade - to encourage returns when
the conditions for them have been created.

The continuing calls by Belgrade for Kosovo
Serbs to boycott Kosovo institutions have undermined
work done by both UNMIK and the Institutions of
Self-Government to reach out to minority communities
and to end their often self-imposed isolation. The
Serbian Government has still not withdrawn its
directive to Kosovo Serbs to withdraw from the payroll
of the Institutions of Self-Government, despite
numerous calls to do so by the international
community. I appeal to the representative of the
Serbian Government to withdraw that directive.

One of the most frequently cited complaints of
Belgrade and Kosovo Serbs is inadequate security to
allow greater participation in political and social life in
Kosovo. However, police statistics actually show a
sharp drop in incidents that might be ethnically
motivated, and we monitor them very carefully. While
06-6573]

there have been serious incidents that attract wide
public attention, this overall improvement in the
situation merits greater recognition. Also, the Kosovo
Police Service has made a concerted effort to improve
overall security for minorities, as witnessed by the
opening of police substations in minority areas and by
active involvement by minority police officers in
policing those areas. Moreover, the crime statistics in
all reporting categories show that there is no
disproportion regarding ethnicity with regard to crime.
That said, we cannot be complacent about where we
are. We continue to put a high priority on all incidents
in which police suspect ethnic or political motives.

UNMIK has also been working intensively to
address another important concern: the supply of
electricity. The difficulties can be traced back to one
core problem. The Kosovo electricity company (KEK),
the energy provider in Kosovo, has inherited an
infrastructure in a state of disrepair, and it does not
have enough funds for repair and investment unless
consumers pay for the electricity they use. We have
recently had some success in improving the payment
culture, but some consumers - including nearly all
Kosovo Serbs - still do not pay and have significant
debts. However, recent talks have been somewhat
encouraging. We are now looking forward to a result
where Kosovo Serbs are finally recognizing and paying
KEK, which will enable it to upgrade the system for
the benefit of all, starting this winter. In that context,
it is also very important that Kosovo can effectively
import additional amounts of electricity, if and when
needed, through the Serbian transmission system.

Overall, much has been achieved this year on
standards. But that does not mean that everything has
been fulfilled. Continuous efforts are needed, as
indicated by the challenges noted in the technical
assessment of standards implementation that is before
members. Progress on many of the standards also
depends on clarity regarding status. We all know that
progress in key areas such as returns is limited by the
lingering uncertainty about Kosovo's future.

While the status process has clearly been brought
a long way forward this year, momentum needs to be
kept up and a timely status settlement achieved. The
constructive engagement and unity of the Kosovo
negotiating team - which includes opposition
leaders - have contributed substantially to the
progress made in the process so far. It is crucial that all
stakeholders in Kosovo remain committed to the
3
process and continue to support the work of Special
Envoy Ahtisaari.

The Contact Group has unambiguously stated that
once the status process has begun, it cannot be blocked.
Resolving Kosovo's status would benefit the entire
Balkan region, including Belgrade. On the other hand,
further delay would entail significant political and
economic costs for Kosovo, for our neighbours, for the
region as a whole and for the international community.
Delay would be more than just a loss of time. Delay
would raise tensions and play into the hands of
extremists on all sides. And delay would not make a
solution easier; it would make it much more difficult.
No one can have an interest in such an outcome.

Once a status decision is made, UNMIK will need
to provide for an orderly and smooth handover to
future local and international institutions established
under the status settlement. Early and prudent planning
is indispensable in order to achieve that, and transition
planning has now become one of our key priorities. We
need to do as much as possible, without prejudice to
the status process, before the formal transition period
begins with the adoption of a resolution by the
Council.

The transfer of responsibilities from UNMIK to
the future local and international authorities will be a
highly complex task. Let me mention just some of the
elements required.

Kosovo will need a new constitutional
arrangement to replace the constitutional framework,
which relies on UNMIK. The adoption of a new
constitution will naturally be followed by elections.
The entire body of legislation promulgated by UNMIK
will have to be reviewed and necessary amendments
made so that, for example, references to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNMIK
are replaced.

The future authorities will have to take over all
executive functions for which UNMIK still has
operational responsibility. New institutions, which may
include new ministries, will also have to be created to
perform new responsibilities. A wide variety of other
tasks will need to be carried out after the end of
UNMIK's mandate, such as the handover of our
archives to the future authorities and the production
and issuance of new travel documents and
identification cards to replace the current UNMIK
documents. Those tasks, as well as the implementation
of the status settlement, will place substantial strains
on the local authorities. The international community
must support them in this endeavour.

It is also important that the future International
Civilian Office, now being prepared by the European
Union and the United States, will be fully operational
when status comes. Let me reiterate once again: delay
would not make a solution easier; it would make it
much more difficult.

The United Nations has accomplished much in
Kosovo. We now owe it to Kosovo and to you, the
members of the Security Council, to make sure that
this final phase of United Nations administration is
wrapped up in an orderly and responsible manner. I
trust that the Council will help in that endeavour by
keeping the momentum in the status process and by
seeing it through.

