Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings that we heard this morning from Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Audrey
Azoulay, Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
Mr. Jiirgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL;
and Mr. Alessandro Bianchi, Project Leader for Cultural
Heritage Protection of the Italian Ministry of Culture.
We express to them our support for their work.

Bolivia, as a country that abides by international
law and one with a diverse and abundant cultural history
and heritage, has elaborated domestic legislation and
mechanisms aimed at regulating the classification,
registration, restitution, protection, conservation,
restoration, defence, custody and safekeeping of its
cultural heritage.

It has also ratified the relevant international
treaties and conventions and shares good practices in
multilateral, regional and bilateral forums. With this
understanding, and aware of the inestimable value of
cultural heritage as a living portrayal of the identity
of peoples, we express our strong and categorical
condemnation of the plundering, trafficking, smuggling,
destruction and any related activity systematically
perpetrated by Da'esh, Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and criminal groups to finance their criminal
activities through the smuggling and illegal sale of
cultural heritage property, the proceeds of which are
laundered and funnelled into tax havens with few or
no controls, especially with respect to investing in the
tertiary sector.

The tremendous economic gains made by terrorist
groups through these criminal acts have been possible
mainly due to governance gaps, the weakening of the
forces of order and security, and the absence of control
at the borders to prevent such acts. We must therefore
reiterate that these situations were caused primarily
by the implementation of policies of regime change,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of States. It is clear from the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/969) that, since the adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), significant progress has been
made. However, we must continue to make further
efforts to ensure its comprehensive implementation. We
believe, therefore, that the resolution is a useful tool for
tackling the challenges involved in countering the illicit
traffic in cultural heritage and property. Cooperation
among States and various international organizations,
including UNESCO, INTERPOL and UNODC, is a
priority that must be given impetus and strengthened
by the international community.

We also believe that joint action between special
United Nations missions deployed on the ground in
areas facing internal conflict would help effectively to
strengthen their efforts and build capacity to counter
illicit trafficking in cultural heritage. We believe that
the efforts made to implement the resolution must also
focus on returning cultural sites to their pre-conflict
condition and also include mine-action efforts so as
to clear explosive remnants of war and anti-personnel
mines in such areas, given that post-conflict restoration
and rehabilitation efforts can begin only when the
security situation allows. We therefore believe that
the positive experience registered in coordinating and
carrying out joint mine action, as noted in the report of
the Secretary-General, in which Mali, along with the
United Nations Mine Action Service, began a general
programme to neutralize these threats, is something
that could be replicated in other countries.

Furthermore, those States in whose formal and
informal markets cultural heritage has been identified
and recovered must develop and adopt policies for
redress and the return of said property and take into
account the guidelines laid down in the various
international instruments on the issue.

In this vein, there is also a need to strengthen the
judicial mechanisms enabling the investigation and
prosecution of persons involved in the commission of
such crimes, and the international community needs to
lend greater support to this effort. Therefore precedents
such as the sentence handed down by the International
Criminal Court in the Al-Mahdi case, on the destruction
of historical and religious sites in Mali, is a necessary
benchmark in terms of combating impunity.

In closing, Bolivia reiterates its rejection of all acts
of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of
their motive, whenever and by whomsoever committed.

We reiterate the need for all States to use every means
available to combat terrorism, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and other obligations
under international law. All counterterrorism efforts
made by the Security Council and the United Nations
must be fully supported by Member States, which
must seek to bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes, so that they can be duly investigated, prosecuted
and punished.

