Mr. Williamson (United States of America): The
United States delegation expresses its appreciation to
State Secretary Hans Dahlgren of Sweden for his
concise, informative and extremely valuable briefing
on the outcome of the Stockholm Process discussions
in Sweden on making targeted sanctions work. The
series of meetings held in Sweden in 2002, focusing on
ways to improve the implementation and enforcement
of targeted multilateral sanctions, was extremely
helpful.

We also appreciate the investments previously
made by the German and Swiss Governments in
hosting similar conferences focused on improving the
design and implementation of targeted multilateral
sanctions. The Stockholm Process, much like earlier,
similar conferences in Interlaken, Bonn and Berlin, was
an important forum for the informal exchange of Views
among experts on making sanctions more effective.

My delegation believes that sanctions remain a
Viable and very useful policy option for use by the
Security Council to modify the behaviour of a State or
entity that poses a threat to international peace and
security or that has committed an act of aggression. As
authorized in Article 41 of the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council's imposition of a "complete or
partial interruption of economic relations" with a
targeted actor offers an approach greater than
persuasion, but less than the use of force, to compel a
desired change in policy and behaviour.

In recent years, sanctions have proven to be an
effective policy tool that the Security Council has used
to alter events on the ground, increase the costs to non-
compliant actors and pressure States and groups to
lessen their involvement in illicit activities. With the
advent of expert panels and monitoring mechanisms,
the Security Council has found a method for using
information gathered by experts to name and shame
those who deviate from accepted norms by
delegitimizing their activities. We should not
underestimate the impact of naming and shaming as a
tool to compel parties to adjust their behaviour.

While the United States opposes any effort to
limit policy options available to the Security Council to
address threats to international peace and security, we
acknowledge the desirability, where possible, of
targeting restricted measures the Security Council may
impose to avoid unnecessary negative impact on
civilians and other States. We should not ignore the
humanitarian consequences of United Nations
sanctions. To the extent possible, sanctions should try
to limit the negative impact on civilians who, too often,
are already suffering under the yoke of a repressive
Government at home.

We believe that recent sanctions regimes, such as
the measures imposed by the Security Council on the
Government of Liberia under resolutions 1343 (2001)
and 1408 (2002), demonstrate our shared desire to
focus only on those individuals whose actions and
policies pose a threat to stability.

I should like now to comment briefly on the
evolution of sanctions policies beyond geographic
boundaries. Terrorist acts are a growing threat to
international peace and security. Fanatics willing to
target and kill innocent civilians to advance their own
political agendas are a clear and present danger that
must be addressed. Fortunately, the community of
nations - individually, in coalitions and in the United
Nations - is trying to confront this danger. The recent
shift in the focus of Security Council-imposed
sanctions beyond geographic borders appropriately
reflects our shared commitment to ensuring that the
threat of international terrorism is defeated.
The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), both under previous
Committee Chairman Valdivieso of Colombia and now
under Ambassador Valdes of Chile, deserves special
mention as an example of the progress that can be
achieved through our collective efforts. Financing is a
critical contributing factor to the cycle of terrorist acts.
Curbing the financial flow of terrorists stops some of
their evil activities and forces terrorists out of their
comfort zones. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) is making a significant
contribution to the war against terrorism.

This is also an area where the United Nations is
playing a big role to disrupt terrorist networks, curb
their effectiveness and limit their reach. The Al
Qaeda/Taliban sanctions regime is, by its very nature,
targeted against terrorists and their supporters. Security
Council resolution 1455 (2003), adopted in January as
a presidential text, should improve Member States'
implementation of these sanctions - a key theme
emphasized in the Stockholm Process.

Another area that received significant
consideration under the Stockholm Process was
enhancing the United Nations role in sanctions
implementation. In this regard, the United States
delegation notes that the Secretariat previously
established a roster of experts to serve on United
Nations expert panels and monitoring mechanisms. The
United States recommends that the Secretariat now
seek from all Member States the names of qualified
experts in such areas as arms control, border
monitoring, financing controls and other relevant areas
for immediate addition to the roster. The United States
also believes that it is imperative that the Secretariat
establish an informal system that would document and
categorize the relevant findings and recommendations
of the various expert groups currently and previously
authorized by the Security Council with a view to
generating commonalities in the work of their groups
as well as reducing overlap and increasing efficiency.

The international community should continue to
seek improvements by Member States in their
implementation of all sanction regimes. Gaps in
capacity need to be highlighted and better addressed.
There are countries with the will and capacity to fight
terrorism. There are countries with the will but which
lack the capacity to build an adequate infrastructure of
laws, border controls, export controls, financial
controls, etc. We encourage Governments to assist
willing but unable States to improve their capacities,
whether through the training of national authorities,
increased border controls, the adoption of national
legislation or the use of expertise offered by
specialized international agencies. This is an area
where the United Nations and lead countries can make
an enormous contribution by helping others.

Unfortunately, there are States with the capacity
but which are unwilling to combat terrorism. Those
countries should be held to account. As Counter-
Terrorism Committee Chairman Sir Jeremy Greenstock
told the Council in January, we must put some teeth
into this effort.

In conclusion, first let me respond to an
intervention by an earlier delegation and make clear
that the United States believes that sanctions measures
should be tied directly to the described change in
policy and behaviour of targeted actors, rather than
artificially linked to the duration of sanctions to an
arbitrary time limit.

The United States reiterates its appreciation for
the commitment made by the Governments of Sweden,
Switzerland and Germany in helping to further the
ongoing consideration of ways to improve the design
and implementation of targeted multilateral sanctions.
While our joint work on these matters remains
unfinished, the outcome documents generated by the
discussions in Sweden, Germany and Switzerland have
helped point us in useful and important directions. We
will continue to lend our support to ongoing efforts to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions while
minimizing their unintended consequences where
possible.

