Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to say that we owe
a great debt to Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his
concise briefing on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1737
(2006). We deeply appreciate his precision, his
outreach and his inspiring leadership of the Committee.

In the past three months, the 1737 Committee and
its Panel of Experts have enhanced the implementation
of the Security Council's resolutions on Iran. The
outreach activities of the Committee, conducted
through visits, inspections and participation in
seminars, have improved the understanding not only of
the Committee's work but also of the role of States in
the implementation of the resolutions. We believe that
these activities should be sustained. Indeed, more
intensive outreach activities are required in developing
countries to underpin these improvements.

In the same vein, accelerated action in the
Implementation Assistance Notices and the publication
of the Panel's final report is needed to improve the
information available to the wider United Nations
membership on the Committee's activities. Let me use
this opportunity to reiterate Nigeria's continued
cooperation and support in the work of the Committee.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has once again voiced serious concerns on the possible
military dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme. Its
recent report indicates that Iran has carried out
activities relevant to the development of a nuclear
device. Concerns have also been raised by the IAEA on
Iran's failure to fully cooperate with the body and on
the lack of sufficient clarification on the direction of its
nuclear programme. These are worrying developments,
and they underline the need for intensified interaction
between Iran and the Agency.

We believe it is incumbent on Iran, as a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to dispel the doubts surrounding its nuclear
programme and reassure the international community
of the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. Iran should engage substantively with the
IAEA without delay to provide necessary clarification
and information on all pending issues, especially those
relating to possible military aspects of its nuclear
programme. It must grant access to all sites,
equipment, persons and documents requested by the
Agency. In addition, it should take steps to implement
its safeguards agreement and other obligations.
11-64673

In spite of the limited progress of the previous
talks with the E3+3, we believe that diplomatic
negotiation is vital to resolve all outstanding issues
relating to Iran's nuclear activities. We therefore call
for redoubled efforts by all actors, including the E3+3,
for a negotiated solution to the problem. Iran should
also take steps to improve its interaction with the IAEA
and the E3+3 as a demonstration of its commitment to
its obligations under the international instruments, and
particularly to a peaceful nuclear programme.

These disturbing developments on Iran's nuclear
programme and proliferation activities will require
close and sustained monitoring by the 1737 Committee
and its Panel of Experts. The international community
must maintain the highest level of vigilance and stand
ready to address, in a pacific manner, proliferation
risks wherever they occur.

