The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Croatia.

My Government shares the sense of urgency and
utmost concern regarding the ongoing violence in
southern Israel and Gaza, in particular its heavy toll on
civilians. We deeply regret the loss of civilian life. Our
sympathies go to the families of innocent victims on
both sides.

We join in the appeals made by the Council on
28 December 2008 and by the international community
at large for all violence to be immediately brought to a
halt, as it is only through peaceful means that we can
hope to achieve a just and lasting peace. We urge the
parties to adhere strictly to international humanitarian
law. It is essential to avoid further civilian casualties,
as any life lost is one too many. In that regard, we
should not forget that the tenets of humanitarian law -
notably the duty to protect civilians - apply to all.

Croatia is deeply concerned at the desperate
situation of Gaza's civilians and hopes to see swift
humanitarian action on the ground, including deliveries
of humanitarian supplies, unhindered humanitarian
access and the facilitation of the evacuation of injured
persons. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies, as well as the initiative by the Government of
France, in that regard.

However, we cannot address the situation in
Gaza- including the latest military actions of the
Israel Defense Forces - in isolation from its context.
Hamas and the militants in the Gaza Strip, positioned
in and among the civilian infrastructure, have since
been consistently carrying out rocket attacks on Israel.
The terrible daily rocket attacks that Hamas is
launching at the population of south Israel have
increased in frequency as well as in range in recent
days. Israel cannot be denied its inherent and
legitimate right to defend itself or its obligation to
defend and protect its citizens. However, civilian
casualties must be avoided.
We do not condone violence, and we continue to
believe in peace. Only two weeks ago, the Security
Council sent out a strong message of support for the
Annapolis peace process. It is essential that we stand
firmly behind the messages contained in resolution
1850 (2008), which lay the groundwork for a political
settlement and a continuation of the process. This calls
for responsibility on the part of all actors, notably
those in the region. We will continue to support every
constructive effort aimed at curbing the violence.

We shall study very carefully the draft resolution
circulated by the Libyan delegation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now call on the representative of Egypt.

