Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express appreciation to
the Italian presidency for taking the initiative to organize
this briefing meeting on the activities of United Nations
police forces. We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for his briefing. We are also grateful
to the three Police Commissioners - from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur - for sharing their field experiences. My
delegation has no doubt that we have indeed benefited
from their briefings.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2382
(2017) and commend Italy, as the penholder, for
facilitating the negotiations on the resolution, which we
hope will contribute to enhancing the role of United
Nations police.

Ethiopia recognizes the important role that United
Nations police play in promoting stability and long-
term development in countries affected by conflict.
The landscape where United Nations peacekeepers
are deployed today has changed dramatically. The
significance of United Nations police has never been as
critical as now, in the light of the corresponding change
in conflict dynamics, the transformation in the size and
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the evolving
trends towards multidimensional peacekeeping. During
our visit to the countries of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, we got a close-up look at the critical role played
by the MINUSMA police component in Mali. We
agree with what Commissioner Yacouba said earlier.
We also appreciate what the police component of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur has been doing, as highlighted by Police
Commissioner Makotose, including the demonstrated
gender sensitivity.

United Nations police have become a vital
component ofpeacekeeping, particularly in carrying out
mandated tasks related to supporting the capacities of
host States' law enforcement institutions. The role that
United Nations police components play in facilitating
the transitions from peacekeeping to development
and peacebuilding is also very crucial. Past and
recent experiences, such as in Liberia, as well as in
other cases, show the demonstrable success of United
Nations police in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In particular, their functions in supporting host States
through monitoring and restructuring local police
forces, training and advising other law enforcement
institutions, as well as restoring and promoting public
safety and safeguarding the rule of law, have been
indispensable. We believe that national ownership
should be the guiding principle of United Nations police
when supporting host States in building and developing
the capacities of local police forces. National capacity
gaps of host States should also inform the composition
of United Nations police components, particularly
during planning, recruitment, the provision of guidance
and training.
Where mandated, the managing of civilian tasks
that United Nations police undertake, including in
preventing and addressing violence against women and
children in the context of conflict and post-conflict
situations, also remain very instrumental. In that
regard, the deployment of women police officers will
have practical and positive impacts on winning the
trust of local communities. That is why increasing the
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
is very important. It is a source of pride to note that
Ethiopia is one of the leading contributors in that regard.

There is no doubt that peacekeeping mandates
related to police activities need to be clear and
achievable. Of course, police-contributing countries
should ensure that the forces that they deploy in the
field - individual police officers, formed police units
and specialized police teams - are well trained and
equipped in order to implement such mandates.

Furthermore, the Secretariat has a key role to
play, including through enhancing the effectiveness
of strategic generation of police personnel with better
planning, appropriate expertise, language skills
and operational readiness. Therefore, strengthening
United Nations policing operational coherence within
the United Nations system remains very important.
In that regard, we believe that triangular cooperation
regarding policing among the Security Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
is key to strengthening the effectiveness of United
Nations police in peacekeeping.

Finally, Ethiopia has made very modest
contributions to United Nations police, including police
officers who served in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, which just concluded its mandate and
which is now transitioning into MINUJUSTH. I want
to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia's commitment to
enhancing its participation and contributions to United
Nations police in the years ahead.

