Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish like preceding speakers
to thank the Pakistani presidency, and in particular you,
Sir, for your highly creative initiative of organizing at
the end of your presidency of the Security Council this
wrap-up meeting on "Conflicts in Africa: Security
Council missions and United Nations mechanisms to
promote peace and security".
I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Africa,
Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari. I also wish to thank him
for his important contribution at the opening of today's
debate. His forceful suggestions will undoubtedly help
our Council to improve its efficiency in addressing
African issues.

It is perfectly clear that this open debate, which is
benefiting from the participation of States non-
members of the Council, will allow us to take into
account their views on this issue. My delegation
believes that this is a guarantee of legitimacy and of
broad approval of the proposals to be made during the
course of today's discussion. At a time when the
international community's attention is focused on other
theatres of conflict, Cameroon welcomes your decision,
Sir, to centre this discussion on United Nations action
in conflicts in Africa.

At first glance, the subject might seem to have
lost some of its lustre and to be somewhat threadbare,
having been taken up so often in recent years by the
Security Council, which now devotes 62 per cent of its
time to this issue, by other United Nations bodies and
by myriad other international forums.

Obviously, Africa remains at the heart of the
Security Council's concerns. Indeed, the Council's
members and - with respect to an open debate on
conflicts in Africa - the States Members of the United
Nations have demonstrated outstanding creative insight
in offering fresh and innovative solutions and
strategies. All that is now needed to implement these
suggestions is the genuine political will of the parties
involved and the firm resolve of the members of the
Security Council to support Africa in its struggle to
promote peace and security on the continent. However,
the approach that has been chosen is particularly novel
insofar as it stresses the contribution of Security
Council missions in areas prone to conflict, in this
instance the promotion of peace and security in Africa.

As members of the Council are aware, missions
of the Security Council in general, especially to Africa,
are vital and play a critical role. They allow the
Council's members to assess the situation on the
ground, to enhance dialogue with the parties and to
obtain information directly from the protagonists.
Moreover, such missions allow the Council's members,
inter alia, to better grasp first hand the nuances and
structures of the conflicts in question. They also allow
the Council to present a united front, which is
extremely important, especially with respect to the
parties to the conflict and the personnel of United
Nations agencies active in the field.

I should like to focus my remarks on a few of the
questions raised by the problem being addressed at this
wrap-up debate: the role of Security Council missions
and the relations they may engender between the
Council and African regional organizations.

In recent years, out of 19 Security Council
missions to conflict zones throughout the world, 13
were dispatched to Africa, as though to justify the time
that the Security Council has devoted to the
consideration of conflict situations there. While
Security Council missions in the field provide an
opportunity unequivocally and publicly to broadcast
the positions and decisions of the Council, should they
not also - given their political impact on the
protagonists - become an extremely useful tool for
preventive diplomatic action? In situations in which
there is every forewarning of potential conflict, such
missions could make a significant contribution to
defusing tensions before hostilities erupt and could
usefully complement the preventive diplomacy of the
Secretary-General.

Moreover, it would be desirable for Security
Council missions to become a consistent and integral
part of the Council's decision-making process. The
level and quality of the information that they provide to
members of the Council through direct contact with the
protagonists on the ground have a definite influence on
members' perception of the situation and can
ultimately have a positive impact on later decisions. In
such circumstances, should the Security Council not
plan to systematize these missions in the field,
conditions permitting, when it is preparing to take an
important decision on any given situation? The
members would thereby be able to adopt their positions
in full awareness of all realities in the field.

Of course, in my delegation's view, such an
approach is not about bargaining over the details of any
future decision the Council may take or about going
into the field with preconceived notions. The idea,
rather, is simply to arrive at a deeply-felt conviction by
listening to the parties to the conflict and to all the
protagonists while sending them strong messages. We
have no problem with a decision to send a mission into
the field that takes into account the views expressed in
open debate by States that are not members of the
Council, since some will be regional actors. The
Council's credibility cannot suffer from such
participation in the preparation of decisions,
including - depending on the case - the adoption of
approaches designed to motivate, suggest decisions to
the parties and, if necessary, help them to understand.
In any case, the parties' perception of the Security
Council's decisions can only be improved by their
having been consulted and heeded, while the Council
need not feel bound. The most important thing is to
reach a heartfelt conviction that allows a fully informed
decision to be taken.

We regret, however, that the planned Security
Council mission to West Africa could not take place
under those conditions. Along the same lines, regional
organizations are among the actors that are met on the
ground during Security Council missions. It will be
recalled that, on 11 April 2003, the Council devoted a
public debate to its relations with regional
organizations in the light of the new challenges to
international peace and security. On that occasion,
Cameroon focused its statement on the Council's
cooperation with African regional and subregional
organizations.

Security Council missions are also valuable
opportunities to improve working relations with
African regional and subregional organizations,
particularly in the way the Council considers decisions
and positions that it takes on issues of interest to the
continent that are before the Council. The Security
Council has, in a consistent and encouraging way,
developed exemplary institutional relationships with
the African Union and with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). We saw that
recently with the situation in cote d'Ivoire, for which
ECOWAS conducted a mission here in New York and
received the Council's blessing. However, the Council
has sometimes proved to be highly selective when there
has been a contradictory regional decision on a conflict
under consideration.

We encourage the Security Council to strengthen
its institutional relationships and to maintain them
during its field missions, since one of the guarantees of
effectiveness would be to achieve a perfect balance
between regional efforts and Council action for conflict
prevention and settlement in Africa. My delegation is
eagerly awaiting the time when the Council will be
able to work in a completely harmonious way with
regional organizations, regardless of their political
influence or the perception that its permanent members
may have of them. This issue deserves much attention.

In conclusion, I should like to express the hope
that the forthcoming Security Council missions in the
Great Lakes region and in West Africa will be an
opportunity to promote the ongoing peace process, to
explain Council positions and to become fully
convinced of the need to finally adopt a comprehensive
approach at the level of those subregions. It must be
said that West Africa enjoys the advantage of having a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
entire subregion. We hope that the next United Nations
inter-institution mission in Central Africa, together
with the Security Council mission in the Great Lakes,
will result in recommendations to that end.

