Mr. Prendergast: Since I briefed the Council last
month on the Middle East, people across the region
have had their hopes rekindled for progress towards
peace between Israel and the Palestinians. They have,
at the same time, been angered and outraged by the
cold-blooded terror attack in Lebanon that took the life
of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and others.

The hope flows from the summit meeting
between President Abbas and Prime Minister Sharon
that took place in Sharm el-Sheikh on 8 February,
hosted by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, in the
presence of Jordan's King Abdullah. At Sharm
el-Sheikh, President Abbas and Prime Minister Sharon
reaffirmed their commitment to the road map.
Signalling their desire to break away from bloodshed
and despair, the two leaders agreed that "all
Palestinians [would] stop all acts of violence against
Israelis everywhere" and that "Israel [would] cease all
its military activity against all Palestinians
everywhere".

Both parties have since taken actions to keep up
the momentum generated by the summit. Indeed, it is
our hope and expectation that the understandings
reached at the summit will be implemented fully and
on time. The Government of Israel announced that it
would release 900 prisoners and withdraw from five
West Bank cities and the surrounding areas. On
21 February, 500 Palestinian prisoners were released.
Negotiations to resolve impediments to the Israeli
withdrawal are continuing, and we hope that Jericho,
as well as Tulkarem, Qalqiliya, Bethlehem and
Ramallah, will soon be handed over to the Palestinian
Authority.

We commend Israel's decision to halt punitive
house demolitions. Israel also reopened the three
crossing points into Gaza - Erez, Rafah and Karni -
after temporarily closing them in the wake of
Palestinian attacks. Israel announced, moreover, that it
was issuing more work permits, bringing the total
number of workers authorized to enter Israel via Erez
to 1,600. New permits were issued to 300 merchants
and 600 labourers for the Erez industrial zone.

On the Palestinian side, President Abbas has
acted courageously to end violence. In the past month,
the Palestinian Authority deployed 1,000 security
officers along the Gaza Strip's northern border with
Israel and hundreds more in the central and southern
districts of Gaza. President Abbas also relieved three
top security commanders in Gaza of their duties
following a raid by militants against a Palestinian
Authority prison in Gaza, during which three inmates
were killed, and the firing of dozens of mortar shells
against Israeli settlements on 10 February. Fulfilling an
important obligation under the road map, Abu Mazen
also restructured the security services into three main
branches - the national forces, the intelligence forces
and the police - all of which will report to the
Palestinian Prime Minister.

Together, those steps demonstrate President
Abbas's determination to prevent future attacks. An
important result of his efforts came on 12 February,
when Hamas and Islamic Jihad agreed to a temporary
ceasefire. We call on those groups to eschew terror and
armed confrontation with Israel and to choose the
peaceful, democratic road of negotiations and political
activism. The path taken by President Abbas will not
be easy. If he is to prevail against those who favour
violence over peace, he will need strong support from
both Israel and the international community.

In addition to the positive steps taken by each
party, we are most encouraged by the resumption of
direct engagement between them. Most significantly,
Prime Minister Sharon has reiterated his readiness to
coordinate with the Palestinians the disengagement
plan from the Gaza Strip and parts of the northern West
Bank, and the first meetings to that effect have taken
place. Vice-Premier Peres has met with a number of
senior Palestinian officials to begin coordinating the
civilian and economic aspects of Israel's withdrawal.
We commend Prime Minister Sharon's steady
commitment to disengagement in the face of a serious
escalation in threats and protests from his domestic
opponents. In an important decision, on 20 February
the Israeli Cabinet approved in principle the evacuation
of settlements under the disengagement plan. The
Knesset also demonstrated support for the Prime
Minister by passing, on 16 February, the Compensation
and Evacuation Law. That law is an essential step in
carrying out the withdrawal plan.

As members of the Council will have noted, there
are many positive developments to be welcomed and
encouraged. At the same time, we need to be aware
that the conflict continues and that it continues to bring
an unacceptable toll of death and suffering.

Over this past month, 54 Palestinians and 8
Israelis were killed, and 150 Palestinians and 46
Israelis were injured. On 13 January, Hamas, the
Popular Resistance Committees and the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade attacked the Karni crossing between
Israel and the Gaza Strip, killing six Israeli civilians. In
response, Israel announced that it would temporarily
cut all ties with the Palestinian Authority, and the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) renewed military
incursions into Palestinian areas, which had been
suspended since the Palestinian presidential elections.
On 15 and 16 January, eight Palestinians were killed in
Israeli military operations throughout the Gaza Strip.
Palestinian militants fired large numbers of Qassam
rockets and mortar shells, which critically wounded a
17-year-old Israeli girl in Sderot on 15 January. I am
very sorry to report that she died six days later.

On 31 January, a 10-year-old Palestinian girl was
killed in the yard of a school of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in the southern Gaza Strip. This
is the fourth tragic incident in the past year in which a
Palestinian child has been killed by Israeli fire into an
UNRWA school. As we have stated here before, all
United Nations buildings and installations - but
especially schools - must be kept safe and protected
at all times. Our concern has been conveyed to the
Government of Israel, and we are now awaiting the
outcome of an IDF investigation into the incident.

Despite the vastly improved political climate and
the initial measures that Israel has instituted, most
movement restrictions for Palestinians remain in place,
in the form of checkpoints, curfews and the permit
system. The lack of improvement in the daily lives of
ordinary Palestinians poses a serious threat to the
viability of a renewed peace process.

Closure continues to impact on humanitarian
operations, as well. Frequent and prolonged closure of
the Karni crossing into Gaza has created a backlog at
Ashdod port of more than 900 containers destined for
UNRWA, costing the Agency storage and demurrage
charges of more than $30,000 a day. With an additional
390 empty containers remaining inside the Gaza Strip
at a daily cost of $7,000, UNRWA has incurred total
storage and demurrage charges of more than $4.5
million since March 2004. We hope that current Israeli
efforts to alleviate this situation will lead to a
satisfactory and lasting solution.

On 20 February, the Israeli Cabinet approved the
revised route of Israel's barrier in the West Bank,
which, although it has been moved closer to the Green
Line, still incorporates a large amount of Palestinian
land. To the south of Jerusalem, the new route places
the Gush Etzion settlement block on the Israeli side of
the barrier and surrounds four Palestinian villages with
some 18,000 residents, plus a sizeable amount of
Palestinian agricultural land. The Government restarted
barrier construction in the Salfit area of the northern
West Bank around the settlement of Ariel, raising
concerns that large amounts of Palestinian territory
might end up being incorporated on the Israeli side.
Barrier activity also intensified in the Jerusalem area,
where a large number of confiscation orders have
recently been served to landowners.

We recognize Israel's right and duty to protect its
people against terrorist attacks. But, now more than
ever, we urge the Government of Israel to address its
legitimate security needs in ways that do not increase
suffering among Palestinians, prejudge final status
issues or threaten the longer-term prospects for peace
by making the creation of a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State more difficult. We reiterate our call
on Israel to abide by its legal obligations as set out in
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and General Assembly resolution ES-10/ 15.

The international community has come together
in support of the new momentum to assure the parties
that they are not alone and that we will accompany
them along the road to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

The Quartet principals will meet on the margins
of the London conference on 1 March, following
contacts at the envoy level during the past month. They
will review the progress that the parties have made to
date and decide on further action over the coming
months.

The London conference, hosted by the
Government of the United Kingdom, will bring
together the members of the Quartet, the Group of
Eight, a range of key donors and the Palestinian
Authority. Prime Minister Qurei will present the
Palestinian Authority's reform agenda and, together
with the other participants, will assess suitable
mechanisms to help the Palestinians lay the
groundwork for an independent, sovereign, viable,
contiguous and democratic state. The Secretary-
General will attend this important and constructive
meeting.

The London conference, while not a donor event,
offers an opportunity for the international community
to be updated on the Palestinian Authority's precarious
fiscal situation and to provide urgently needed funds
for short-term assistance. At the end of January, the
Palestinian Authority had received only $20 million
from the United States and $5 million from Norway,
out of a total of $660 million pledged for the year. The
United States and others have since announced plans
for additional support. Consolidated action is needed
from the international community to ensure the
financial stability of the Palestinian Authority at this
pivotal time.

At the outset, I mentioned the outrage caused by
the atrocious terrorist attack in Beirut on 14 February
that killed former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri and 14 others. The funeral for Mr. Hariri and his
colleagues took place on 16 February. Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi represented the Secretary-General.

Pursuant to the Council's request that the
Secretary-General urgently report on the
circumstances, causes and consequences of the killing
of Mr. Hariri, the Secretary-General acted promptly to
select a team, headed by Mr. Peter Fitzgerald of
Ireland, who is a senior law enforcement official. The
team, which includes other staff with relevant
expertise, will make contact with Lebanese officials
and others in order to gather such information as is
necessary for the Secretary-General to report to the
Council in a timely manner.

Turning to southern Lebanon, during the
reporting period there have been several disturbing
incidents along the Blue Line, but no serious
escalation. On 14 January and again on 17 January,
Hizbullah detonated explosive devices along the Blue
Line, fortunately without causing any casualties. We
reiterate our call on the Government of Lebanon to
extend its authority throughout its territory.

In response to those attacks, Israel carried out
immediate air strikes against Hizbullah targets in
southern Lebanon, reportedly injuring two Lebanese
civilians. Israel's security Cabinet approved in
principle a military operation along the Blue Line on
19 January. The operation did not take place, thus
averting a further escalation of the situation.
Regrettably, however, a total of 30 Israeli overflights
were recorded during the past month, some of which
were reported to have been deep in Lebanese territory.
We reiterate our position that these air violations must
cease.

By their meeting in Sharm el-Sheikh and the
measures taken subsequently, Prime Minister Sharon
and President Abbas have stirred widespread hope that
Israelis and Palestinians may finally be on the path to
peace. They have effectively restarted the process to
implement the provisions of the road map, as endorsed
by the Council in its resolution 1515 (2003). The end
goal remains settling their conflict, ending the
occupation and establishing a Palestinian State living
side by side with a secure Israel. We are convinced that
2005 is a year of opportunity. We fervently hope that,
as the Secretary of State of the United States,
Condoleezza Rice, put it, the international community
will help the parties to transform opportunity into
achievement.

