We thank Special Representative Fall for his detailed briefing. We welcome the progress made by the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), under the chairpersonship of Gabon, with its institutional reform agenda and the installation of the new regional peace and security architecture. We understand that this new architecture will help that body contribute more effectively to the joint objective of achieving stability in Central Africa. We welcome the measures taken by the countries of the subregion to strengthen their response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we welcome the approval of the COVID-19 regional response strategy for Central Africa by the Heads of State and Government of ECCAS. However, we are concerned about the impact that may have on the organization and financing of the electoral processes. Nevertheless, there has been progress, such as the presentation of the electoral calendar by Chad's National Independent Electoral Commission, according to which the elections are scheduled for 2021. In this respect, it is essential that attention be paid to the participation of women and young people in political processes, especially in the current electoral processes. Efforts to improve relations among the countries of the subregion must continue. We welcome concrete progress, such as the commitment reached among the Presidents of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda in the eradication of armed groups, the strengthening of existing mechanisms to eliminate their sources of financing and the joint fight against related criminal networks. We also recognize the efforts of Burundi and Rwanda to normalize their bilateral relations. We hope that those diplomatic initiatives will continue and that they will serve to advance pending issues. We regret that there are still cases of violence in the North-West and South- West regions of Cameroon, where civilians are paying a high price. The reported attacks on humanitarian workers are a source of deep concern for the Dominican Republic. We reiterate our call to the Government of Cameroon to redouble its efforts to reach a political solution to the crisis in those regions, and we also urge the Special Envoy and regional organizations to continue to intensify their efforts to mediate and engage in dialogue with the parties in order to establish the trust and the political will necessary to build sustainable peace throughout the country. We must voice our concern about the volatile security situation in some parts of the subregion due to the activities of armed groups. Particularly disturbing are the deadly attacks in Cameroon and Chad by Boko Haram factions and by the Lord's Resistance Army, with devastating consequences for women and girls, who are disproportionately exposed to violent attacks, including conflict- related sexual violence. It is more important than ever that armed groups heed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. The adverse effects of climate change continue to negatively impact human security and livelihoods. Some parts of the subregion once again experienced severe flooding caused by excessive rainfall, destroying the livelihoods of many communities. The resulting humanitarian situation in several parts of Central Africa remains precarious and has undoubtedly been exacerbated by the effects of COVID-19. Finally, we welcome the good offices of UNOCA, ECCAS and Mr. Fall in promoting peaceful solutions based on dialogue, confidence-building and reconciliation efforts, which should be supported by all relevant actors at all levels.
