Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like, first, to
congratulate the delegation of Lithuania and you
personally, Madam President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council. I would also like to thank
you, Madam, for organizing today's open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his tenth report on the subject (S/2013/689), and to express
our appreciation to Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their informative briefings.

Despite the fact that this year marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council's engagement in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict by giving
peacekeeping operations explicit protection mandates,
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in current armed conflicts. They continue
to be subjected to indiscriminate attacks and other
forms of violence by parties to conflict. The targeting
of civilians because of their religion or ethnic or tribal
affiliation in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan is very alarming. Civilians are still suffering
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, despite the robust peacekeeping mandate that
has been given to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The situations in Syria and the occupied
territories are clear reminders of the tragedies civilians
endure on a daily basis. All that underlines the fact that
United Nations bodies, especially the Security Council,
should adopt more effective measures in that regard.

I would also like to thank the delegation of
Lithuania for the excellent concept note (S/2014/74, annex) it has prepared and its suggestion that we
focus today's debate on the protection of civilians
through United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
contribution of peacekeeping missions to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is extremely important.
We support providing missions with the necessary
mandates, personnel and equipment to enable them
to become effective mechanisms for early warning
when violations occur. Developing a comprehensive
framework for the future work of United Nations
peacekeeping missions so as to ensure the protection
of civilians and accountability for any violations that
occur during the implementation of their mandates
is essential to achieving a common and effective
understanding regarding the protection of civilians.

We stress that United Nations peacekeeping
missions should uphold the principles of respect for the
sovereignty and cultural specificities of host countries.
The protection of civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence in any armed conflict is the primary
responsibility of the host country of any peacekeeping
operation. Peacekeeping missions with protection
mandates should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government in
that regard.

The successful conduct of tasks relating to the
protection of civilians, wherever a United Nations
mandate exists, requires a holistic approach that
encompasses the provision of timely and adequate
resources, logistical support and the required training,
in addition to clearly defined and achievable mandates.
The consent ofthe host State as a fundamental principle
of peacekeeping must be respected. That requires
open and regular political discussions between senior
mission leadership and national authorities, as well as
effective follow-up on how to implement all mandated
tasks, including, of course, the protection of civilians.
Existing legal challenges in identifying who are the
civilians whom peacekeepers should protect and how
to differentiate them from insurgents in some areas of
operations should also be addressed.

As a major troop-contributing country, Egypt has
always stressed the need to establish high standards
of conduct on the part of peacekeepers. We provide
mandatory predeployment training for all our military
and police personnel, including training on the
protection of civilians according to United Nations
standards.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
reiterated the need for compliance with the provisions
of international law and international humanitarian
law by States and armed groups involved in armed
conflict. We believe that all parties, in particular
States, must comply with the principles of distinction
and proportionality in armed conflicts. All parties
must refrain from targeting medical facilities and grant
access to those providing humanitarian assistance.
Peacekeeping missions should consider tracking and
reporting any violations.

Egypt also supports what the report has called
for regarding the need to act consistently across all
relevant situations, considering that, without such
consistency, there will be a significant gap between the
commitments undertaken by the Security Council in
the abstract and the actual performance of the Council
in responding to Violence against civilians in armed
conflicts, when performance matters most.

We share the concerns expressed in the Secretary-
General's report about the increasing use of drones and
unmanned aerial vehicles, and its implications on the
nature of conflicts and the negative impact on civilians
and accountability. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, has to ensure rapid
and effective accountability for any violations against
civilians in armed conflicts. The establishment of
international and national commissions of inquiry into
such violations has proved to be an effective tool.

We call on the Security Council and the United
Nations bodies concerned to take decisive actions to
stop the indiscriminate attacks against civilians in the
occupied Palestinian territories and to lift the unjust
blockade imposed by the Israeli authorities on the
Gaza Strip. We remind Israel of its clear obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law in that respect and its primary responsibility,
as the occupying Power, for the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Egypt, for its part, is
doing everything possible to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip by opening the Rafah crossing
whenever possible, despite the security challenges that
we face in the Sinai.

Finally, we look forward, in future, to greater
attention and a broader discussion, including with troop-
contributing countries, be devoted to the emerging
challenges linked with the protection of civilians
during armed conflicts, in addition to the current core
challenges identified in the Secretary-General's report.

