Mr. Mehdier (Azerbaijan): Allow me to
commence by expressing our gratitude to the United
States for having organized this open debate on the
situation the Middle East. I take this opportunity to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The situation in the Middle East demands
constant international attention and in-depth
participation in addressing the perennial problems and
challenges that engulf it. As a highly complex region in
many respects, including in terms of geography,
geopolitics, ethnic intermingling and simmering ethno-
national conflicts, the Middle East has remained at the
hub of the international agenda for decades.

The wave of changes that have swept the region
since the spring of 2011 have become yet another

potent factor that has absorbed international attention
and portended the desire of Middle Eastern societies
for political and societal transformation processes
encapsulating the ideas of democracy, equal
representation, greater freedom and wider political
participation.

We all agree on the potential benefits to be
brought about by the process of democratic transition
in the Middle Eastern countries. However, one should
not dismiss the idea that every transition is
accompanied by hardships and trials. Therefore,
patience, diligence, resolve and political dexterity will
be the best tools in making the democratic
transformation process as smooth as possible and in
excluding erroneous judgments and policies regarding
the region's prospective development.

Turning to more specific issues, we would like to
note the progress in the Middle East peace process that
was demonstrated by the recent interactions between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides on 17 April in
Jerusalem, after a prolonged hiatus in peace
negotiations. In this respect, we would like to welcome
the exchange of letters between the parties initiated on
this very date, and express the hope that the sides will
avail themselves of this positive momentum for
resuming negotiations.

In this respect, Azerbaijan appreciates the
consistent efforts of Jordan to revive the dialogue and
resume the negotiations. We would also like to note the
importance of the Quartet meeting held in Washington,
DC, on 11 April, in keeping the Middle East peace
process high on the international agenda, and express
our hope that our collective efforts will finally lead to
the resolution of this lingering conflict.

Among a number of political, humanitarian and
security challenges, we cannot but express again our
deep concern about continued illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Needless to say, apart from their impact on the rights,
freedoms and everyday lives of Palestinians,
settlements cause serious damage to the peace process
and, more dangerously, threaten a two-State solution
and the emergence of a viable Palestinian State.

The situation involving the serious violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law
cannot go unheeded by the Security Council. In
performing its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, the Council must react
adequately in order to put an end to illegal practices
and policies and ensure that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are observed and respected. It is
also important to take full advantage of ethnic,
religious and cultural diversity by promoting
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation while
categorically rejecting and invalidating any
manifestation of ethnic and religious intolerance.

The situation in Syria still occupies the top
position on the list of international security issues. We
are encouraged by the fact that, as a result of the
tireless efforts of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on Syria,
Mr. Kofi Annan, the sides concerned have committed
to ending the bloodshed and observing a ceasefire after
lasting violent clashes. Needless to say, reports
testifying to sporadic violations of the ceasefire are
worrisome, but we still believe that such instances will
remain isolated cases without further spillover to
threaten the current fragile trust.

The adoption of the resolutions authorizing the
dispatch of the advance team to Syria (resolution 2042 (2012)) and, later, of the deployment of the full United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (resolution 2043 (2012)) was an expression of a unified Security
Council position on this highly crucial matter. Hopes
are high that the security environment in Syria will be
propitious enough for the Mission to carry out its task
of monitoring and supporting the full implementation
of the Special Envoy's six-point proposal.

In conclusion, we would like to voice the hope
that, with more political will, rigorous work and
concerted efforts, peace and security will no longer be
rare commodities in the Middle East.

