Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating Nigeria on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important meeting. Allow me also to express our
sincere thanks to the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing this morning. My delegation also
commends the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, for their comprehensive briefings this morning.

Civilians continue to suffer the brunt of violence
during armed conflicts. Civilians are displaced from
their homes and are often denied access to life-saving
food, medicine and shelter. It is against this backdrop
that the States Members of the United Nations pledged
in the Millennium Declaration "[t]o expand and
strengthen the protection of civilians in complex
emergencies" (resolution 55/2, para. 26).

Protection for civilians is a basic principle of
humanitarian law. Civilians not taking part in the
fighting must on no account be attacked and must be
spared and protected. The 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their 1977 Additional Protocols contain specific
rules designed to protect civilians. In situations that are
not covered by these treaties, in particular internal
disturbances, civilians are protected by the
fundamental principles of humanitarian law and human
rights law.

The Council has been discussing this important
issue for more than a decade and has adopted many
resolutions and heard strong and relevant statements by
distinguished representatives. However, ironically, a
large number of civilians continue to be exposed to the
atrocities of conflict. My delegation urges all parties to
conflicts to ensure the protection of the lives and
property of civilians. My delegation condemns all
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law and stresses the need to combat impunity,
safeguard access for humanitarian assistance, and
protect the safety of humanitarian aid workers.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations to
protect civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council's thematic resolution 1894 (2009), the updated
aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/l, annex) and the
inclusion of protection activities in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions have been
important steps forward. However, at the same time,
the gap between the words of the protection mandates
and their actual implementation persists. In this regard,
my delegation would like to re-emphasize the
importance of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, as endorsed in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Final Document (resolution 60/1) in
preventing harm to civilians in armed conflict.

The vulnerable situation of civilians in post-
conflict societies needs special attention. Long after
the guns have fallen silent, such people remain
traumatized and permanently scarred by the brutalities
of war. If peace is to be sustained, they must be
rehabilitated and reintegrated into their communities
more effectively, and the perpetrators must bear the
resultant cost.

The presence of uniformed female personnel may
play a pivotal role in protecting civilians in armed
conflict. I take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of
the all-female Bangladeshi police contingent working
in the peacekeeping mission in Haiti. We believe that a
female police force could also play a critical role in a
State's ability to protect its citizens.

Finally, we would like to mention what my
delegation considers to be two overarching themes for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.

The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders. We believe that the protection of
civilians is the primary justification for a United
Nations presence in the field. However, despite some
improvements, various political, humanitarian, military
and development components of United Nations
missions in the field still lack an integrated focus on
the protection of civilians. My delegation stresses
effective coordination, particularly among the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its grave
concern over violations and breaches of international
law, including international humanitarian law. For
example, the total disregard and rejection of
humanitarian and international law and values being
committed in particular by occupation forces in the
occupied territories of Palestine for years are a
disgrace to humanity. My delegation strongly urges the
international community, particularly the Council, to
take effective steps to ensure respect for and
compliance with the Geneva Conventions in such
situations.

