I thank the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, and Ms. Mustafa for their briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity to express Tunisia's support for Mr. Pedersen's good offices in pushing the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). After nearly a decade of conflict and destruction, the prospects for Syria, the Syrian people and the region at large have never looked bleaker. Special Envoy Pedersen eloquently captured in his briefing those worrisome trends, and I would like to underline some of them in my national capacity. On the economic and humanitarian fronts, the picture is grim and, we believe, needs the urgent focus of the Security Council. Syria is facing economic freefall and further pauperization of the population, which are exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and economic difficulties. The United Nations has warned of the risks of famine in the light of food insecurity reaching unprecedented levels, as well as massive poverty and unemployment rates. The surge in recent days of COVID-19 cases and mortality numbers across Syria is another concerning development that is likely to worsen the humanitarian crisis, particularly in vulnerable areas. We stress that the tackling of the coronavirus spread needs to be urgently stepped up, including through the sufficient and unimpeded provision of tests, treatments and medicine, as well as support for Syria's downgraded medical infrastructure, in order to avert a worst-case scenario. On the political and security front, we are concerned about the early signs of a relapse into conflict in northern Syria following several weeks of general calm, along with rampant insecurity and unrest in southern Syria. We have been witnessing in recent days continued terrorist provocations along the contact lines in Idlib, military reinforcements on the ground and the resumption of limited military operations in rural Idlib and rural Aleppo. We reiterate our call on all parties to keep their abiding commitments, de-escalate tensions and exercise utmost self-restraint to enable sustained calm and a truce. We are also following closely the ongoing process of either absorbing or dismantling competitors, enemies and spoilers among terrorist and extremist factions in Idlib. We stress the importance of a collective approach towards eradicating the safe haven that Security Council-listed terrorist organizations, such as Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and Da'esh, have established in Idlib and beyond in order for any peace to take hold in Syria and the region over the long term. In that regard, we welcome the ongoing efforts to tackle Da'esh on all its fronts, including its financing and economic structure in Syria and the region. Tunisia is particularly concerned about the unabated recruitment of fighters from Syria who are transferred to fuel conflict and unrest in neighbouring Libya. This is a stark reminder that the Syrian vacuum left by conflict and economic collapse is enabling wider forces of instability, stretching from the Middle East to North Africa. Put together, Syria is unfortunately today ground zero for a regional collapse that requires the due attention and collective action of the international community and the Council to reverse the negative security, humanitarian and socioeconomic trends. We look forward to the resumption of the Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva next month. This is perhaps the only glimmer of hope amid the worsening crisis. The critical situation within which Syria is engulfed today commands all the more the Syrian parties to work constructively together and seek compromises and common ground in order to make swift progress on the political process under the able facilitation of Special Envoy Pedersen. We reiterate that there is no viable alternative to a political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) - a solution that is by and for the Syrians, puts an end to terrorism and foreign intervention and preserves Syria's unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
