Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I wish
you every success. I am certain that your intelligence,
impartiality and clear-sightedness will be of great
assistance to us all.

We wish also to congratulate Guinea on its
presidency last month. The Guinean presidency did
outstanding work at a historic, difficult and trying time,
during which it demonstrated great flexibility and
savoir faire.

I wish to express my thanks to the mission of the
United Kingdom, and in particular to Ambassador
Greenstock and First Secretary Anna Clunes, for their
arduous and magnificent work during the first 18
months of the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
existence. The Committee has been consolidated as the
primary instrument of global cooperation against
terrorism. This is due, to a great extent, to the wealth of
professional qualities that make Ambassador
Greenstock an irreplaceable diplomatic personality. I
will do my very best to follow his example, however
humbly.

Terrorism threatens all States and must therefore
be addressed in concertation. Since it easily transcends
borders, international cooperation is vital. The
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
now assumed by Spain, is a great responsibility to
which my country is fully sensitive. As all here are
aware, we have suffered from terrible acts of terrorism
for several decades and we have first-hand experience,
unfortunately, of the horrific effects of that scourge.
We are therefore firmly committed to addressing it
resolutely, in which task the Committee is an essential
tool.

We have received a significant legacy of work
well done, in which the tirelessness and professional
skills of the experts assigned to the Committee and the
Secretariat's services to the Council have also been
essential. In that regard, I extend them our gratitude
and assure them of our intention to continue to
collaborate closely with them.

As Ambassador Greenstock has rightly stated, the
Committee is entering a new phase in its work,
qualitatively quite distinct from earlier phases. Up until
now, we have focused on identifying the existence of
national legislation; from now on, we will focus on the
implementation and effectiveness of that legislation.
The Committee has been working on the basis of three
criteria that should continue to guide its path: the
principles of cooperation, transparency and equal
treatment. Cooperation between the Committee and
international organizations and States will be
increasingly important. This is of particular
significance, and the Spanish chairmanship recognizes
it as such. Evidence of this, as Sir Jeremy Greenstock
stated, is the forthcoming meeting of representatives of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the World Customs Organization. We should not
overlook the important role of the CTC as a catalyst
and as an intermediary between those States that
require assistance and those able to provide it.

The CTC's transparency has enabled the
Committee to be perceived as an important tool in the
fight against terrorism. In that regard, it is essential to
develop, enhance and continually update the CTC web
site in order to provide easy, fast and productive access
to all States and international organizations.

Finally, equality of treatment must continue,
enabling the CTC to be a genuinely universal tool that
works with and assists all States, making possible their
mutual enrichment by means of, inter alia, an exchange
of experience leading to the improvement and
development of the mechanisms of the fight against
terrorism.

I conclude by appealing to the Security Council
and to all Member States to continue working together,
in accordance with the Charter, for the maintenance of
international peace and security in the face of the
global threat posed by terrorism. And of course, I wish
to express my sincere gratitude to the members of the
Council for the confidence in me that they have shown
by electing me to head a task so important, so pressing,
so crucial and so global in scope. I express my hope
that I will be equal to the task.

