Mr. Saenz Biolley (Costa Rica)(interpretation from Spanish): From the moment when you, Mr. President,
initiated consultations among the members of the Security
Council concerning the specific request made by the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations on
22 June 1998 to hold a formal meeting of the Security
Council, the delegation of Costa Rica expressed its
support for the idea that this principal organ of the United
Nations should hold an open debate to consider the
current situation of the Middle East peace process.

In that regard, Costa Rica believes that, while the
substance and dynamics of the peace process have been
determined by the parties, the Security Council has a
responsibility regarding this issue and that it should
transparently and democratically hold an open debate on

 

the current state of the peace process in that troubled
region.

All Members of the United Nations are aware that for
more than 50 years Costa Rica has maintained and
continues to maintain a deep and constant friendship with
the people and the State of Israel. It is well known that for
more than 50 years Costa Rica has supported the right of
the Israeli people to exist as a free and independent State.
It is also well known that Costa Rica, on all occasions and
in all forums, has upheld Israel's right to secure borders
that guarantee its existence as a member of the community
of nations.

Clearly, of course, this bond that Costa Rica has
maintained and continues to maintain with Israel has made
it difficult for us to maintain similarly full friendly and
cooperative relations with an important group of United
Nations Member States, as we would like to do.

Consequently, Costa Rica believes it can speak frankly
and unreservedly to the friend, for that is the primary value
of friendship. Costa Rica believes that peace in the Near
East, the peace so laboriously worked out and developed,
is perhaps the most remarkable undertaking in diplomatic
negotiation in modern times. The peace of the brave in the
Middle East is a unique and superior thing, and as such it
should be preserved and made to prevail at all costs.

Thus, my country is concerned about the meaning and
effects on the peace process of political acts, such as the
administrative programme announced on 18 June 1998 by
the Government of Israel, which comprises a set of
measures relating to the city of Jerusalem.

The final, permanent status of Jerusalem must be
determined and agreed in the manner established by the
parties to the peace process. In that regard, Costa Rica
takes this opportunity to make a clear appeal for
compliance with the substance of the agreements, for
actions to be in keeping with that which was established in
Oslo and, in particular, for the parties to fulfil all their
obligations without reservations and conditions.

Costa Rica trusts that the measures announced by the
Government of Israel will not be put into effect and calls
on the parties to resume quickly the implementation of the
peace process.

