Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): Let
me express my great appreciation and pleasure at
speaking on my next to last day in this job before you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, my old friend, from a country I
have been associated with for most of my professional
career. It is our honour to be here under your
presidency today, and tomorrow as well, I hear, which
will be an even greater honour. It is a great pleasure to
see you again here in New York.

I want to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
an excellent and comprehensive briefing, one that
responds to all of the issues in front of us. I praise him
and his colleagues, and I share in his strong
appreciation of the outstanding work of the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Bernard Kouchner.

Since this is my penultimate appearance before
the Security Council, I should like to make a general
remark first about the situation and also about the
troop-contributing nations. I am delighted to see that so
many of them are represented here today. I want to
echo what my colleague, Ambassador Cunningham -
who will take over the Mission this weekend and
remain as the strong charge' d'affaires, fully and
personally backed by the Secretary of State-designate,
General Powell, who has personally asked him to
remain- said to the Council Tuesday about troop-
contributing countries. I strongly support what he said
concerning the role of the troop-contributing countries
in these deliberations, pending the full-scale reform of
the Security Council, which I called for in April, when
I changed the American position on Security Council
membership. We believe that countries of concern
should be here in this room and should have their
views heard.

My principle is very simple: transparency and
openness in deliberations and all points of view heard,
but changes in the actual rules of the Security Council
should be part of a comprehensive process. I regret that
that has not moved forward further since our
announcement in April. But we have left it on the table,
and Secretary-designate Powell addressed it yesterday
in very open terms at his hearing. I urge the Council to
look at what he said on Security Council reform.

Again, I want to stress to the troop-contributing
countries present here - and I am glad that
Ambassador Schori is at the table with us to represent
the European Union - that I strongly support their
active participation in our deliberations.

Let me turn now to the Balkans, and particularly
to the remarks we have just heard. Of course, the last
year has marked a profound change in the situation,
almost entirely for the better. Rather than managing
constant crises, we now face the more reasonable task
of constructing a peaceful and stable future. Still, I
want to emphasize that the problems in front of us are
extraordinarily difficult. We need to overcome the
legacy of corruption, cronyism, economic
mismanagement and just plain, downright criminal
activities that are so common to countries in post-
communist transition and that are particularly endemic
in this war-torn region.

The people of Montenegro and Serbia have tough
political challenges ahead. They must clean out the
remnants of the old regime, and they must work with
the brave leaders of Montenegro to reconcile
conflicting approaches to Yugoslavia's constitutional
future. President Gjukanovic deserves our appreciation
for his steadfastness in the face of Milosevie's efforts
to crush democracy in Montenegro. How the dispute
between Montenegro and Serbia will be resolved is a
matter for the two Republics within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to resolve for themselves in a
peaceful fashion. I cannot predict how that dispute will
be resolved, although I have talked at length to both
President Kostunica and President Gjukanovic about
that. But I want to stress that the terrain on which that
argument is being handled is totally different, and that
an entirely peaceful and mutually satisfactory
resolution should be achievable, given the leadership in
both Republics.

In Bosnia there is much left to do, but progress
has been steady and Dayton has been a success. The
nation is at peace with itself and with its neighbours.
Since we met last, Yugoslavia has recognized Bosnia.
Anyone here who has been involved in this issue for a
long time - and I think that, in this Chamber, I am
probably the person involved in this issue the longest
~ can say that it was the very issue of recognition that
was an animating force in the war itself. All this has
been done without injury from hostile action to a single
solider of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO). That is directly contrary to the dire
predictions made by so many people in the early 1990s.

We salute the more than 1,000 brave United
Nations peacekeepers who died or were wounded in
Bosnia. We note - and I want to stress this - that of
the over 1,000 casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers the largest single number of casualties
was sustained by our great allies the French. But there
were no NATO casualties. The difference is inherent in
the difference between the United Nations presence in
Bosnia and the NATO-driven presence as a result of
Dayton. This has given the United Nations and the
international community a chance to build a single
nation.

While we are far from finished in Bosnia, we
have made huge progress. Refugee returns to minority
areas have increased significantly, and they are
increasing across the board. I especially congratulate
the European Union on its significant economic efforts.
We can now move farther and faster, in the light of the
changes in Zagreb and Belgrade and those occurring in
Sarajevo.

Extreme nationalists too often blocked the
implementation of Dayton, and they drew support form
their neighbouring capitals. That era is over, and the
future of Bosnia therefore looks much brighter.

The elections that took place in Bosnia underline
several points. In the short term, the strengthening of
some of the nationalist parties was not good news, and
we must be honest about that. The nationalist parties
took advantage of democracy to strengthen their
positions; but they are the enemies of democracy. As
the people of Bosnia continue to assemble their
governments at every level, I have a simple message to
my friends in that country: the extreme nationalist
parties have no future; they are backward-looking and
corrupt, they victimize the very people who support
them, and they keep them isolated and weakened
economically. They have no place in the future of
Bosnia or in the future of Europe.

But there was also good news in those elections.
For the first time in Bosnia's post-war history there is a
real chance that moderate politicians will be able to
assemble a functioning legislative majority at the
national level, as well as a fully functioning
Government. If that works, it will open up dramatic
opportunities for progress and send a powerful message
to the world.

I call on the High Representative in Bosnia to
watch the new Governments carefully and to act
aggressively against those who violate the spirit and
letter of the Dayton Agreements. I continue to believe,
and I will say it one last time as an official of the
United States Government, that the Serbian Democratic
Party (SDS) - the party of Radovan Karadzic and his
fellow war criminals - should have been banned a
long time ago. It has no place in Bosnia's future. They
are the Nazis of the Balkans. I am hopeful that when
the dust from that election settles, the extreme
nationalists will be further marginalized. I take note of
the voluntary detention of Madam Plavsic, who is now
in The Hague. What she did was courageous and
correct. I am sure that it will be taken into account as
the legal proceedings against her proceed, and I believe
that it should send a powerful signal to other people in
the region that they can run but they cannot hide.

The situation in Kosovo, which is what we are
here to discuss today, also remains extremely difficult.
I warmly welcome the successor to Mr. Kouchner,
Hans Haekkerup, to his new task. I had excellent talks
with him during his trip to New York. I urge him
publicly, as I did privately, not only to continue the
excellent work of his predecessor in accordance with
what the Under-Secretary-General has reported to us
today, but also to focus on two overriding issues of
transcendent historic importance. Anyone here who has
been in Pristina knows that just working in that
atmosphere on a day-to-day basis is so difficult that
one can lose track of the larger issues. But I have no
question that Minister Haekkerup, with his vast
experience as a former Minister of Defence, will be
able to succeed there. I believe that while he continues
his day-to-day efforts Mr. Haekkerup's primary focus
should be to hold Kosovo-wide elections as soon as
possible so that the people of Kosovo can govern
themselves democratically.

That is what is called for in resolution 1244
(1999). While there is a legitimate disagreement in the
Chamber about certain aspects of that resolution - and
I know I will hear in a moment from some of my
friends about views of theirs that differ from the ones I
have stated - there should be no disagreement on the
next major step, because resolution 1244 (1999)
definitely calls for self-governing status internally. I
recognize the ambiguity on final status, and I will
address that in a minute. But I say to my friends in the
Chamber, and particularly to my friends from the
Russian Federation and China - with whom we have
had previous disagreements on this matter - that there
should be no disagreement about the Kosovo-wide
elections. If there is, I would hope that it will be aired
publicly and prominently so that we can address it. But
my view is that that is unambiguous. In fact, as most
present will recall, it was my view that the election
held last September should have included the Kosovo-
wide level as well as the municipal level. That was not
the decision made by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). So be it. The election
took place. It was successful. It was peaceful. Then the
Serbian elections took place. They were successful.
They were peaceful. Contrary to the fears of many
people, including my own concerns, they took place
inside Kosovo as well without problems. So I think the
situation is now open for this all-important election.
My own hope is that it will be held as early as this
spring. That may be overly optimistic, but I urge the
Security Council, and I urge the Under-Secretary-
General, and I urge Mr. Haekkerup and the OSCE to
start planning it now. It takes 120 to 180 days from the
time one commits oneself, and the longer we talk, the
longer we wait; and this needs to be done. After it is
done, this Council and the world community will face
an even greater challenge.

On the next point - the future and final status of
Kosovo * I can only offer some speculative opinions,
because one cannot really deal with this issue - the
final status - until the elections have been held. But I
believe the elections will be a success and will produce
a reasonable group of elected officials who will
represent the aspirations of the people of Kosovo. I
hope that this election will include the Serbs and other
ethnic groups besides the Albanians in Kosovo so that
it can be fully representative.

After that election, however, we will need to
recognize the underlying fact. Kosovo will never be
peaceful and stable until its status is resolved. The
continuing violence of the region, most of which is
currently coming from extremists on the Albanian side,
is unacceptable. But until we resolve the status issue in
a mutually satisfactory way, the anxieties the problem
causes will continue to fester and lead to more
problems. Anyone who doubts the danger of this issue
needs to look only a little bit further to the East, to the
Middle East, to the area seething now, to the occupied
territories, to recognize how dangerous this issue will
be ifit is left to fester.

If we are having this discussion 10 years from
today, if NATO troops are still in Kosovo 10 years
from today, we will have failed. Ten years may seem
inconceivable, but the United Nations Command is still
in existence in Korea 48 years after the end of the
Korean War precisely because the status of Korea was
never resolved, and so the United Nations Command
has had to remain, and the American troops remain in
Korea 48 years later. I hope that the Council will not
have to be discussing Kosovo 10 years or 5 years from
today, but it will unless the status is resolved.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) states
clearly that all options remain on the table and sets
forth a process without dictating a solution. It is the
task to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo to facilitate the political process
that will resolve this issue. Again I stress that the
intensive work must follow the elections, but we must
be aware of this issue now. It may take some time. It
may take a long time for the process on final status to
reach a solution. But I believe that the process should
begin as soon as the two sides are ready. Nothing
would do more to reduce the uncertainty and anxiety
that drive the violence in Kosovo than the start of a fair
process aimed at resolving the status of Kosovo.

I think we should be clear about two points
before this process begins. First, the terms of any
eventual settlement must be mutually acceptable to
both sides and backed by the international community.
No other approach will result in a stable, long-term
solution. No other approach will permit a significant
drawdown in external forces.

Secondly, the need to start this dialogue only
increases the importance of holding the elections I
spoke of earlier, the Kosovo-wide elections, as soon as
possible. The people of Kosovo need democratically
chosen leaders to speak for them in this discussion that
will take place.

We cannot allow the challenges that remain to
detract from our sense of what was already been
accomplished, however. The Balkans are a very
different place, and a much better place, than they were
eight years ago. Violent clashes seemed to lurk around
every corner until recently. But today the chances of a
major conflict are increasingly remote, especially
thanks to the democratic Government of President
Kostunica and the newly elected leadership of Serbia
under Prime Minister Zizie. I also want to congratulate
Prime Minister Zizie, who I have known for many
years as an opposition leader, for having finally taken
his rightful place as an elected, democratically chosen
leader.

Still, my friends, there is much yet to do. My
greatest regret is that the main perpetrators of the
region's crimes are not yet in The Hague where they
belong. But the net is closing in. As I said earlier, Ms.
Plavcic's voluntary surrender last week was an
important step forward, and I say here publicly that I
am sure that she will be able to offer important
evidence of crimes that others committed, and the
others should think hard about what that means for
them.

I am confident that the next Administration will
have no more tolerance for the forces of ethnic
separatism and hatred than we have. Secretary of State-
designate Colin Powell spoke movingly yesterday of
America's role as a beacon of freedom in the world. I
draw the Council's attention to his comments, which
were very gratifying - his powerful statement of
support for the Atlantic partnership and for the United
Nations and his appreciation for the commitments we
made in the Balkans to our allies and the people of the
region, for America's freedom is inextricably tied to
the freedom and prosperity of Europe. We stand
strongest when we stand together with the United
Nations and with our closest allies.

On a personal note, this closes out my official
responsibilities in regard to this issue, but I can assure
the Council that I will remain deeply involved as a
private citizen, as I did in previous incarnations as a
private citizen both in the 1992-1993 period and again
in the 1996-1999 period. So, you may not see me in
this Chamber again talking about this issue, but you
will probably hear from me. Perhaps what I say will
not be universally welcomed, but my commitment to
this issue remains undiminished, and I look forward to
watching all of you as you proceed. The long journey is
not over, but we have made tremendous progress. At
long last, I think the dream of a Europe united, whole
and free seems to be within sight.

