Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Senegal for
organizing this annual briefing and this very useful
interaction between Security Council members and
the heads of police components of selected United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, for providing an overview of
current challenges facing United Nations police. We are
also grateful to the heads of police components of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for providing
very thoughtful insights on the activities and prospects
of United Nations police, prevailing challenges, as
well as their safety and security. We wholeheartedly
commend United Nations police for all they are doing
in protecting civilians and in building capacities for
law enforcement institutions in host countries.

The police component of United Nations
peacekeeping and special police political missions plays
a crucial role in conflict prevention and management
in post-conflict peacebuilding, security, the rule of
law and in sustaining peace. Additionally, they give
support to the reform and developing of policing,
law enforcement institutions and conducting interim
policing and other law enforcement duties in host
countries. Being the first line of protection and contact
with local populations, they are an important element
for restoring confidence in the national police, besides
playing a crucial protective role centred around two
axes, namely, protection against physical violence and
the creation of a safe environment.

As a recognition ofthat reality, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which strengthened the
role ofUnited Nations police components in conflict and
post-conflict situations; in supporting, restructuring
and rebuilding law enforcement institutions and the rule
of law; and in implementing security sector reforms.
Resolution 2185 (2014) further calls on Member
States to enhance the capabilities and expertise of
United Nations police components regarding capacity
development and institution-building, supporting host
States' policing institutions and self-sufficiency, and
the transfer of skills and expertise in order to ensure a
successful and durable transition.

In our statement, we intended to deal with three
issues, the protection of civilians, gender-sensitive
policing and police capacity-building and security
sector reform. Since previous speakers dealt at length
with the key issues that underline the subject matter
under consideration, we will stop at this time. We
would like to request the Police Commissioners'
assessment of the impact of resolution 2185 (2014), with
its comprehensive approach to United Nations police,
on the discharge of their mandates.

In conclusion, the complex context to which the
United Nations police component is exposed calls on
the Security Council to give clear, credible and realistic
mandates and strategic guidance to the Police Division
and to United Nations police components in the field
and to ensure that sufficient resources are provided,
informed by national and local priorities, including
the host State's key reform objectives. In addition,
police-contributing countries should pay greater
attention to the training and selection of personnel,
while ensuring that peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace are tangible successes in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

