Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing of the
Security Council, focusing on the consideration of the
developments in the situation in South Sudan and the
extent of the challenges facing that country. We would
like to thank Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
and Mr. Smai'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for the quality of their briefings.
My delegation also welcomes the recent joint visit of
their respective organizations to South Sudan.

Cote d'Ivoire follows with interest the development
of the situation in South Sudan, which calls for
comments on the political process, security issues and
the humanitarian and human rights situation.

With regard to the political process, my delegation
welcomes the efforts of the leaders of the region and all
other bilateral and multilateral partners, which led to the
signing of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan on
12 September. In that regard, my country welcomes

the return of Mr. Riek Machar, First Vice-President of
South Sudan, to Juba on 31 October.

However, my delegation remains concerned about
the difficulties with regard to the full and inclusive
implementation of the revitalized Agreement, which
should promote a return to peace, thereby offering the
South Sudanese people the prospects for development
and a decent life to which they have aspired for a little
over five years.

My delegation therefore reaffirms its support for
the ongoing political process. In that regard, it urges
the South Sudanese parties to join the current positive
regional dynamic for a return to peace and stability,
with the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and other partners.

My country believes that the political process should
also be extended to women, who are underrepresented
in the institutions entrusted with implementing the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. Unfortunately, we
note the presence of only one woman on the National
Pre-transitional Committee, which monitors the
implementation ofthe Agreement, that is, a rate of 10 per
cent, which is well below the 35 per cent envisaged.

On the security front, my delegation notes with
regret the acts of vandalism and the attacks against
the population by certain armed groups. We therefore
believe that, in order to address that troubling situation,
there is a compelling need to pay particular attention to
the thorny issue of the unification of the army.

C6te d'Ivoire would also like to urge the Government
of South Sudan to work harder to end hostilities and to
ensure the protection of civilians. It further calls on the
Government of South Sudan to implement the necessary
security sector reforms, at the heart of the revitalized
Agreement, and to implement, in collaboration with
the other South Sudanese parties, the arrangements
contained in the Khartoum Declaration of Agreement
between Parties of the Conflict of South Sudan.

The humanitarian and human rights situation
remains equally alarming. My country notes with
great concern the persistence of sexual violence,
violence against children and attacks on humanitarian
workers, as well as obstacles to helping those in need.
My delegation also condemns the kidnappings and the
recruitment of child soldiers.

Given that situation, Cote d'Ivoire would like to
reaffirm the need for the effective implementation of
the principle of accountability so that the perpetrators
of human rights violations are held accountable for their
acts before the competent international judicial bodies.
My delegation urges the South Sudanese leadership to
create security conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and to the safe and dignified
return of displaced persons to their areas of origin.

In conclusion, my country believes that only
the determined commitment of the South Sudanese
leadership in good faith can ensure the success of the
peace process and reassure international partners.
In the same vein, it is necessary that the South
Sudanese authorities comply with the requirement for
transparency in the management of oil revenues.

