Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me, through you, Madam President, to sincerely thank Ms. DiCarlo as well as the other two briefers, who joined our meeting today via video-teleconference. I would also like to welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to today's meeting. The Security Council was briefed on 6 February on the current priorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) (see S/PV.8714), including achieving tangible results in conflict and post-conflict environments. To that end, special attention was paid to the crisis in Ukraine, which remains the most pressing security issue in Europe. Although the conflict threatens peace and security, it also has an impact on the daily lives of civilians, in particular as it pertains to the freedom of movement and the humanitarian situation. As in other crisis-affected areas, the humanitarian situation, including the plight of women and children, deserves special attention. Financial resources must therefore be mobilized in order to meet the needs of the most vulnerable segments of the population. Allow me to commend the efforts of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the European External Action Service and the United Nations Development Programme to bring about tangible improvements on the ground in an effort to assist those in need. The 2015 Minsk agreements marked a turning point in the crisis in Ukraine, as they reflected the willingness of the parties to reach a consensus-based solution. It is for that reason that the Niger supports all measures to implement the agreements, which were endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February 2015. We call on the parties to fully implement those agreements and demonstrate political will in order to create the right conditions for peace. We also welcome the resumption of the dialogue within the framework of the Normandy format, following the summit held in Paris on 9 December 2019, whose conclusions should be welcomed. The efforts made by the Trilateral Contact Group should also be supported. We encourage the OSCE to intensify its efforts to effectively monitor and verify the ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, in accordance with the agreements I just mentioned. In conclusion, as in other hotspots, the parties must work to find not a military solution, but a political one - the only kind of any value.
