Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Egypt on assuming the presidency
of the Council for the month of August. It has laid out
a very comprehensive coverage of key items on our
agenda. Likewise, I offer our most sincere appreciation

to the Chinese presidency for its very capable and
outstanding stewardship of the Council in July.
I also congratulate and welcome Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzia as the new Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation and look forward to
working with his delegation to take the work of the
Council forward.

Our delegation offers its condolences to Afghanistan
for the most recent terrorist attack in Herat province
and, like others, we condemn the attack in the strongest
terms. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims
and we wish a speedy recovery to those injured in
the attack.

The delegation of Kazakhstan welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2370 (2017) on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons, which was put forth
by Egypt. The resolution will significantly enhance our
effectiveness in countering the illicit arms flow and
monitoring the arms embargo. It will also contribute
to the efforts of the United Nations in the framework
of the Arms Trade Treaty and implementing resolution
2220 (2015) on the illicit transfer and misuse of small
arms and light weapons.

We are convinced that the only effective way
to prevent weapons from falling into the hands
of terrorists and terrorist groups is to create and
effectively implement relevant norms at the national,
regional and international levels. The international
community needs to expand its cooperation and
interactions in order to include a more rapid and timely
exchange of information providing, if necessary, full
support to carry out activities to identify and prevent
the acquisition of arms or suppress the intentions
of terrorists to illegally acquire weapons. That
collaboration should be at the regional and global levels.
It should involve the mechanisms of international and
regional organizations, primarily the United Nations
system, including sanctions committees.

The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, along with other sanctions committees, play
an important role. In addition, it is necessary to take
measures to disclose and eliminate sources of the
financing of terrorist groups and their accomplices.
Particular attention should be paid to strengthening
national expert control mechanisms.

When exporting weapons and dual-use technologies,
mandatory verification of end-user certificates should
be carried out in strict compliance with sanctions
regimes for the supply of weapons. Despite the fact that
resolution 2370 (2017) updated provisions related to
strengthening control over and preventing conventional
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists, it is
appropriate to highlight the efforts and aspirations of
terrorist groups to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
Therefore, it is necessary to raise levels of security in
order to protect facilities containing nuclear, chemical
and biological materials, as well as their components
and manufacturing technologies. It is necessary
to strengthen control and determine appropriate
conditions for personnel who are allowed to work with
them. Kazakhstan pays special attention to the physical
protection of nuclear facilities and infrastructure, as
well as other facilities that have abundant potential
to draw criminal and terrorist groups interested in
acquiring nuclear and other materials for creating
dirty bombs.

Kazakhstan is a committed member of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which was
launched by the United States of America and the
Russian Federation in order to strengthen the interaction
of the international community in preventing nuclear
materials from falling into the hands of terrorists.
As part of the global fight against the illicit trade in
conventional arms and their transfer and use for terrorist
purposes, we believe that the following important tools
should be used.

First, we must improve domestic procedures
for issuing permits for the transfer of conventional
weapons. We must also improve the reporting of all
States. That includes harmonizing legislation among
countries of the region, helping countries in passing
national legislation and with their ability to take action,
strengthening control over the targeted use, transfer and
supply of conventional weapons, as well as ensuring
liability provided for by national laws for violations.
We must improve customs mechanisms and legislation
and strengthen control over borders in order to prevent
trafficking across countries. That can be done through
the training of specialists and providing equipment.
It is also necessary to support all forms of capacity-
building between States through bilateral cooperation,
North-South cooperation, South-South cooperation
and trilateral cooperation. Therefore, Kazakhstan
stands ready to join the multilateral effort to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons that imperil peace
and security.

