Mr. Oshima (Japan): This morning, it is my great
pleasure to report to the Security Council on the
findings of the mission that Visited Afghanistan from
11 to 16 November 2006, in which I had the privilege
of serving as team leader.

The Security Council mission to Afghanistan was
the second carried out since 2002 in support of the
Afghan people. The mission noted significant efforts
2

undertaken by Afghans and the international
community during the past four years to achieve
national reconciliation and promote democratic
institutions, which the Bonn Agreement had envisaged.
The Bonn Agreement was successfully concluded one
year ago, in December 2005, with the opening of a
democratically elected National Assembly. In all 34
provinces, there are now functioning provincial
councils.

Afghanistan is set to enjoy continuing high rates
of economic growth and increasing per capita income,
expanding trade and investment with regional partners,
significant infrastructure projects in place, including
roads and power generation facilities, and programmes
in the fields of education, rural development and the
development of new Afghan security institutions. The
Afghanistan Compact - a new five-year blueprint for
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Afghanistan - was launched in
January this year at the London Conference, with the
aim of laying firmer groundwork to ensure that
Afghanistan would embark on a period of genuine
stability and development. Those are positive
achievements and developments, and they merit high
praise.

However, progress in 2006 towards realizing the
Vision set out in the Afghanistan Compact has not been
as smooth or rapid as had been hoped, owing to a
number of reasons. Among them, uneven efforts to
improve governance and establish the rule of law, the
growing Taliban-led insurgency and widespread
insecurity in the south and east of the country, an
upsurge in illegal drug production and trafficking, and
pervasive corruption in the governing systems were
noted in the briefings that the Council mission received
on the ground. Those factors, combined with the still
very fragile State institutions, feed into the
disappointment and disillusionment of Afghans and are
beginning to test the confidence of the Afghan public
in its nascent institutions and processes. The mission
also noted with grave concern that growing insecurity
in parts of the south and south-east was disrupting
rehabilitation and reconstruction work by Afghans, the
United Nations and other international partners.

It was against that background that our mission
took place. The mission recognized that Afghanistan
had to start its reconciliation and reconstruction effort
not just from the zero point, but further below, from
deep minuses, after decades of conflict. In such
06-64703
circumstances, the time frame required and the
patience needed for national healing and readjustment
and for the march forward will be different from the
ordinary. As the history and the experiences of nations
have taught us, such a process cannot be completed in
a short period of time or in linear progression. There
are bound to be some zigzags and ups and downs.

However, few can deny that Afghanistan is now
at a crossroads. The country is set to move forward
with promises of reconstruction and development
based on democratic institutions. But at the same time
it is also being confronted, in its fragility, with a host
of challenges and difficulties, including those related to
security. No one can guarantee that, without
determined efforts on the part of Afghanistan and
sustained support over the long haul from the
international community, the country will not slide
towards broader conflict once again.

The primary messages that the Council mission
wished to stress, therefore, were essentially twofold:
first, that the firm and unyielding commitment of the
international community in support of the Government
and the people of Afghanistan and their country's
transition was unwavering; and second, that the
Afghanistan Compact, which is owned and led by
Afghans, remains the central strategic framework for
cooperation between the Afghan Government and the
international community. The Government of
Afghanistan, with the support of the international
community, must ensure its steady and faithful
implementation.

The report of the mission is before members. It
describes its findings in some detail and, on the basis
of those findings, presents several recommendations. I
already had an opportunity, in a public meeting on
22 November (S/PV.5570), to make remarks on the
activities and some of the findings of the mission.
What I intend to do here is to provide a brief
explanation of the situation that the mission
encountered and then to give a summary of its
recommendations.

First is a matter of great concern: the security
situation. Security was the dominant concern in
Afghanistan. Many of the mission's interlocutors
expressed apprehension about the rise in violence in
parts of the country. The insurgency appeared to be
more or less confined to one third of the country.
06-64703
However, the security situation in general remained
precarious throughout the country.

After a worrying upsurge in the number of
security-related incidents throughout spring and
summer this year, some interlocutors said there were
signs that insurgent- and terrorist-related Violence
might be subsiding after October. There were, however,
more cautious Views on that prognosis.

The growth of the Taliban-led insurgency has
been fed in part by the failure of the Government and
the international community to provide basic services,
credible governance and security in many urban
centres and rural communities. Highlighted in that
connection were the weakness of the incipient Afghan
National Police, a lack of the rule of law and pervasive
corruption. It was also alleged that the narcotics
industry and the money it generates play an important
part in feeding the insurgency forces.

Many expressed frustration about the current
state of the Afghan National Police. Proposals had been
made to the international community to support police
expansion to meet the latest challenges of the
insurgency and the deteriorating security in some
regions. The mission was briefed on the importance of
strong recruitment, vetting and monitoring procedures
for the new Afghan National Auxiliary Police.

The mission paid tribute to the leading role that
the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) had assumed in contributing to security in
support of the Afghan Government. It also took note of
ISAF's continuing need for adequate forces and
resources. The Afghan side also noted that, despite
unfortunate incidents such as those resulting in civilian
casualties, there was still overwhelming support for the
presence of international security forces. Better
coordination between the international forces and the
Afghan Government was called for by Afghan
interlocutors.

Next is the issue of impunity and corruption.
Throughout the mission, interlocutors cited corruption
and the perpetuation of a culture of impunity as the
root causes of popular Afghan disaffection and unease.
It was pointed out that widespread corruption in law
enforcement and in judicial institutions was central to
the population's decreasing trust in the Government.
An anti-corruption commission had been established
two months earlier and was working to identify the
nature and the scope of the problem. Solutions,
3
however, remained elusive. Support and expertise
would be required from Afghanistan's international
partners in this regard.

It was also pointed out that the continued
tolerance of positions of authority given to the former
commanders and warlords was contributing to
instability. Government efforts to diminish the
authority of those figures would also require
international support. The Government's strategy to
disband illegally armed groups was considered a key
vehicle for dismantling the power base of those
commanders.

The next issue to which I would like to refer is
governance. Afghanistan was in desperate need of
training of professionals. The Afghan leadership
identified the restructuring of the civil service and the
strengthening of its capacity as the top priority for
Afghanistan and its international partners. A premium
was placed on enhancing human capital at all levels as
a precondition for an effective public sector and for
sustained progress towards development goals.

On human rights and the protection of civilians,
Afghan and international interlocutors expressed
concern about the increase in human rights Violations
and the failure to ensure the protection of civilians -
including in the context of the attacking and burning of
schools - the Government's failure to uphold equal
rights in law and the restrictions on public discourse.
The mission took note of their concern that the space
made for human rights and gender equality, which had
opened following the ousting of the Taliban in 2001,
had recently begun to close.

The mission participated in the third session of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB).
The JCMB had demonstrated a growing capacity to
monitor progress and address bottlenecks hindering the
implementation of Compact benchmarks. While the
efforts of the JCMB should be commended, in order
for the Compact to deliver visible change to the Afghan
people, Government-led coordination efforts would
need to be strengthened and integrated under the
overall National Development Strategy.

Pervasive unemployment, particularly among the
young, is one of the central factors contributing to
instability in the country. Attracting private sector
investors is important, but the lack of security deterred
those investments that could generate jobs.
Insecurity, ongoing drought, flooding and combat
operations have all combined to displace larger
population groups inside Afghanistan this year,
generating fresh vulnerabilities and new humanitarian
needs. In this regard, increased efforts are needed to
ensure the delivery of assistance to people living in
more remote areas of Afghanistan.

I would like briefly to refer to the issue of
counter-narcotics efforts. Afghanistan's burgeoning
narco-economy was identified by the vast majority of
the mission's interlocutors as a primary threat to
stability. It was described as a cancer which would
spread and kill Afghan society over the long term. The
mission was informed that in 2006, opium poppy
cultivation represented 60 per cent of Afghanistan's
gross domestic product. The importance of much more
energetic measures and of regional and international
cooperation in combating drug trafficking was
underscored.

With regard to regional cooperation to address
the many problems, it is clear that such cooperation is
of the utmost importance in resolving Afghanistan's
challenges, since issues of security have regional as
well as internal dimensions. Many interlocutors
stressed that the existence of sanctuaries in Pakistan
for insurgent groups must be addressed by law
enforcement and other means. The mission was briefed
by the Afghan side about the negative impact on border
security that could result from the recent peace deal in
North Waziristan, Pakistan.

For its part, the Pakistani side, pointing out its
burden of accepting a large number of refugees,
stressed that a stable Afghanistan was essential for
Pakistan's security. It said that Pakistan was doing its
best to improve the security in the border area, having
suffered casualties in the operations, While admitting
the difficulty of ensuring effective control over the
long border, which has many crossing points. It was
pointed out that cooperation among Pakistan,
Afghanistan and international forces was ongoing at
various levels, including through the Tripartite
Commission. The ISAF commander in Kabul, for his
part, told the mission that he appreciated the emerging
tripartite cooperation. As regards the peace deal in
North Waziristan, the Pakistani side pointed out that
the assertion that the peace deal has resulted in an
increase in incidents did not reflect the facts. The
mission encouraged Pakistan to monitor the North
Waziristan agreement with a View to ensuring that the
cross-border impact of that or any future agreement is
positive for security and stability.

The mission was encouraged by the efforts of the
Afghan and Pakistani leaders to promote mutual
cooperation and trust, including through people-
to-people contact. The mission was briefed on plans to
hold cross-border jirgas on security.

Finally, Afghan interlocutors strongly praised the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Donors similarly welcomed
the expanded UNAMA presence, describing it as a
huge plus. The mission acknowledged the voices
calling for UNAMA to play greater coordination role
between them and the military.

Now, I should like to turn briefly to the key
findings of the mission.

First, the spread of insurgent and terrorist activity
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups,
coupled with corruption and failures of governance,
collectively pose a grave threat to nation-building. To
overcome those challenges, the Afghan Government
and the international community have established a
sound strategy, including, in particular, the Afghanistan
Compact. The Council will need to ensure that this
shared strategy remains firm and enduring.

The Afghanistan Compact is the best framework
for cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community and
should be moved forward to serious action under the
overall guidance of the JCMB. The Afghan
Government should transform its ownership into
further action, with a View to achieving the
benchmarks set out in the Compact. The international
community, for its part, should provide additional
support on an ongoing basis, both for quick gains and
for sustained progress.

Secondly, with regard to international military
forces, NATO and other countries are urged to maintain
and increase their commitment to ISAF to meet the
challenge of the current security environment in
Afghanistan. It is important to establish a strong and
sustainable Afghan national army and a trusted and
effective national police force. With regard to the
establishment of the police force, donors and the
Afghan Government should redouble their collective
efforts. The international community should also
revitalize its support for the Afghan Government's
efforts to disband illegally armed groups.

On the rule of law and good governance, the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of its
international partners, should, as a matter of the
highest priority, establish the rule of law and good
governance throughout the country. Immediate steps
must be taken to strengthen justice sector institutions
and provincial governments, including through the
replacement of corrupt officials and local power
brokers.

The Government and the international community
should sharpen their focus on human rights and the
protection of civilians. The Government is also
encouraged to reinforce its commitment to human
rights and reconciliation and increase support for the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
the implementation of the Peace, Justice and
Reconciliation Action Plan, as required by the
Compact. The Government and donors should
empower women as a true cross-cutting priority.

Next, with regard to the coordination and
delivery of humanitarian and development assistance,
such assistance should, wherever possible, be delivered
by skilled and experienced civilian actors, and the
capacity for civilian coordination of humanitarian
assistance should be strengthened in 2007. At the same
time, given the prevailing circumstances in
Afghanistan, assistance will need to be provided by
those best placed to deliver it. The focus should be to
extend development to the provinces, strengthen
accountability at the community level, and achieve
tangible and visible results. The JCMB coordination
mechanism should be further improved and focused on
delivery.

In the area of counter-narcotics, the Government
and the international community should do much more
to strengthen their efforts to fight this scourge by
helping diversify means of livelihood, so that rural
communities can move away from the illegal
cultivation of the opium poppy and pursue legitimate
economic opportunities. The Government, with support
from the international community, should step up
activities aimed at the arrest and prosecution of major
drug traffickers, regardless of their position or status.

With respect to regional cooperation, fostering
trust and cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbouring and regional partners is of crucial
importance for peace, security and development in the
region. The mission welcomes the efforts made by the
Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan to fight
terrorism and to reinforce border security, and it urges
both Governments to intensify dialogue and
collaboration. The mission looks forward to the
outcome of plans by the two countries to hold cross-
border jirgas to improve security and stability, on the
basis of better understanding and mutual trust.

The list established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) should continue to be updated
as necessary and on the basis of the most current
information, as envisaged by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

With regard to UNAMA, the United Nations
should continue to play a central and impartial role in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
Secretary-General is encouraged to consider measures
to promote UNAMA's coordination role, at both the
capital and country levels, and to make
recommendations in his next report.

Finally, the mission recognizes the extremely
difficult and stressful circumstances under which
UNAMA and the rest of the United Nations family are
operating in Afghanistan. Acknowledging their
dedication and commitment, the mission report
concludes by calling on Member States to provide all
necessary support to allow the United Nations to carry
out its mandate in such a challenging environment.

I will conclude my remarks on behalf of the
Council mission by expressing its deep appreciation to
the Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan, to the
Commander of ISAF and its contributing countries, to
UNAMA and the country team, to non-governmental
and civil society organizations active in the country,
and to all other interlocutors for their support and
cooperation and for the opportunities for discussion
that the mission was provided during the course of its
Visit.

