Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the presentations provided by the briefers
and especially for the participation of Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Burkina Faso.

Peru has been following with concern the fragile
humanitarian situation and continuing deterioration
of security in the region, the result of brutal terrorist
attacks and intracommunal violence that in many cases
are driven by organized crime and whose destabilizing
consequences risk spreading to States in West Africa.
We would like to offer our condolences in that regard to
the Governments and peoples of Mali and Burkina Faso
for the deaths and other victims that have resulted from
the reprehensible actions of such groups. In that context,
we continue to consider the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5) as a crucial actor in confronting
those global scourges. It will be vital to provide it with
adequate equipment, training and predictable funding,
and, at the same time to strengthen the operational
capabilities of its various components, including its
investigative units. In particular, we highlight its efforts
to ensure that its activities are conducted in full respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.

We especially welcome the firm decision taken
in September by the Heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States in September to
establish a united front prioritizing the fight against
terrorism, based on developing a comprehensive plan
of action and ensuring significant funding for its
implementation. As has been said, while a military
response is necessary to combat insecurity in the region,
it must be complemented by measures to promote
development and address its underlying problems,
such as poverty, the weak presence of the State, the
marginalization of some populations and the effects of
climate change.

We therefore stress the importance of international
support for the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, as an appropriate comprehensive framework
for promoting the needs and priorities of the countries
of the region. We also welcome the Franco-German
partnership for security and stability in the Sahel.

All of these efforts must be complemented by
measures to empower women and programmes aimed
at generating greater employment opportunities,
particularly for young people in the region, in order
to prevent them from being co-opted by criminal and
extremist groups as the only alternative for survival.

From a regional and subregional perspective, we
believe it important that the efforts, initiatives and
cooperation mechanisms deployed on the ground,
including responses to the humanitarian situation,
maintain political and operational coherence in
order to address security and development priorities
and to comply with the provisions of relevant
Council resolutions.
I conclude by expressing Peru's commitment to
the efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries, in coordination
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African Union and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among
other United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as
other actors committed to the shared objective of
achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel.

