Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Nicholas
Haysom for his first briefing to the Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and I
welcome him to the role. I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov
for his briefing and acknowledge Afghanistan's
Permanent Representative, Zahir Tanin, for his central
and always very persuasive role in Afghanistan's
engagement with the international community. The
year 2014 - Afghanistan's year of transition - is
drawing to a close. Despite the many challenges facing
the country, it has been a successful year.

Afghanistan has taken the lead for security across
the country, historic presidential elections were held,
and important economic reforms are under way. The
millions of Afghans who participated in elections this
year, under the threat of violence, cast an uninhibited,
unambiguous vote in favour of democracy. The
formation of President Ghani's and Executive Officer
Abdullah's National Unity Government is a historic
achievement, marking the first democratic transition of
power in Afghanistan. Appointing an inclusive cabinet
will be an important first step, and we look to President
Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah to do this
without delay.

Drawing on the lessons ofthe presidential elections,
and as set out in the National Unity Government
agreement, we look to the Government to implement
important electoral reform ahead of parliamentary
and district council elections. President Ghani has
demonstrated his Government's commitment to
stronger regional relationships. The region needs much
closer, serious cooperation on security, including in the
fight against terrorism and to counter narcotics.

Afghanistan's security transition will be complete
at the end of 2014, when the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) mission concludes. Over the
last 13 years, ISAF and the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have substantially reduced the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. We all pay tribute
the many men and women, both military and civilian,
who have given their lives in pursuit of this mission.

The ANSF is now assuming full responsibility
for securing the country. The ANSF has grown from
scratch in 2001 to a professional force capable of
providing security across Afghanistan. Its performance
in securing two rounds of presidential elections is
testament to this. Of course, it faces challenges from
increasingly violent anti-Government forces - forces
responsible for most of the very worrying increase in
civilian casualties.

As Afghanistan assumes security responsibility,
the international community remains committed. The
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission will continue to
train, advise and assist the ANSF. My own country,
Australia, will contribute personnel to Resolute
Support and provide $100 million a year from 2015
to 2017 to sustain the ANSF. Resolution 2189 (2014),
adopted unanimously by the Council last Friday, was
an important reaffirmation of international community
support for Afghanistan's transition and for the Resolute
Support Mission.

Since the fall of the Taliban in 2001, Afghanistan
has made impressive progress on development. Eight
million children are now in school, including 3 million
girls. Forty women sit in the Afghan parliament. Life
expectancy is up, and infant mortality is down. A total
of 15 million Afghans now own a mobile phone.

It is clear that Afghanistan's new Government is
determined to achieve self-reliance. Key to self-reliance
will be economic growth, which will ensure strong
Government revenues. At the London Conference on
Afghanistan earlier this month, donors and the new
Afghan Government focused on development priorities
and mutual accountability. We are reassured by the
Government's commitment to deliver on its ambitious
reform programme. Australia will support this and
continue to provide substantial development assistance
in support of economic growth, empowering women
and girls, and humanitarian assistance.

Much progress has also been made on human
rights. The new Government has demonstrated that it
is committed to advancing the position of women and
girls in Afghan society. Full implementation of the law
on the elimination of violence against women and the
finalization and implementation of a national action
plan on women, peace and security must be priorities.
An inclusive peace and reconciliation process that
recognizes the role of women will have a much greater
chance of success. As I have said consistently, along
with others, progress on women and girls will be and
must be a decisive indicator by which Afghanistan's
progress will be measured by all of us who want to
support Afghanistan's successful transition to the
future.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been a serious partner in
Afghanistan. That was made clear through its central
role facilitating the resolution of the protracted political
election process this year. Australia looks forward to
UNAMA, with adequate resources, continuing its focus
on good offices, human rights, donor coordination and
humanitarian assistance. A strong UNAMA with a
strong partnership with the new Afghan Government
will be vital, as will a continued UNAMA role across
the country and in the provinces.

To conclude, 2015 will mark a new and
hopefully decisive chapter in Afghanistan's history.
Afghanistan's transformation decade will be period
of great opportunity, but axiomatically also one of
great challenge. Afghanistan has made extraordinary
progress following the collapse of the Taliban. It
has established a democratic Government, created
functioning State institutions, built an effective
security force and achieved remarkable - if not
complete - gains on human rights. Australia, like
the rest of the international community, is committed
to supporting Afghanistan - an Afghanistan now
ultimately in the hands of the Afghan people and their
Government.

It has been an honour to serve as penholder on
Afghanistan in the Council. I appreciate the close
cooperation of all Council members, Member States
and of course Afghanistan itself. I thank Ambassador
Tanin and his team for their own strong leadership
in so diligently working for the success of the new
Afghanistan. The Council has been united in its support
for Afghanistan, and that reflects the international
community's resolute commitment to Afghanistan's
future.

