Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of the Transitional National Government, for
their presentations. I also welcome the presence among
us of Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, and thank him for
his statement.

I would recall France's full support for the
Transitional Federal Government. We endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.

The situation in Somalia remains fragile. Whether
we are talking about the humanitarian situation or the
military situation, the attacks of the radical opposition
on the Transitional Federal Government are ongoing.
The Government successfully resisted such attacks, but
the emergence from crisis has been slowed down.

With regard to the Istanbul Conference, in which
the French minister will participate, should make it
possible to start planning for ways to develop Somalia.
The international community should support President
Ahmed. We hope that the United Nations will be able,
in accordance with the overall strategy overseen by the
Security Council, to provide a permanent presence in
Somalia, led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose coordinating role has been
recognized by the Council.

However, such progress presupposes that the
Transitional Federal Government shall continue, with
the help of the international community, to strengthen
itself militarily. France has contributed to that end by
training a battalion of 500 Somali soldiers. Other
countries, such as Uganda and Djibouti, have done the
same. This month, the European Union, with the
participation of French soldiers, has begun to train
2,000 Somali soldiers in Uganda, in close cooperation
with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and other partners.

In this regard, it is critical to ensure that our
efforts are sustainable and to coordinate them as much
as possible with the activities of AMISOM. The
African Union Mission, strengthened by a fourth
Ugandan battalion and by new police officers,
continues to give the Government indispensable
support. I pay tribute to the courage of its personnel,
and in particular the Ugandan and Burundian
contingents. The support provided to AMISOM. by the
United Nations logistical support package, within the
limits defined by the Council, should continue, as
should the support of the major donors, either directly
or through the various funds that have been set up. The
United Nations also has different means for taking
action at its disposal, such as international sanctions.

Following the adoption of resolution 1907 (2009)
last December, the sanctions Committee decided to
place a series of entities and individuals on the
sanctions list, on the basis of resolution 1844 (2008), in
order to signal our determination in a concrete manner.
All these actions will have even greater impact now
that the Transitional Federal Government has been
strengthened by the political momentum it has sparked
in the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement and through the
agreement signed with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a on
15 March. It is all the more urgent that the latter
agreement be implemented and that the transitional
Somali authorities show themselves to be united.

With respect to fighting piracy, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/234) shows that the number
of attacks has decreased. We must continue to take
action on the seas, and Operation Atalanta plays a
major role in this effort. But we also have to expand
our action on land, which will require helping the
States of the region that have been victims of piracy to
obtain the legal and financial means to prosecute and
eventually convict and imprison the pirates.

We hail the efforts of the States of the region and
encourage Kenya, Seychelles and Tanzania - as well
as Somalia, of course - to redouble their efforts in this
area, with the support, inter alia, of the Contact
Group's Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The Fund
has already decided to allocate more than €2 million.
We call on donors to contribute to the Fund. France
welcomes the agreement between the Transitional
Federal Government and the authorities of Puntland in
this regard. The High Representative of the European
Union, Baroness Ashton, will soon visit the region in
order to raise these and other issues, which the Council
will take up again in late July.

Somalia is experiencing one of the most complex
and dangerous crises ever. I recall in that regard that a
French national has been held hostage there since July
2009. The European Union's ability to act there is
particularly difficult. We must ceaselessly continue to
work on improving our means of action. Accordingly,
France will closely follow the results of the different
investigations launched following the publication of
the latest report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/9l). I would stress that these difficulties make
better coordination between the actions of the
international community and the United Nations all the
more necessary. I welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to that end and
to work for an integrated mission. France looks
forward with great interest to hearing the Secretary-
General's recommendations on these matters.
