Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin my other colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to the briefers for their
comprehensive assessments of the latest situation in
Ukraine. My delegation acknowledges the presence of
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine at
today's meeting.

Over one year after the signing of the Minsk II
agreement and its endorsement by the Council via
resolution 2202 (2015), we need to examine how
much progress had been made in its implementation.
Listening to the briefers, it is obvious that much more
need to be done.

Malaysia is deeply concerned by the daily violations
of the ceasefire. The recent escalation in violence in
eastern Ukraine and the missing weapons from the
storage sites detected by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission are alarming signs, and we hope do not indicate
for the direction in which we are heading. While we
welcome the progress made to date in implementing
the Minsk agreements, such as the exchange of
prisoners and on constitutional reform, we wish to see
more efforts towards the holding of local elections in
Donetsk and Luhansk, in accordance with the laws
of Ukraine, the reinstatement of full border control
by Ukraine and the withdrawal of all foreign military
personnel, mercenaries and military equipment from
Ukraine's territory.

We reiterate our call on the parties to cooperate
fully with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine to enable its personnel to carry out their
mandate, including by providing full and unhindered
access to the OSCE to rebels-held areas in the Donbas
region and the requisite information to enable the OSCE
to verify the withdrawal of heavy weapons. Any threats
to the security and safety of the OSCE personnel and
obstructions that prevent them from fulfilling their
mandate are unacceptable. The recent capture of a
United Nations staff member by the separatists is a
cause of great concern, and we urge his immediate and
safe release.

On the humanitarian situation, we remind the
parties to honour their obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law, particularly
on the protection of civilians. Malaysia urges all
parties to allow safe and unrestricted humanitarian
access to those in need. We reiterate our position
that humanitarian assistance must be carried out,
in accordance with international law, international
humanitarian law and respect for Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. We reiterate the need for a peaceful political
solution to the conflict, based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We commend the hard work of the OSCE and the
Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine, and we urge the
relevant parties to intensify cooperation through those
frameworks in good faith.

In conclusion, we urgently need to break the
current deadlock and to halt the downward spiral in
implementing the Minsk agreements. Every effort must
be made to uphold and stabilize the ceasefire and build
trust through confidence-building measures. Malaysia
therefore urges both sides to renew their commitment,
engage in good faith and redouble their efforts to fully
implement the provisions of the Minsk agreements.

