Mr. Inzko (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to be
here today to briefthe Security Council on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country in which the
international community's commitment and unity
remains crucial to achieving our shared goal, which
is none other than sustainable peace and security in
the Balkans.

(spoke in English)

These are special days for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as it will celebrate on 22 May the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its admission as a full-fledged State
Member of the United Nations, along with Croatia
and Slovenia. But these days are also special for
my home country, Austria, as it was presiding the
Security Council in the month of May 1992, exactly
25 years ago. The Ambassador of Austria at that time,
Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, as President of the Security
Council, on 20 May 1992 (see S/PV.3079) proposed
that the Council adopt a decision recommending to
the General Assembly that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted to the United Nations. At the same meeting,
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
755 (1992), endorsing that recommendation. Upon that
historic recommendation, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
admitted under General Assembly resolution 46/237,
adopted without a vote, 25 years ago, on 22 May 1992,
as a Member of the United Nations.

I wish to use this occasion to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina wholeheartedly, and I am very
glad that - as predicted 25 years ago - Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made a significant contribution to
the work of the Organization, most recently with its
successful tenure as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, as well as - and I stress this - with
its peacekeeping forces worldwide.

As this is my first opportunity to do so, I would also
like to take a moment to express my sincere and heartfelt
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of
Ambassador Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin, who had such a
dramatic impact on the work of the Council over many
years. He was also involved in the talks on the former
Yugoslavia as Special Representative of the President
of the Russian Federation.

When we speak of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
should also keep in mind what has happened over the
past six months. I must say that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has maintained its commitment to making progress
along the path of Euro-Atlantic integration, while also
continuing to face internal challenges to its sustainable
stability and advancement.

On the positive side, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities formally received the European Union (EU)
questionnaire in December, and the adaptation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU
took place that same month. I wholeheartedly welcomed
both developments and have consistently called upon
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities at all levels to
maintain their focus on the EU agenda.

Iwould also like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts of the EU, under the capable leadership of
its Special Representative Lars-Gunnar Wigemark,
towards assisting the Bosnian authorities in achieving
their aspirations to integration with the Union. Equally
significant are the efforts ofEnlargement Commissioner
Hahn and of High Representative Federica Mogherini,
who has invited the Balkan leaders to an important
regional meeting in Brussels next week.

Equally encouraging was the consensus and
forward-looking pragmatism demonstrated during
the reporting period by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency in adopting the so-called defence review of
military forces last November - an issue which had
been outstanding for quite some time. This is one of the
requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina in its efforts
to participate in the NATO membership action plan.

On the regional level, bilateral cooperation and
overall reconciliation between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia have continued to improve, in large
part due to the committed engagement of Serbian
Prime Minister and soon to be President Aleksandar
Vucie, and also through the efforts of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council ofMinisters Chair Denis Zvizdic'.
Good cooperation between Sarajevo and Belgrade,
and also between Sarajevo and Zagreb, has manifested
itself through joint Government sessions and through
the visit of Croatian Prime Minister Andrej Plenkovie
to Mostar.

Despite all these positive developments, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has also seen some significant
challenges over the past six months. First and foremost
was the political controversy between Bosniak
political representatives and Serb political parties
over whether Bosnia and Herzegovina should submit
a request for revision of the International Court of
Justice 2007 Judgment in the genocide case of Bosnia
and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro. This
issue split Bosniak and Serb parties and officials
within the state-level coalition to an extent not seen
for many years, delaying progress. Two different legal
interpretations on whether the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency needed to renew the mandate of the Bosnian
agent to the Court before submitting such a request
proved to be irreconcilable, increasing tensions within
the Presidency.

The now former agent of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the International Court of Justice, Sakib Softie
submitted the request for revision to the Court, which
later proved to be even more controversial when it
came to light that the Court had already notified
him that a renomination of the agent by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities would be needed. The
situation was ultimately resolved when the Court made
its decision on the non-admissibility of the request, but
the overall dynamic whereby leading politicians focus
disproportionately on ethnically divisive issues, while
showing little urgency in addressing the need for real
reforms, is a serious cause for concern.

The second negative trend during the reporting
period surrounded the activities of the Republika
Srpska authorities to implement their unconstitutional
referendum, including ostentatious celebrations of the
9 January holiday, with the participation of some Serb
members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces.

In addition, during the reporting period, some
Croat politicians intensified calls for the federalization
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was understood by
some to imply the further ethnic division of the country
into three to four federal units, one of which would
have a Croat majority.

Increasingly, the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina appear unable to act even in their own
self-interest in a win-win situation, for instance
in addressing the commitments made under the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) arrangement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The continued failure to meet
the IMF prior actions for the completion of the first
quarterly review will hold back significant international
assistance to the country's fiscal stability and economic
development. In that regard, I would like to express my
praise and support for Francisco Parodi, IMF Resident
Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
ongoing efforts of the IMF to encourage meaningful
structural reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Furthermore, the situation with regard to rule of law
in the country continues to deteriorate. Corruption is a
serious problem, and continued challenges to state-level
institutions, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court and the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, contribute to the further weakening of
the rule of law.

Finally, during the past six months, the frequency
and intensity of the Republika Srpska President's
public remarks advocating for secession have lessened,
although the independent status of Republika Srspka
remains part of his party's official platform, and only
this week he publically expressed his certainty that such
an independence referendum will eventually take place.

The lessening of such rhetoric follows the
imposition of financial and travel sanctions against the
Republika Srpska President by the United States. This
reaffirms to me that we, as an international community,
can have an impact when we are ready to send a strong
message to authorities and leaders who openly reject
the rule of law and reopen the wounds of the past that
they are leading themselves and their constituencies
into isolation.

In sharp contrast to divisive rhetoric are the
efforts of high-school students in the historic city of
Jajce, who, with their determination and perseverance,
prevented the partition of their high school based on
ethnic segregation, as planned by some political parties.
Equally encouraging is today's news from Srebrenica,
where Bosniaks and Serbs, Muslims and Orthodox
students, are celebrating together their graduation from
high school. They have stressed that we are all human
beings and that, with their common festivities, they
wish to demonstrate their mutual respect and desire for
reconciliation. The students said that this is the latest
and most realistic message out of Srebrenica, They
have stressed unity, love and a common future. This is,
of course, a good message.

Looking ahead, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
have its next general election in the autumn of 2018.
With the difficult period surrounding the International
Court of Justice crisis and the celebration of Republika
Srpska Day over, political discussions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will now most likely focus on amendments
to the national election law. Thus far, no consensus has
been reached on this issue, which has the potential to
create a new political stalemate in the country.

Keeping in mind that some 18 months remain
before the elections, I would strongly encourage the
current authorities to make the most of the forthcoming
period and demonstrate to voters that they are able
to look past divisive issues and deliver meaningful
reforms to improve the economic situation in the
entities and throughout the country. Foremost on this
list should be the economic reforms demanded by the
country's international creditors, as well as EU-related
issues, in order to open the early possibility of future
EU candidate status for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I also expect the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, foremost the parties represented in the
State Parliament, to finally resolve the legislative
vacuum that has prevented citizens in Mostar from
electing local representatives since 2012. That will
require compromise on all sides and willingness to
resolve issues pragmatically.

Finally, it is simply unfathomable that, more than
seven years after the European Court of Human Rights
ruled that the current electoral system discriminates
against individuals that do not belong to one of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's three constituent peoples,
a considerable number of citizens are still denied the
basic right to run for public office on the basis of
ethnicity. The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must correct the discrimination identified in the Sejdic-
Finci case and in related cases as a priority.

Six months ago (see S/PV.7803) I described two
parallel trends in Bosnia and Herzegovina - positive
advancement in Euro-Atlantic integration and a negative
tendency to flout the rule of law and focus on divisive
backward-looking issues. With the continued support of
the international community, the elected representatives
of Bosnia and Herzegovina can make progress and
ensure that the first trend becomes the dominant one,
but they will need to refocus their attention.

In the meantime, the international community
should retain all the instruments at hand. We need to
be mindful of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a complex political and security environment where
negative scenarios can quickly endanger the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the progress achieved after Dayton.
For that reason, I am firmly convinced that there is still
a need to maintain the EU military force on the ground
with an executive military mandate, and I fully support
its extension in November, when it is reviewed by the
Security Council.

The European Union Force is arelatively inexpensive
but necessary investment in peace and stability in the
Balkans. In my View, it provides an essential baseline
of physical and psychological security that supports the
EU, my Office and other international organizations in
our pursuit of our common goal of sustainable peace
and prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
people. Recent scenes witnessed in the Parliament of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remind
us of how quickly an incident can escalate in the
Balkan countries.

Despite the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made in the past two years in its pursuit of EU

candidate-country status, the country still faces
fundamental challenges. As we enter the third decade
of peace implementation, it cannot be assumed that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on a glide path to a peaceful,
viable State that is irreversibly on course towards
European integration.

I thank the international community for their
continued attention and commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is necessary, but insufficient
to deliver the changes needed to bring Bosnians and
Herzegovinians greater prosperity, stability and
membership in Euro-Atlantic institutions. Only
the leaders and institutions can do that. But we
can - and in my view we must - continue to offer
institutional support and a vision based on integration
and functionality.

In addition we must be firm in upholding the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, while providing a framework of stability
and respect for the Peace Agreement. In those things,
our commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
wonderful and talented people remains unwavering.

