Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing. We applaud the entire
team of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its valuable contribution
towards promoting stability and development in Haiti.

More than three years after the devastating
earthquake, Haiti continues to face significant political,
economic and other challenges. The hard-won progress
in the political arena in past years has been giving way
to setbacks and uncertainties. The continued stand-off
among political actors and the lack of trust in the rule
of law in society are a source of serious concern.

The socioeconomic situation in Haiti also remains
fragile, with its food insecurity, cholera epidemic, and
weak health-care and humanitarian-relief systems. The
social and economic grievances have often led to civil
unrest and rising crime, which put a heavy burden on the
country's stabilization process. Given the complexity of
the challenges Haiti faces, a comprehensive approach
still remains important.

On the political front, it is imperative that the
long overdue elections be held soon in order to enable
the Haitian people to have a credible and broad-
based political mechanism at hand. The agreement
on the establishment of the transitional college of the
Permanent Electoral Council is welcome. However, it
is disappointing that the body has yet to materialize.
We encourage all the political stakeholders in Haiti
to step up their efforts with a view to finalizing the
appointment of the members of that electoral body and
hold fair and inclusive elections within the earliest
possible time frame this year.

The strengthening of the rule of law and the
relevant institutions is a prerequisite for the protection
and promotion of human rights in the country. We are
particularly concerned about the continuing sexual
violence against women. Despite the growing awareness
of its seriousness, a number of women and girls are still
being victimized through such crimes. What is worse is
that the victims' acute suffering often goes unreported,
while perpetrators are not properly investigated and
prosecuted.

The police and judicial response to sexual violence
must be strengthened. MINUSTAH needs to further
enhance its training programme for the National Police
in the field of sexual violence and in respect to broader
human rights concerns. Moreover, education and
awareness campaigns in society could help break the
culture of silence and impunity on the issue.

To ensure better security and a long-term basis for
development in Haiti, capacity-building ofthe police is a
vital requirement. Despite the continued improvements
in its performance, we note the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the current capacity of the
National Police is not yet sufficient for it to assume full
responsibility for security throughout the country.

As MINUSTAH moves to a more focused and
action-oriented phase of its operations, it is noteworthy
that the consolidation plan for the Mission identifies
the capacity-building of the police as one of its highest
priorities. Indeed, the readiness of the National Police to
ensure the security of the country will be a precondition
for MINUSTAH's eventual withdrawal from Haiti.

We appreciate the role of MINUSTAH in assisting
Haiti in the areas of recovery, political stability and
development. In that regard, we fully support the
ongoing reconfiguration and consolidation process
of the Mission. The international community should
continue its support for and engagement in Haiti, so
that the country can overcome the current challenges
facing it and achieve recovery and stabilization in the
near future. The Republic of Korea will continue to
give its support to the Government and the people of
Haiti in their endeavour.

