Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): It is
a great pleasure to see you, Sir, at the helm of this
meeting, my old colleague from other days, now in
your first presidency. I wish also to pay tribute to the
extraordinarily strong leadership of Ambassador Wang
Yingfan and the Chinese delegation during the
tumultuous month of May, in which, if my memory is
correct, four different conflicts erupted. It was not a
normal month in the Security Council, and I hope that
you will convey to Ambassador Wang Yingfan my
Government's high admiration for the way he
conducted our proceedings during this very difficult
month. I hope that you will be able to have fewer than
four wars this month, and I congratulate you on starting
your term with a meeting of such importance on an
issue of such enormous consequence.

I wish to acknowledge, in my delegation, seated
behind me to the right, Secretary of State Albright's
special representative on these issues, Ambassador
David Sheffer, who has worked very closely with our
special guest this morning and who will later in the day
be available for private discussions with any members
who wish to pursue some of these issues.

Finally, I wish to congratulate the Chief
Prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, for her excellent
statement. I apologize for being late and having been
unable to hear it in person, but I have read it and I
think it contains many important statements concerning
Yugoslavia, concerning the issue in general and, above
all, concerning Rwanda.

The Prosecutor's presence here gives us a chance
to reflect on this extremely important intersection of
peacekeeping and justice. Let me start with an issue
that is very much on all our minds these days - Sierra
Leone - which is not currently in her jurisdiction. Her
presence here reminds us ofthe importance of the issue
of the search for justice in regard to Sierra Leone.
While she is here to talk about Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, I think it is vitally important that we
understand that the same issues apply in regard to the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and its leader, Mr.
Sankoh, and that there must be accountability, justice
and reconciliation in Sierra Leone if we are to bring
peace to the area. While I will leave the details for the
proper venue of discussion, because they are
exceedingly complicated, I can assure the Council that
our Government will not be satisfied unless there is full
accountability and justice as part ofthe process.

In Sierra Leone, a decision was made last year -
a decision that can be subject to question, in
retrospect - to elevate the pursuit of peace to a higher
level than the pursuit of justice. The granting of
amnesty to Foday Sankoh and his followers was
accepted as a precondition by the Government of Sierra
Leone and not as the result of a justice and
reconciliation process. My friends in the Security
Council, I think we have all seen the price of that
decision, and I would simply say that I hope that we
will find ways to do in Sierra Leone some degree of
review, whether it is part of this Tribunal's extended
mandate, or of another mandate, Ijust urge us not to
forget this. I know that Ambassador Sheffer will be
talking about this privately with many Council
members later in the day.

South Africa, of course, is a perfect example of
how to approach these issues. Its strong judicial
system, its vibrant civil society movements and the
vision of its leaders allowed South Africa to move
beyond its past.

Let me turn to Rwanda, where we have seen the
pursuit of justice on both an international and a
domestic track. Both have had considerable
administrative difficulties and delays, but with our
support both are improving and must continue to bring
to justice those responsible for genocide. The work of
the Tribunal is indispensable, but it cannot be healed
from the outside. Forgiveness and reconciliation must
come from within.

The Government of Rwanda has a programme of
justice known as gachacha- please forgive me,
Ambassador Mutaboba, if I mispronounce the word.
This system, which are all now familiar with, based on
traditions of your country - and I speak directly to the
Ambassador of Rwanda, who has played such a
positive role in helping us deal with his country's
legacy - has taken justice out ofthe courtrooms of the
former judicial system and given it to local
communities and traditional leaders. I have read
criticism of this in the Western press; I am not in a
position to make a formal, detailed judgement on
something so complicated; but none of us should
impose our own values or cultural histories on other
societies and traditions, provided that the basic human
rights embodied in the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights are fulfilled.
Every country in this Chamber has a different judicial
system, and they should be respected.

In my Government's View, the current
programme, along with international and domestic civil
proceedings, is the best way to address this issue. On
our two trips to Rwanda - mine in December and the
one with my Security Council colleagues last month -
it was clearly explained to us that the caseload could
not be handled by the normal system, and we must take
that into account. I noticed that President Kagame
stressed the importance of this initiative in his
inaugural address, and I hope the Rwandan
Government will be able to give us a timetable for
clearing this enormous backlog.
The pursuit ofjustice in the wake of the genocide
in Rwanda is also tied up with the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is not, as
some people claim, the only cause of the conflict, but it
is not separate from the broader issues that have
occupied this Council.

While you, Mr. President, and I and our
colleagues from Mali, Namibia, the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom and Tunisia were in Lusaka, we raised
some of these questions with the Political Committee,
especially problems posed by non-signatory armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am
particularly grateful, Mr. President, that you have
invited the Political Committee to meet with us here in
New York on 15-16 June to continue the Lusaka peace
process, insofar as the Security Council can contribute
to it. I would say to our friends here in the audience
who were not with us in Lusaka that Ambassador
Levitte and I and our five colleagues consider the
meetings on 15-16 June to be potentially as important
as what we did in the last week of January here in this
Chamber. We re-engaged the Security Council in
moving the Lusaka peace process forward. We hope
that all the appropriate participants will be here. They
all committed themselves to come when we were in
Lusaka, but things being what they are, we need to pin
this down.

We also attach high importance to the political
dialogue preparatory meetings that will start in Benin
next week. Once again, as this is the first time that I
have had a chance to discuss this under the French
presidency, I need to reaffirm how important it is that
we all support the meetings on 15-16 June under
Ambassador Levitte's presidency.

Going back to the primary subject here, I do not
want to underestimate the destabilizing influence of
UNITA and other armed groups operating in the
territory of the Congo, but I want to use the visit of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal to
focus on the group with which she is primarily
occupied. Again, Mr. President, I hope that you will
use your role on 15-16 June to engage the Political
Committee on this issue. I refer, of course, to the
former Rwandan Armed Forces and the Interahamwe.

Our goal should be the transfer of all indictees to
Arusha and the effective demilitarization, disarmament,
resettlement and reintegration of the remaining
personnel. This will involve the need for the
Government of Rwanda to create and maintain
conditions that are conducive to voluntary repatriation.
It will also involve support from other regional
Governments. We do not want to label all Rwandan
exiles in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
genocidaires. But neither are we prepared to engage
with group of exiles that is subordinate to or affiliated
with the former Rwandan Armed Forces or the
Interahamwe.

The presence of these odious elements operating
freely within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not, however, excuse the human rights violations
that may have been caused by allies of the Rwandan
army, perhaps elements of the Rwandan army itself and
its Congolese allies. Still, it is difficult to imagine a
settlement of the external dimensions of the crisis
without a concerted regional effort that takes into
account Rwanda's legitimate security concerns.

It is in the interest of peace in the Congo that this
issue be settled. Extradition to the International
Criminal Tribunal of all those under indictment is a
requirement of all Member States, and the smooth
effective running ofthe International Criminal Tribunal
is a requirement of the United Nations system.
I was therefore particularly pleased to see that
Chief Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, in her speech,
discussed improving the management systems,
speeding up the trial process and the work that she and
Mr. Jorda will do. An international tribunal of the sort
we are talking about should not be subject to continual
questions about its management practices. It
undermines the credibility and effectiveness of the
court. It raises questions about the use of United
Nations monies, which I have had to deal with in
another place, and they are very difficult.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has - and I want to stress that it has produced a
number of important results, and I think its work is
accelerating - set some important international
precedents. However, it must make better use of its
resources while accelerating its work. I commend the
Chief Prosecutor for her efforts to improve the
operations ofthe Tribunal.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I thank you again
for beginning your presidency with this important
statement. I want to reaffirm the fact that our country
has never wavered in its support of these efforts, even
when deals were offered, and I want to conclude by
saying that I fully share Chief Prosecutor's Del Ponte's
view that men like Radovan Karadzie, Ratko Mladic
and, indeed, Mr. Milosevic and the other people who
have been indicted in Belgrade must be brought to
justice if Europe is ever to see stability. Similarly, in
the Great Lakes region, Rwanda's legitimate security
concerns will not be dealt with until the Interahamwe
genocidaires are taken care of in the appropriate
fashion, and at that point, if not earlier, I hope that
Rwanda will be able to take commensurate actions that
allow us to move towards stability, particularly in the
eastern part of the Congo.

Thank you, Mr. President. I look forward to a
productive month and particularly to your potentially
historic meetings on 16 June.

