Mr. Eide: Two or three issues were raised that I
would like to comment on briefly.

The first relates to the comment made by the
representative of the United Kingdom about the
expansion of our offices. Just to give a quick response,
I hope that over the next very few months we will be
able to open four more offices in provinces where it is
possible to operate. There are some provinces where
we are asked to go unarmed but where most people do
not want to go even armed, so that is not our priority.
After that, further offices will really depend on Council
members and many others giving us the resources we
require.

The second issue relates to the comment by the
Libyan Ambassador on civilian casualties. I really must
say that the efforts being made now by General
McChrystal are impressive, and I have also seen over
the past few weeks how the level of civilian casualties
has gone down. There has been one serious,
unfortunate incident, but apart from that, the trend of
the past few weeks is actually in the right direction. I
commend General McChrystal on his efforts. His
thinking on this is identical to mine.

With regard to detention centres, I have visited a
number of them and intend to continue to do so. There
are three reasons for that. One is to see the physical
conditions under which detainees live; the second is to
make sure that there is a possibility for detainees to
inform and keep in touch with their families; and the
third, of course, has to do with the possibility of
recourse in the justice system. My general comment is
that in Bagram the new facility being built is a
tremendous step in the right direction. With regard to
the Afghan facilities, I would say that they are in many
ways miserable. The reason for that is clear - it is a
lack of resources. They do not have them. If we, the
donors, were able to provide more resources, much
could be done in that respect.

We are suffering from a lack of resources not
only for the actual facilities, but also for the justice
system. That, of course, makes it even more difficult to
handle things the way we should. I appeal to donors to
provide more resources, and I know that those
responsible in the Afghan Government are in full
agreement with me in this respect.

Finally, even though the French Ambassador did
not ask me a question, I would like to comment on
something he said. He said that he was grateful for the
role that I had played with regard to the election
process. I must say here that in the very complex
period we have been going through - and this is really
a very positive sign - there has been full harmony
between my View and those of ambassadors around this
table and of others in the diplomatic community in
Kabul. That has certainly facilitated our dialogue with
Afghan authorities.

