Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): How
many Security Council meetings have been dedicated
to the situation in my region since I took office as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon in 2007? How
many times have we witnessed the deterioration of
peace prospects in the Middle East despite so many
good intentions, including the commendable efforts
of France?

I have watched closely, and often with indignation,
the growing feelings of injustice and disappointment
fuelled by three deadly wars in Gaza, an unprecedented
intensification of the occupation and a plethora of
initiatives for negotiations that would never come to
pass. All that is in addition to the underlying wounded
memory that seems increasingly difficult to heal and
that leads to the sad radicalization of minds. Despite
this lugubrious reality, we must not fail to welcome the
Palestinian reconciliation agreement reached last week,
which rightly revives a certain hope. In that regard,
it is also appropriate to thank Egypt for its sustained
mediation efforts.

Yet how can that hope be translated into reality
when the Israeli authorities continue their relentless
pursuit of colonization, which, it should be recalled,
is illegal under international law? Simply note Israel's
approval of new construction in Hebron, a first in
15 years. That should be resolutely condemned by
the Council without further delay. That expansionist
policy, which has lasted more than half a century, was
summarized by Ariel Sharon in the following terms:

"Everybody has to move, run and grab as many
hilltops as they can to enlarge the settlements;
because everything we take now will stay ours.
Everything we do not grab will go to them".

There is no need to repeat that, as long as the Security
Council remains a prisoner of its inability to put an end
to those flagrant Violations, we will move further away
from the two-State solution, with the greatest contempt
for the relevant resolutions adopted by this organ.

Before turning to Lebanon, with your indulgence,
Madam President, I would like to remind the
downtrodden Palestinian people, in this difficult time,
of these words from General de Gaulle:

"[a]t the end of our sorrow, there is the greatest
glory of the world, that of the men who did not
give in".

As for Lebanon, my Government remains deeply
committed to the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). In that regard, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon has demonstrated that it is carrying out its
thorny mission, and we reiterate our full confidence
in it. Its mission is all the more important because the
environment remains exacting. Not one day passes
without Israel violating my country's sovereignty, or its
leaders bombarding it with incessant threats, which is
in direct Violation of the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006). I would like to recall that those violations and
repeated threats have been duly recorded in letters
sent by the Lebanese Mission to the Security Council.
It is high time that the Council shoulder its onerous
responsibility and ensure that the rules and principles
of international law are upheld in order to put an end to
such acts.

Could the Council not at least swiftly condemn
the unspeakable remarks of Naftali Bennet, Israeli
Minister of Education, who, after threatening to send
Lebanon back to the Middle Ages, now threatens to
attack "the infrastructure, the international airport
and the Government institutions" of my country?
I repeat that those remarks were made by Israel's
Education Minister.

It has now been more than 10 years since the
General Assembly adopted a resolution, by an
overwhelming majority, calling upon Israel to shoulder
its responsibility and compensate my country for the oil
spill it caused in 2006 when it bombed the Jiyeh power
plant. My country has been treated unjustly. Peace and
security cannot be maintained if States are not held to
account for the damage they cause. It is in that spirit that

we again call upon the Council to act without further
delay to compel Israel to fulfil its responsibilities.

With regard to Syria, Lebanon welcomes the
considerable reduction in violence since the signing
of the memorandum on the creation of de-escalation
zones last May in Astana. We support the efforts of the
co-sponsors of the process to maintain the ceasefire and
facilitate humanitarian access throughout Syria. The
international community must also consolidate progress
on the ground and support the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to resume negotiations in Geneva
in order to reach a political solution to the crisis,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The solution must take into account the aspirations
of the Syrian people to live in peace and dignity in a
sovereign and unified country. That will pave the way
for a viable reconstruction process and for millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to
their homes.

To conclude what could be my last statement as the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the Security
Council, I can only hope that the Council will finally,
and without delay, shoulder its responsibilities, as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations, and
allow a genuine opportunity for fair and lasting peace
to be achieved.

