Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Among the
many, many expressions of sympathy we have heard
since yesterday in memory of our illustrious colleague
Vitaly Churkin, whose affection and friendship we shall
sorely miss, one in particular struck me, and I should
like to reiterate it here:

(spoke in English)

"With Ambassador Churkin's passing, the United
Nations has lost a highly intelligent, frank, wise
and dynamic presence and a diplomat committed
to the dignity of the Security Council."

(spoke in French)

As was already done by the Foreign Minister of
Senegal yesterday in a letter to his counterpart, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, I would like personally and on
behalf of my entire delegation to convey to Ambassador
Iliichev our most heartfelt condolences on the passing
of a person whom many of us so rightly considered to
embody the spirit of the Security Council.

The Secretary-General, as has been said here, has
contributed to a surge in diplomacy. Once again I would
quote Mr. Churkin himself, in 2011, who, in this very
Chamber, said the following:

(spoke in English)

"We also understand the concern that the
Council may too often resort to Chapter VII of the
Charter, including the application of sanctions. In
that regard, we stress that the Russian Federation
has consistently called on the Council to make more
active use of the toolkit of preventive diplomacy
and to invest in the development of mechanisms for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The provisions
of Chapters VI and VIII should be fully exploited.
Sanctions and the use of force to settle conflict
are appropriate when all possibilities for peaceful
settlement have been exhausted, the threat to
international peace and security is clear, and the
decision to resort to Chapter VII enjoys the broadest
possible support of Council members." (S/PV6672, 
pp. 3-4) (spoke in French)

I would ask Mr. Iliichev to convey to the members
of his delegation and to the bereaved family and the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation
our most heartfelt condolences. May Vitaly's soul rest
in peace.

