Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council.

Once again, we gather here to discuss troubling
developments in Serbia's southern province of Kosovo
and Metohija, under the administration of the United
Nations since June 1999. And once again we are
compelled to discuss the dangerous consequences of
the unilateral, illegal and illegitimate declaration of
independence by the Kosovo's Provisional Institutions
2

of Self-Government, which took place on 17 February
of this year. With that declaration, a direct assault on
the innate operating logic of the international system
was committed, for Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) places a binding Chapter VII obligation on all
Member States to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia.

Those 20 or so countries that furthered the
secessionist cause of the Kosovo Albanians have
contributed to making the international system more
unstable, more insecure and more unpredictable.
Recognizing the unilateral declaration of Kosovo's
independence from Serbia legitimizes the doctrine of
imposing solutions to ethnic conflicts. It legitimizes
the act of unilateral secession by a provincial or other
non-State actor. It transforms the right to self-
determination into an avowed right to independence. It
legitimizes the forced partition of internationally
recognized sovereign States. And it provides any ethnic
or religious group with a grievance against its capital
with a playbook on how to achieve its ends.

I want to be very clear: we will never recognize
the attempt by the authorities in Pristina to unilaterally
secede from Serbia. We call upon the countries that
have recognized that attempt to reconsider, and we call
on those that have not done so to stay the course and to
help us continue to defend the international system
from being fundamentally undermined.

With a frankness that we owe to those most
directly affected by this perilous precedent, but also
with an eye to those who could be affected in the time
to come, let us ask ourselves the following questions.
Have the principles of international relations been
advanced by wrenching Kosovo away from a
democratically governed country? Will the province of
Kosovo, as an entity-in-limbo that cannot acquire the
international legitimacy arising out of membership in
the United Nations, be able to achieve sustainable
prosperity without Belgrade? And have regional
stability and cooperation been increased by the
perverse choice that our neighbours are being forced to
make - a choice between Serbia and Kosovo?

Since 17 February, the situation on the ground
has been deteriorating, which has made it more
difficult to control. This is not Where we should be.

Understandably, the public reaction in Serbia to
Pristina's unilateral declaration of independence has
been clear and loud. For the vast majority of Serbs, it
08-26760
has been a dignified reaction. Hundreds of thousands
assembled in Belgrade on 21 February to express their
sorrow peacefully, and to do so in worship. Young and
old, rich and poor, they came from all corners of Serbia
to demonstrate their opposition to the forcible partition
of their country.

It is tragic that a small proportion of those who
gathered in Belgrade on that day turned to violence.
The assault on foreign embassies, downtown stores and
Government buildings was as unacceptable as it was
deplorable. Allow me to express, on behalf of my
Government, our unreserved regret to those countries
Whose embassies were damaged. They have our
assurances that all measures have been taken to ensure
that something like that will not happen again.

Violence is not the answer - not in Belgrade, not
in Mitrovica, not in Pristina. Nowhere in Serbia is
violence the answer. But violence has been a reality for
too long in our southern province. That which took
place under a dictatorship in the 1990s was terrible and
should never be minimized.

And yet, I remind this Council that our Serbian
collective experience has been marked by the memory
of what happened in the period after June 1999. In
peacetime, with the United Nations present, hundreds
of thousands of Serbs were expelled from Kosovo.
Tens of thousands of Serbian homes were torched to
the ground. Thousands of Serbs were murdered or are
still missing and presumed dead. And more than 150
Serbian Orthodox churches and monasteries were
destroyed. The province's Serbs were abandoned to
pogroms carefully orchestrated and brutally executed
by Kosovo Albanians, who have been rewarded for
their violent conduct.

The Republic of Serbia will not accept the
imposition of an outcome that fundamentally violates
our legitimate national interests. So long as these
attempts by some to exclude us continue, we will keep
coming back to this body and to all other relevant
bodies, and we will employ all legal, diplomatic and
political means at our disposal to continue asserting
our core sovereign rights.

By the same token, I underline to the Council
Serbia's preparedness to move constructively forward.
We must overcome the danger of imposing realities
that have no legal basis, for such attempts only create
defensive, self-preservationist moves that drive us
further apart. We must start talking honestly to one
08-26760
another to assess the decisions that have been taken,
the mistakes that have been made, the threats that have
arisen and the accommodations that must be made.

We must meet and reason together. And we must
work in concert to instil the confidence necessary for
all the Western Balkans to once again take bold,
historic steps towards a common European future. For
I believe that none of us can afford any more missed
opportunities to build trust, to seek agreement, to
consolidate values and to arrive at a just, mutually
acceptable solution that will benefit us all.

The alternative to handling this issue with great
care and reverence for the United Nations Charter, with
great respect for the reputation and legacy of United
Nations peacekeeping and with great concern for the
credibility of the Secretary-General is simply too bleak
to fathom. In short, what we must do is to turn our
minds from wondering what will happen next to
wondering together about what we can still
accomplish.

I would like to emphasize that Serbia wishes no
ill to the ethnic Albanians in our southern province. We
continue to take seriously their right to obtain
substantial self-governance while remaining under a
common sovereign roof with Serbia. It is in our vital
interest that all of Kosovo's communities prosper -
and prosper together - in peace, security and
reconciliation as neighbours in a progressive society of
hope and forgiveness. That is why Serbia does not
intend to impose an embargo, and it is why we have a
clear policy of not resorting to the force of arms.

At the same time, we will continue to ensure that
the Serbs of Kosovo do not remain relegated to a
fearful life of ghettoized isolation, as they have been
for the past eight years. We will ensure that their future
is based on tangible assurances, rather than on vague
promises and unlawful jurisdictions.

Resolution 1244 (1999) must be observed in full.
That is the only way to prevent a further deterioration
of the situation on the ground. There must be no
erosion of the clearly defined mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) by the Security Council. Therefore, we
strongly demand that no further transfer of
competencies from UNMIK to any other body take
place. That is of vital importance.
3
Let me assure the Security Council that the
Republic of Serbia will continue to comply with
resolution 1244 (1999). Unfortunately, others have
taken the divisive step of making their own
interpretation of the resolution to suit some short-
sighted purposes. It is a great pity that some European
countries have joined in that dubious exercise, first by
recognizing the unilateral declaration of independence
by the authorities in Pristina, thereby gravely setting
back the region's European prospects, and then by
establishing the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) and the affiliated International
Steering Group (ISG) of countries.

Both EULEX and the ISG have set for themselves
the goal of assisting in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status
Settlement - the so-called Ahtisaari proposal - but
the Proposal has never been endorsed by the Security
Council, which is the only institution endowed with the
power to legitimate changes in the nature of the
international presence in Kosovo.

It is therefore the basic position of the Republic
of Serbia that both EULEX and the ISG operate well
outside the parametres set forth by resolution 1244
(1999) and that their activities are strongly inconsistent
with the principles of the United Nations Charter and
the Helsinki Final Act. Let me be clear: It is not that
the European Union is unwelcome in our southern
province - for we do welcome, as a matter of
principle, any demonstration of Europe's deepening
commitment to our country, including Kosovo - but
there has to be a clear legal mandate for any such
commitment, and that can be achieved only by getting
the approval of the Security Council. We must work
together to overcome that problem within this very
forum.

President Boris Tadie spoke a few days ago of our
willingness to sign the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union immediately.
Despite our present troubles, I wish to reaffirm that
principled position - one which a solid majority of
our countrymen share. Our heritage, our culture, our
beliefs and our history are profoundly European.
Europe has developed into a storehouse of values that
creates stability and security in our historically divided
continent. It has become the antidote to isolation,
protectionism, fear, extremism and war. It brings
people together, expands markets, points to a more
prosperous tomorrow, solidifies the gains made, and
inspires attempts at resolving differences in line with
the higher aspirations of humankind, instead of giving
in to our basest instincts.

To construct and to integrate, and so to grasp the
infinite opportunities that the twenty-first century
offers to the bold and to the visionary - that is the
kind of Europe to which we are committed and to
which we hope to belong. Regrettably, we have come
to the chasm. Let us now try to join together in order to
build a bridge over it, to look beyond the immediate
divide and to secure a future in Europe for the entire
western Balkans.

The Republic of Serbia stands ready to be a
constructive partner in the achievement of regional
peace, stability and reconciliation. We are committed
to open dialogue and good-faith negotiations, and we
continue to be faithful to the principles of international
law. The Republic of Serbia is ready. We are ready to
host a series of meetings with UNMIK on a whole host
of issues, such as the status of the Kosovo Serb
population and that of the Serbian Orthodox Church,
the question of customs points, and the status of
Kosovo Serb judges and policemen in our southern
province, as well as all others.

We have to solve concrete problems, we have to
address the real life concerns of the province's most
vulnerable, and we have to pay attention to the human
cost of our actions. Every day that goes by without
working towards some sort of agreement creates
unsustainable hopes, irrational fears and dangerous,
uncoordinated outcomes on the ground. Let me
reiterate Serbia's principled, deeply held position that
regional peace and security can be consolidated
through dialogue, not imposition; through agreement,
not compulsion; and through law, not might.

Tomorrow is the fifth anniversary of the tragic
assassination of Serbia's first democratically elected
prime minister, Mr. Zoran Djindjic. He was the engine
of our democratic success and the visionary of our
place in Europe. A month before he was murdered,
Mr. Djindjic wrote a series of letters to world leaders
on the question of Kosovo's future status in Serbia and
Serbia's future status in Europe. He wrote of his vision
of a Serbia as proud of its European future as it is
proud of its national past. He wrote about the
importance of preserving our identity while broadening
its scope, and he wrote that "the worst option is for
08-26760
things to happen in Kosovo without our participation
and without our objective responsibility".

Well, the worst option, as Mr. Djindjic called it,
has been attempted by people who should have known
better. Those outside actors chose to sacrifice regional
geostrategic priorities on the altar of the extremist
communal aspirations of the Kosovo Albanians, and
they chose expediency over statecraft. The
international system wobbles precariously as a result,
but it can be steadied. By acting together, I believe we
can overcome our differences on Kosovo in the weeks
and months ahead.

Elections will take place in Serbia in May. The
result will be a turning point for my country and for all
the western Balkans, for it will be a time of great
decision. Real, concrete differences exist in Serbia on
economic and social issues and on the crucial issue of
Serbia's future in Europe. Each citizen of Serbia will
be called on to make a clear and compelling choice, but
let me be clear on what the election will not be about.
It will not be about Serbia's policy towards its
breakaway province of Kosovo and Metohija.
08-26760

Make no mistake; on that fundamental issue -
on the question that concerns the very nature of the
identity of the Serbian nation - there is no
disagreement in Serbia. My country is strongly united
on Kosovo, and we will always remain so. We will
continue defending our sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We will remain steadfast in our determination
to help our brethren overcome their present discontent,
and we will build on our unity, forged by Kosovo, to
preserve a democratic Serbia that is whole, free and
comprehensively engaged with a world community
strengthened by the reaffirmation of the legitimacy of
the international system. Kosovo shall remain a part of
Serbia forever.

Thank you, Sir, for having given me the
opportunity to address the Council at a time of great
consequence for us all.

