Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): My delegation would
like to thank you, Sir, and members of the Council for
giving us another opportunity to contribute to the open
discussions on three issues, all of which are of special
and direct interest to Sierra Leone. Earlier in the week,
it was the scourge of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, followed by the equally disturbing but
complex problem of children in armed conflict. Today,
the focus is on the progress report on the
recommendations of the Council's mission to West
Africa, including Sierra Leone.

Our participation today is also an indication of
the importance that my delegation attaches to such
visiting missions. Council members get to see first
hand - albeit after armed conflicts have subsided -
the situation on the ground. Each visiting mission
enhances the ability of the Council to make pragmatic
decisions on the peacekeeping and peacemaking
processes in the respective theatres of conflict. This
was the Council's second visit to Sierra Leone, a
country which until recently hosted the largest number
of United Nations peacekeeping forces.

The Security Council mission to West Africa
came up with eight recommendations concerning Sierra
Leone. The progress report on those recommendations
should be considered in tandem with a subsequent
report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), published
exactly four weeks ago today.

I should like to speak about just two of those
recommendations. The first relates to the linkage
between the drawdown or withdrawal of UNAMSIL
and the capacity of the Republic of Sierra Leone armed
forces and the Sierra Leone police to assume their
responsibilities for the security and safety of the
country. The question is, what will happen as
UNAMSIL phases out its operation, and what will
happen when it leaves? The Security Council mission
to West Africa recommended that the Government
intensify its efforts to develop the capacity of the army
and police to ensure security when UNAMSIL leaves,
as projected by the end of 2004.

Before I go any further, let me say that the people
of Sierra Leone never expected the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to stay in the country
indefinitely. However, they were shocked and
dismayed to see ECOMOG leave at a time when there
was concern about an emerging security vacuum. The
population dreaded the possibility - or the reality -
of the premature removal of their security blanket.
They remembered the marvellous job performed by
ECOMOG, especially during those dark days when the
rebels launched their ruthless killing campaign,
ignominiously labelled "Operation no living thing".
In 1999, during the peace talks in Lome, the
rebels repeatedly ridiculed us. They said that we had no
army. Today, the situation is different. Thanks to
ECOMOG, UNAMSIL and its troop contributors, the
International Military Advisory Training Team
(IMATT) led by the United Kingdom, the
Commonwealth and others, we can take pride in the
fact that we have a restructured, professional,
disciplined and loyal armed force and police force
willing and ready to play their part in ensuring the
defence and the safety of the people of Sierra Leone.

The Secretary-General's report provides a detailed
account of the various elements of the current security
situation. We note, for instance, his statement to the
effect that, since September 2002, when the drawdown
was launched, UNAMSIL troops have withdrawn from
a number of strategically important areas and handed
them over to the Sierra Leone police. We share his
conclusion that progress has been made in the gradual
handover of responsibility for the national security of
Sierra Leone to the Sierra Leone police and military.

Only those who know and experienced what
really happened in Sierra Leone - for instance, the
role of the "sobels" or soldiers-turned-rebels, and the
targeting of police stations in acts of arson and
murder - would appreciate the progress we have made
in the security and safety sectors.

This brings me to the second recommendation of
the Security Council mission to West Africa
concerning Sierra Leone. It relates to another linkage.
The mission suggests that the Security Council should
recognize the importance of the linkage between
establishing peace in neighbouring Liberia and
consolidating stability in Sierra Leone and the Mano
River Union subregion. Sierra Leone is fully aware of
this linkage. Who could forget that the rebel war was
launched and, to a large extent, directed from Liberia?

The Secretary-General himself recognizes this
and refers to it in his progress report on the
recommendations of the mission to West Africa. He
mentions, for instance, the ongoing efforts to stabilize
Liberia and their impact in the subregion, as well as the
contribution of the joint UNAMSIL-Sierra Leone
military forces operation in tightening control over the
border areas. However, he correctly points out that
those areas remain a significant security challenge. The
Council should take particular note of this problem.

Trends towards peace and stability in Liberia
augur well for the consolidation of peace in Sierra
Leone. However, we must have the capacity to deter
any repetition of the 1991 rebel invasion across our
eastern border.

At this stage we can say that the prospects for
assuming full responsibility for our national security
and safety when UNAMSIL leaves are good - perhaps
very good. However, as the Secretary-General has
observed, there are a number of outstanding problems
that need urgent attention.

First and foremost is the need for additional
resources to enhance the overall capacity of the army and
the police to assume their responsibilities. It is not enough
to train the police and military and deploy them to
areas vacated by UNAMSIL without providing them
with an infrastructure, such as police stations, military
and police barracks. What is the use of boasting about a
professional and loyal army when that army's mobility
and communications system are severely restricted? The
Secretary-General points to the lamentable state of the
armed forces' vehicle fleet and the shortage of
communication equipment. Here, we recall the so-
called inability of UNAMSIL to defend itself when the
rebels attacked in May 2000. UNAMSIL would not
have completed or performed its functions well if it
had not been fully equipped. We urge the Security
Council to give this infrastructure constraint the
priority consideration it deserves. This is at the core of
the whole withdrawal plan.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that
progress in strengthening the capacity of the army and
the police to take over national security responsibilities
from UNAMSIL constitutes a key security benchmark
that should guide the drawdown and withdrawal of the
operation. In this connection, we commend the Secretary-
General for his decision to conduct a comprehensive
assessment of the benchmarks for the drawdown and
withdrawal plan, as well as the progress that we Sierra
Leoneans have made in consolidating peace and
stability in the country.

We hope the Security Council will take due
account of the Secretary-General's observations and
recommendations to be derived from that assessment.
We have no doubt that the Council will also take into
consideration, and take due account of, the views of the
Government of Sierra Leone in determining the future
of UNAMSIL's operations.

