Human rights and peace and security are closely intertwined throughout the whole conflict cycle. Indeed, human rights violations and abuses can be both root causes and consequences of conflict. Accordingly, respect for human rights and the guaranteed protection of civilians are cornerstones of sustainable peace. We therefore warmly welcome the German initiative today to underscore the role of peace missions in protecting human rights. Peace missions add important value because they can identify violations and abuses, prevent such violations and abuses, and help build capacity in their operational contexts. First, with respect to identifying violations, human rights components in peacekeeping operations play a crucial role in monitoring and reporting violations of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. They serve as eyes and ears on the ground, exposing the gravity and scale of threats that escape the attention of other actors. Secondly, with regard to preventing violations and abuses, peace missions also have the ability to make context-sensitive and forward-looking threat assessments, which enables them to prevent atrocities or mitigate their impact, in line with the protection mandate with which most are endowed. However, comprehensive threat assessment is only possible with trained staff and good cooperation among missions, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations country teams. Thirdly, with respect to capacity-building and support for host-country security forces, the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces is an essential tool for missions to support security forces in respecting human rights. A few years of practice have taught us that the Due Diligence Policy is also relevant in terms of transition planning and exit strategy. When, for example, the United Nations and the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo define benchmarks for a responsible exit of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), lessons can surely be drawn from the Policy. Human rights are not just add-ons for missions - they are core business - and if we are serious about this business, we must mandate missions accordingly, staff them accordingly and budget accordingly. That is part of our commitment to the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Human rights components are key in engaging communities and local stakeholders to support mandate implementation. They also increase mission credibility across the board. For example, in Afghanistan, the work of the human rights component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan contributed to building confidence between parties to the conflict, which is a condition for inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations. Dedicated women protection advisers and child protection advisers are indispensable to fulfilling important protection mandates. Consolidation of human rights components in mandates and resource negotiations cannot come at the expense of such capacity. We have learned from experience that mandates, guidance and policy briefs do not automatically translate into operational human rights readiness for military personnel. We must train Blue Helmets before and during deployment with due attention to methodologies applicable in a mission context. Close cooperation between the military, police and civilian components as well as the sharing of best practices between missions could improve human rights readiness. We also advocate adequate regional attention to human rights. The European Union has extensive human rights components in its civilian and military missions. The African Union has its own human rights missions as well. We would like to encourage the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force to strengthen the implementation of the human rights compliance framework supported by the Office of the High Commissioner through the Joint Force's presence in the relevant States. We would like to take this opportunity to honour the men and women who work tirelessly to advance human rights in the field despite numerous risks, including new challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. For example, in MONUSCO, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office has continued its work in support of national authorities to improve respect for human rights and strengthen the fight against impunity. Its COVID-19 response has entailed attention sufficient to address such issues as domestic violence and overcrowding in prisons. It is an example of the dedication that United Nations peacekeepers and civilian personnel have shown, for which we are grateful.
