Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to echo those who have thanked
Mr. Antonio Guterres, High Commissioner for
Refugees, for his thorough briefing on the issues of
refugees and displaced persons. We commend the
efforts of the High Commissioner to meet the
humanitarian needs of refugees worldwide. We are
grateful to him and his staff for their sacrifices.

No one can doubt that issues relating to refugees
and displaced persons, particularly in Africa and the
Middle East, are among the major problems drawing
the attention of the international community. Over the
past several decades, those two regions have seen
major conflicts and natural disasters. Consequently,
millions of people have been displaced from their
homes to regions that they considered to be safer,
either within or outside the borders of their country.
These movements of people have sparked numerous
problems, specifically due to tensions between the
refugees and the local populations. Hence, the
important humanitarian role played by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in terms of
assisting and protecting refugees and displaced
persons.

When we consider the global geographic
breakdown of refugees, we see that there are more than
15 million refugees, 6.6 million of whom are
Palestinians; and more than 65 million displaced
persons worldwide. The largest number of refugees and
displaced persons is in Africa and the Middle East, and
specifically in the occupied Palestinian territories and
neighbouring countries. There are also refugees from
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia
and the Sudan.

As the Council is aware, the countries hosting
refugees are responsible for assisting and protecting
them. National Governments, with the help of the
international community, are also responsible for
addressing the humanitarian and security problems of
refugees. At the same time, we believe that the ideal
solution for addressing the problems of refugees and
displaced persons lies in setting conflicts, returning
refugees to their homes and reintegrating them by
providing them with jobs and development in their
countries of origin. This should be undertaken through
national efforts and effective partnerships with the
international community.

Libya endured colonization and fascist
persecution for three decades, during which thousands
of Libyans fled the country. It therefore understands all
too well the current suffering of Palestinians. No one
can doubt their suffering, and specifically the suffering
of two thirds of the population of Gaza, under the
Israeli occupation. Approximately 1 million refugees
live in Gaza and have been subjected to bombing and
artillery fire over the past two weeks. The total
embargo does not allow them to escape this holocaust,
which, unfortunately, imitates Nazi methods, but with
modern means of destruction and killing. As of
yesterday, those methods had caused the death of more
than 700 Palestinians, including 219 children and 89
women. By this morning, the number of those killed
had risen to 763.

I must mention here that many refugees from
Gaza had to leave their homes as long ago as 1948.
They were again forcibly displaced in 1967, this time
towards Gaza. They currently have no other option
than to die in this holocaust from which they cannot
flee. There is no other outcome for them but death, and
only death.

That is the goal of the Israeli authorities, who are
in flagrant violation of international law, in the context
of total silence by the Security Council. This silence
can only be interpreted as support for the aggression
and as indifference to the souls of innocent victims on
the part of those who are preventing the Security
Council from shouldering its responsibilities.

In this context, I take this opportunity to
commend the work done by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), led by Ms. Karen AbuZayd. I welcome
the courage shown by UNRWA staff in Gaza and
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories despite
the grave dangers that they face and their being
repeatedly targeted by the Israeli occupying forces.

The international community must be generous
and respond to the urgent appeals made by UNRWA
eight days ago from Gaza. Our hope is that we will
soon hear a briefing from Ms. Karen AbuZayd,
Commissioner-General of UNRWA, and that
arrangements will be made for her to make this
briefing to complement the briefing that we heard
today, so that we can get a thorough picture of the
situation.

We in the Security Council need to take practical
steps to ensure the protection of civilians in time of
war and to protect them from any threat by any party.
We need to remove all obstacles to humanitarian
assistance. We also need to require the parties
concerned to meet their international obligations and
the other obligations they have already undertaken so
that we in the Council will be able to meet our
responsibilities.

