Ms. Juul (Norway): An international order based
on the rule of law is a prerequisite for peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among States. Norway
therefore warmly welcomes the initiative by the
Mexican presidency to organize today's open debate.
We also thank the presidency for preparing the
discussion paper (S/2010/322). The Security Council
indeed has a particular role to play in promoting
international law, both with regard to its own
adherence to the rule of law in its daily work and to
expanding the notion of adherence to the rule of law in
general.

The many violations of international
humanitarian law over the past few years are of grave
concern to us. The lack of protection for civilians in
conflict, the increased targeting of civilians and the use
of sexual violence as a method of warfare are just a
few examples of the serious challenges we face. In
order to provide adequate protection for civilians
affected by armed conflicts, it is necessary to have an
open and frank discussion on the practical application
of international humanitarian law. This discussion
should be based on the experience in the field in recent
conflicts. It is Norway's firm belief that allegations of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
should always be investigated in a thorough and
independent manner to determine whether there have
been any grave breaches.

Norway welcomes the Security Council's
achievements in developing an increasingly strong
protection framework for children in armed conflict, in
particular through its latest resolution on this issue,
namely, resolution 1882 (2009). Such a framework is
key to the protection of civilians and to the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in conflict
situations. Still, the lack of decisive action against
persistent perpetrators and of accountability measures
to fight impunity continue to limit the effectiveness of
the work of the United Nations in this area.

Norway is encouraged by the Security Council
statement in which it expressed its readiness to impose
targeted measures against persistent violators of

international law who recruit, sexually abuse, maim or
kill children in war. We support the proposals of the
Secretary-General to include child recruitment and the
use of children in war as part of the mandates of all
sanctions committees, to improve the flow of
information between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the sanctions committees, and
to invite the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict to regularly
brief sanctions committees.

Furthermore, we would like to acknowledge the
crucial contributions of international criminal tribunals
and courts in upholding justice and the rule of law.
Through these institutions, both the United Nations and
the international community have proven their ability
to rise to the occasion and prevent impunity in the face
of mass atrocities. In that regard, we would like to
draw attention to the International Criminal Court and
the outstanding arrest warrants it has issued in
connection with the Sudan. We encourage the Security
Council to follow up on the recommendations by the
Prosecutor in order to ensure compliance with
resolution 1593 (2005).

International criminal tribunals, courts and
independent investigations do not substitute, but rather
complement, the building of well-functioning domestic
justice systems. To prevent a fragile peace from
relapsing into conflict, it is important to build or
reconstruct the security sector in the aftermath of
conflict. Therefore, the Security Council rightly
emphasizes rule of law mandates in country situations
on its agenda, as do the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund in their engagement in post-
conflict societies.

Impunity is particularly prevalent when women's
rights are violated in armed conflicts. During conflicts
and in their aftermath, we must ask the crucial
questions: Security for whom? And justice for whom?
Abuses against women tend to continue unchecked
when they are not properly dealt with during peace
negotiations and in post-conflict situations. We must
continue to enhance women's opportunities to
participate actively in peace processes and in
peacebuilding.

To enable the United Nations to support the
re-establishment of national rule of law and accountable
and effective security institutions, Norway strongly
supports the Office of Rule of Law and Security

10-4285]
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Global Rule of Law Programme at
the United Nations Development Programme.

We see an obvious need for effective mechanisms
for peaceful conflict resolution between States. The
International Court of Justice (ICJ) provides an
underused opportunity in that regard. Norway has
accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. We
invite all States that have not yet done so to do the
same. It is encouraging that the ICJ is now considering
a larger number of cases, on a broad range of aspects of
public international law. The Security Council should
strive to help the parties to a dispute to refer their
disputes to the ICJ so that this trend towards greater
utilization of the Court continues.

It is vital that the Security Council itself set an
example by adhering to its own legal foundations -
the Charter and international law. In particular, it
should respect and promote the rights of individuals
and basic guarantees of due process. To that end,
Norway welcomes the progress achieved in enhancing
the transparency and fairness of listing and de-listing
procedures of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Resolution 1822 (2008)
introduced the obligation to review all the names on
the list and to add narrative summaries of reasons for
their listing by the end of this month. In addition,
resolution 1904 (2009) established the Office of the
Ombudsperson.

While we welcome that progress, it is of
paramount importance that the procedures for listing
and de-listing be kept under constant review and that
the Council remain open to further procedural
improvements in the regime, such as the establishment
of an independent review panel. First and foremost, we
now look forward to the newly appointed
Ombudsperson taking up her functions. We will follow
her work with great interest.

