Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also congratulate China on its presidency last month.
At the same time, I wish to congratulate you and your
country on the leadership and initiative you have
shown throughout the process leading to and during the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and for
having convened this important meeting today.

Like your country, the Philippines has not
escaped the problems that have been caused by the
proliferation and uncontrolled spread of small arms and
light weapons. In this regard, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement earlier this
morning, in which he once again captured the true
depth of this problem.

The international community took a step in the
right direction in addressing this problem when, less
than two weeks ago, we concluded our small arms
Conference with the adoption of a Programme of
Action. We must continue to move in the right
direction and build on what we have achieved. The
proliferation and the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons are and
should be of direct concern to the Council. While the
other organs, particularly the General Assembly, and
agencies of the United Nations all have particular roles
to play in addressing this problem, the Security
Council has a unique and singular role, not only
because the top producers of small arms and light
weapons are members of the Council, but also because
all have, in various forums, supported efforts to address
this problem. Moreover, the Security Council's role is
important primarily in two areas: arms embargoes and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of ex-combatants.
Illicit small arms transfers have become
commonplace. New and old weapons move with
unbelievable ease, but when United Nations arms
embargoes are defied, that is when we see how truly
insidious the activities of illicit arms brokers are. Thus,
we find it most significant that the Programme of
Action recalls the obligations of States to comply fully
with Security Council arms embargoes. The
Programme of Action also contains the commitment of
States to take appropriate measures at the national level
against any activity that violates a Security Council
arms embargo.

We strongly urge the Security Council to continue
looking into ways and means of enhancing the
effectiveness of arms embargoes, including reviewing
the functioning of existing sanctions Committees and
encouraging States to provide all relevant information
on embargo violations.

While we understand the particular constraints
involved, the Philippines strongly supports the call
made by the Secretary-General and others two years
ago, during the ministerial-level consideration of this
issue in the Security Council, that measures for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants be included in peace agreements and the
mandates of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

We are particularly glad that the Programme of
Action on small arms did not limit DDR to post-
conflict situations. It is true that, as far as United
Nations practice is concerned, the mindset is to apply
DDR only to post-conflict situations, but there are far
too many conflicts in which the United Nations is not
involved and applying this rule to all conflicts is and
would have been a grave error. If we are to wait until
conflicts end, there may be no one left to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate.

We believe that even before conflicts cease, even
before a conclusive military or political solution is
reached, combatants should have a viable and practical
opportunity to take themselves out of the conflict and
for their small arms to be collected. The fact is that
some combatants, given a choice, might prefer to do
this, but that, in the absence of DDR, they may turn to
crime, piracy, acts of terrorism or other similar
activities. The Philippines therefore thanks those who
supported our view and helped bring this progressive
element into the Programme of Action.

We believe that our overall efforts to address the
problem of small arms and the momentum that we have
been building would receive a welcome boost if the
Security Council were once again to place itself fully
and squarely behind these efforts through a presidential
statement or a resolution. This would give added
political impetus to the follow-up action to the
Conference and the Programme of Action.

Finally, the Philippines looks forward to working
with the various organs and agencies of the United
Nations, the relevant international and regional
organizations, other States and members of civil
society in implementing the Programme of Action,
including preparing, as appropriate, for the various
follow-up meetings to review its implementation.

