Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation thanks you for organizing
today's public meeting. We greatly appreciate the
presence here of the President of Costa Rica and his
personal contribution, which considerably raises the
tone of this important public event taking place during
the term of office of Costa Rica in the presidency of
the Security Council.

The topic is of importance in order to achieve the
major objectives of the United Nations. Nothing
distinguishes the United Nations Charter as much as
the explicit link established between peace,
international security, development and the promotion
of respect for individual rights and fundamental
freedoms. This relationship is reflected quite clearly in
Article 26 of the Charter.

Benin recalled the appeal made in Article 26 of
the Charter in our statement made during the general
debate of the sixty-third session in the First
Committee, where we expressed our grave concern
over the considerable increase in military expenditures
among Member States. The topic of our discussion
today, then, puts at the forefront of the Security
Council's agenda this crucial function granted to it by
the Charter, which it has not been able to carry out
because of unfavourable circumstances accompanying
its development since the entry into force of the
Charter.

The Security Council's inaction in the area of
arms regulation and reduction is linked to the
development of nuclear weapons and their proliferation
in the context of the cold war. Regional conflicts,
which increased during that period, are also part of the
framework of that major confrontation. At the end of
the cold war, the entire world had cherished the hope
of reaping the real dividends of peace by beginning
strategic cooperation among the major Powers in order
to face the challenges to humankind at the beginning of
the third millennium. If the bilateral disarmament
agreements in nuclear weapons concluded in the 1990s
made such hopes credible, the current situation is one
of grave concern. We see an increase of 45 per cent in
military expenditures in the same period, with real or
supposed proliferation risks generated by the deadlock
in which the disarmament machinery administered by
the General Assembly finds itself. This has happened
because the Security Council has played only a
marginal role in the regulation and reduction of
armaments called for in Article 26. We can no longer
let this situation, which is totally unacceptable, further
frustrate the expectations of humankind.

By opening a public debate on the strengthening
of collective security through a general regulation and
reduction of armaments as the safest way to peace and
development, your country, Mr. President, has begun
an undertaking of crucial importance. We hope that the
Security Council will seize this new opportunity to
resume leadership in efforts to stem the arms race
throughout the world. If it is able to do so, it will create
conditions favourable for a realization of the promise
of peace, of security, of development and of the
promotion of respect for basic human rights, as
contained in the Millennium Declaration adopted at the
2000 Millennium Summit and in the Final Document
of the 2005 World Summit of the United Nations
General Assembly.

My delegation therefore fully agrees with the
analysis proposed in the concept paper (S/2008/697, annex) drawn up by your country, Sir, to guide our
thoughts on this topic. We endorse the major ideas put
forth in paragraphs 10 to 20 of that document for
tackling the challenges described in it.

The Security Council must implement those ideas
in a meaningful manner by working relentlessly to
make the collective security system established by the
Charter fully operational in all its dimensions. It should
endeavour to regain control over the unacceptable
distortions plaguing international peace and security by
fully shouldering its responsibilities, with strict respect
for the principles of the sovereign equality of States,
whether large or small. The Security Council should
become a major inspiration for multilateralism,
consistently making use of its universal competencies
and the regional coordination required for their
effective exercise.

In this regard, Benin would like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the very interesting
study by Professor Paul Collier of Oxford University
on regional coordination for the reduction of military
expenditures. The peacekeeping and conflict
prevention mechanisms established in various parts of
the world should be designed to build the architecture
of the collective security system envisaged in Chapter
VIII of the Charter.

The African Union has achieved considerable
progress in this area and has repeatedly expressed its
desire that the Security Council and the United Nations
express their appreciation for its efforts, in part by
financing peacekeeping operations conducted under the
mandate of the Council. It is important to promote in
this regard effective cooperation among States in order
to ensure international peace and security at less cost.
In this regard, Benin welcomes the operational
guidelines contained in resolutions 1625 (2005), 1631
(2005) and 1809 (2008), which are rightly recalled in
your letter, Sir, on today's debate.

At the same time, the Security Council should
mobilize the international community to meaningful
action to eliminate the root causes of conflict, through
developing the interdependence of States, their internal
relations and the relationship between man and nature.
The major challenges that this involves prove the total
inconsistency of the arms race. In order to face those
challenges, the reform under way in the international
system should be aimed resolutely towards evolving a
new logic that embodies in the best possible way the
major principles of the United Nations Charter.

