Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me express
the appreciation of the Brazilian delegation to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and for
convening this very important debate. I am also grateful
to the Secretary-General, to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, to UNICEF
Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt and to
Ms. Eunice Apio for their briefings.

While the Security Council framework for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict
has been decisively reinforced since the turn of the
twenty-first century, more needs to be done in terms
of implementation and accountability. Every year,
thousands of vulnerable and innocent girls and boys
still bear the brunt of wars fought by adults. Brazil
resolutely condemns all acts of violence against
children in situations of armed conflict and expects all
violators to be brought to justice. We are particularly
concerned by the alarming reports that certain parties
that have committed serious Violations against girls and
boys in the context of war may have been omitted from
the lists in the annex to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/409) as a consequence of what many would
consider undue political pressure. It is of paramount
importance that the Office ofthe Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict be allowed to exercise
its responsibilities with independence and objectivity,
free from politicization and within the mandate
established by the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
The abduction of innocent children during armed
conflicts is often linked to some of the worst human-
rights abuses, including sexual slavery, enslavement,
hostage-taking, enforced disappearances, forcible
population transfers and child recruitment. Those
Violations may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity under the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court. They are also tragically frequent. Let
me recall that over 24,000 child abductions during
conflicts have been reported since 2002. While
the crime of abduction is already proscribed under
international humanitarian and human-rights law
and has been included among the six grave violations
against children established by the Council, we believe
there is still room for strengthening our legal and
political framework to tackle serious violations.

Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.

Brazil therefore supports the inclusion of child
abduction among the listing criteria for the annexes to
the Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict. That would send a strong signal to all
would-be perpetrators that abducting girls and boys
is unacceptable conduct under any circumstance. We
expect this issue to be addressed in all future action
plans aimed at preventing violence against children to
be signed by the parties in a conflict situation.

An area in which we are achieving progress,
notwithstanding recent tragic and alarming cases, is
the imperative to prevent attacks against educational
facilities, as well as their use for military purposes.
Brazil was pleased to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration, signed in Oslo last month, in which
38 countries agreed to abide by the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.

As we discuss practical ways to further develop our
legal tools to protect children from the impact of war,
allow me to recall the essential distinction between
armed conflicts, on the one hand, and situations of
domestic law enforcement, on the other. While both
categories are considered in detail in the annual report,
they should not be amalgamated in any way, because
they pertain to different domains. Armed conflicts
and situations that represent a threat to international
peace and security, as established by the Council, are
subject to the norms of international humanitarian
law, such as the obligation on all parties to protect
civilians, including girls and boys. Issues of internal
law enforcement, however, fall clearly outside the
purview of the Security Council and should be tackled
by Governments through national legislation and
international cooperation, with international human-
rights law - including the Convention on the Rights of
the Child - as the paradigm to be followed.

Like others who spoke before me, including the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict herself in her statement
today, I would like to mention Colombia, the only
Latin American country to be referred to in the annual
report. We believe that Colombia's efforts to develop
policies to protect children in armed conflict while at
the same time conducting peace negotiations should
be acknowledged by the United Nations and, perhaps,
better reflected in future reports.

The five most deadly conflicts for children in
2014, according to the annual report, were those of
Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine, Syria and Darfur. There is
an underlying pattern in that dismal list. Most of those
hostilities could have been avoided through inclusive
dialogue, peaceful negotiations, good offices and other
diplomatic measures. Conflict prevention remains the
most ethical and effective approach to shielding all
civilians, including children, from the plight of war.
Conversely, inconsistent strategies that prioritize the
use of force tend to aggravate the suffering of those
whom we ought to protect. That reasoning is also
relevant to our joint efforts against terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. We believe that the
international community should focus its efforts on
addressing the root causes that lead to the emergence of
such extremist groups.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that:

"Recognizing and addressing social deprivation
and alienation of communities, strengthening
efforts to grant access to education and other key
social services will contribute to isolating the
leaders of extremist groups through delegitimizing
their discourse and reducing the numbers who
willingly enlist." (S/2015/409, para. 16)
The Peacebuilding Commission can play a key
role in promoting policies in countries emerging from
conflict so as to foster social cohesion and thereby
render children and youth less vulnerable to recruitment
and abuse, including by terrorist groups.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country's
enduring commitment to the advancement of the
children and armed conflict agenda in the Security
Council and also to the wider debate, in various forums,
on the protection of all girls and boys who suffer from
violence and abuse. This crosscutting concern must
be at the heart of all activities and endeavours of the
United Nations.

