Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate
Ethiopia on having assumed the presidency of the
Council for this month and echo others in welcoming
Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn as President
during this important debate. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Guterres; the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat; and President Ramos-Horta for their
insights in connection with a new trajectory for United
Nations peacekeeping.

This new road map of proposed reforms, aimed at
responding effectively to volatile and multiple old and
new conflicts, will promote the three founding pillars
of peace, development and human rights, with politics
and prevention as key priorities.

Kazakhstan fully supports the significant shift
from conflict resolution to prevention and sustaining
peace, together with structural changes and a new
configuration of United Nations entities. These
suggested changes are aimed at bringing about better
working methods and a better culture and ethos than
those prevailing throughout the peacekeeping chain
from Headquarters to the field.

The use of United Nations diplomacy, mediation
and good offices, in partnership with the efforts of
regional organizations such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Arab League,
will have far-reaching effects.

Kazakhstan is of the view that the new reforms must
ensure that the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
are upheld together with that of statehood, which must
be preserved. At the same time, States are obliged to
fulfil their legal, moral and political responsibility to
ensure the protection of civilians.

New peacekeeping and peacebuilding approaches
require clear and achievable mandates, with qualified
staff, equipment and resources for peacebuilding
work. Moving away from mere military arrangements,
the focus has to be directed towards more coherent
programmes and new partnerships to reduce costs
and lower the overhead expenditures of peacekeeping
operations through intergovernmental support. The
Council should work closely with the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund for sustained,
predictable long-term funding, so that new reforms
can take hold in a context of a strengthened security-
development nexus.

The Security Council and the Secretariat must
interact with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations system and
other partners, including regional organizations, for
more informed decision-making. Other important
stakeholders in this process are international and
national partners, including humanitarian aid agencies
and civil society.

The deployment of regional forces has proved
effective, as illustrated by the hybrid missions of the
United Nations and the African Union. Successful
examples include the Multinational Joint Task Force,
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Regional
Protection Force, because of their familiarity with the
local terrain and militia tactics. Such cooperation should
be strengthened on many other fronts, as indicated
in the 19 April 2017 United Nations-AU partnership
agreement. Collaboration with regional structures
also facilitates concerted action against terrorism,
organized crime, human trafficking and refugee and
migration flows.

Reforms also mean holding United Nations staff
accountable to the highest standards of integrity and
discipline so as to prevent misconduct. In this regard,
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse must be strictly enforced. To demonstrate its
national commitment to this goal, Kazakhstan has
endorsed and signed the Global Compact.

The use of modern technologies, reconnaissance
assets and forces in peacekeeping missions is necessary
to improve the security and safety of United Nations
personnel, humanitarian actors and civilians. However,
judicial and legal considerations have to be taken
into account.

Simultaneously, integrating gender- and youth-
sensitive analyses, as well as encouraging both
groups in the context of the planning, implementing,
evaluating and mission drawdown of all operations,
will definitely yield successful results. More women
need to be deployed in peacekeeping operations, with
gender expertise in every mission component.

Kazakhstan is highly committed to peacekeeping
and will continue to send well-qualified military
observers, augmenting its contribution annually.
Kazakhstan is currently preparing its peacekeeping
unit, building upon the valuable experience gained
during Operation Iraqi Freedom, a decade ago. As an
emerging troop-contributing country, we are constantly
increasing our level of preparedness, as confirmed by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Kazakhstan has established its own peacekeeping
training centre, KAZCENT, which has already been
acknowledged as meeting international norms. We
conduct courses on a regional basis and will strive to
obtain the status ofa regional centre. In that connection,
may I take this opportunity to thank all of our partners
for the tremendous support we are receiving.

Finally, as Kazakhstan prepares for greater
practical engagement in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping, not only do we fully endorse the
proposed reforms, but we also commit to implementing
them in cooperation with the United Nations and other
stakeholders so as to achieve all that we envision.

