Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to start
by expressing my appreciation to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing on the recent developments in the Middle East.
I also thank Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine, and
Mr. David Roet, representative of Israel, for their
respective remarks.

The general situation in the Middle East remains
delicate. The current status in many parts of the region
is not sustainable as it may lead to a spiral of violence,
terrorism and destruction across the Middle East.
Parties and belligerents should therefore understand
that in no way can there be any military solution in the
region. Rather, they should make a serious commitment
to seeking or resuming political talks in order to find
peaceful solutions to all contentious issues within or
between countries of the region.

On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is important
for the leadership in Tel Aviv and Ramallah, with the
support of such key stakeholders as the United States,
the Quartet and the League of Arab States, to keep up
the momentum of the talks aimed at achieving a two-
State solution for two peoples living side by side in
peace and security. The parties should make additional
efforts to resume direct and genuine negotiations while
refraining from all provocative actions that would derail
the current process. In that respect, Rwanda believes
that the sustainable solution to the outstanding issues
must be negotiated in good faith and that any unilateral
action may further complicate the current situation.

On Gaza, the humanitarian situation remains a
cause for concern. Rwanda welcomes the outcome of
the Cairo donor conference for the reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip held on 12 October. We commend the
Governments of Norway and Egypt for successfully
co-hosting the conference, which achieved even more
than expected. We hope that pledges made in Cairo will
soon be kept and have a concrete impact on the ground.
We take this opportunity to call on other donors and
international partners to join the international effort to
rebuild Gaza.

In the same vein, we welcome the recent trilateral
agreement between Israel, the Palestinian Authority and
the United Nations to enable them to work at the scale
required in the Strip, involving the Gaza private sector
and giving a leading role to the Palestinian Authority
in the reconstruction efforts, with the hope that the
construction materials will not be diverted from their
civilian purpose. Furthermore, we call upon the parties
to continue to uphold the commitments contained in the
Gaza ceasefire agreement brokered by Egypt in August
this year. We believe that a sustained implementation
of the commitments will allow people's livelihoods in
Gaza to be restored, but even more importantly it will
provide the trust and political environment needed to
reach a larger and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question.

With respect to Syria, it is unfortunate that military
confrontation continues to escalate to dangerous levels
and that the three-and-a-half-year conflict has claimed
the lives of over 190,000 people, with 10.8 million
people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
As we look forward to the briefing to the Council by
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura focusing on possible
avenues to end conflict in Syria, we reiterate our call
on all the concerned parties to resume the Geneva 11
peace talks, which is the only possible way to end the
political crisis with its dramatic security, human rights
and humanitarian consequences.

However, it is clear that political talks with terrorist
and/or genocidal forces should never be envisaged. In
that context, Rwanda reiterates its firm support for
the ongoing fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which commits mass atrocities
against civilians, beheads journalists and humanitarian
workers and persecutes religious minorities, including
Christians and Yazidis. We believe that it is important
that the Security Council, which has always been
unanimous in its fight against terrorism-most recently
in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) - support
the coalition led by the United States aimed at
degrading and ultimately defeating ISIL. The fight to
save the population of the Syrian town of Kobani from
barbaric extermination, which is going on even as
we speak, should be a reaffirmation of our collective
responsibility to protect.

The situation in Lebanon remains severely affected
by the conflict in Syria, with cross-border shelling,
arms smuggling and further influxes of refugees. The
involvement of different Lebanese armed groups in the
Syrian conflict, violating the Lebanese Government's
dissociation policy, has raised tensions, leading to
sectarian violence mainly along the Lebanese-Syrian
border areas that have claimed civilian lives and seen
the kidnapping of members of the Lebanese Armed
Forces.

We commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for
containing threats to the country's security and
stability, and we reiterate our call on all parties in
Lebanon to continue to uphold the Baabda declaration
and its dissociation policy.

In same vein, Rwanda also welcomes the
announcement of new assistance to the Lebanese
army and encourages further assistance in priority
areas. However, Rwanda expresses its concern over
the prolonged vacancy in the presidency for over
four months now, which increases the country's
vulnerability in facing the mounting security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. We express
our appreciation for the efforts of Prime Minister
Salam and his Government in ensuring stability in the
country. We hope that the parties in Lebanon, with the
support of the countries of the region, will overcome
their differences and put an end to this constitutional
gridlock.

To conclude, I would wish to recall that for all
conflicts and crises in the Middle East, the genuine
resolve and unwavering support of those who have
real influence on the parties are prerequisites for any
progress or breakthrough. It is therefore critical that
regional and world Powers remain committed and
coordinated so as to ensure lasting peace in the Middle
East.

