Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Since we joined the Council in January 2013 and on
numerous occasions, Argentina has supported the
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court so that the Court could impartially
exercise its jurisdiction with regard to all parties to one
of the most cruel, atrocious and overwhelming realities
of our time.

Allowing the perpetuation of impunity to be
the response to the crimes committed by all parties
in Syria corrodes not only the ethical, political and
legal foundations of the United Nations, but also the
Council's responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. It is untenable and even offensive today
to seek to present a false dichotomy between peace
and justice. We have all learned that there is no justice
without peace and that peace is endangered without
justice.

Following our political resolve, our ethical
responsibility and our respect for international law,
Argentina voted in favour of the referral of the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. Our
sole, firm and clear objective was the investigation
and prosecution by the Court of perpetrators of the
grave crimes idenfitied in the Rome Statute and the
recognition of the inalienable rights of their victims
to truth, memory, justice and reparation. At the same
time, Argentina decided not to be a sponsor of the
initiative, because it was also our objective to preserve
the integrity of the Statute, which requires referrals to
the Council to be formulated in the appropriate terms so
as not to undermine the legal foundations of the Rome
Statute itself or the Court's validity and effectiveness.

On the one hand, it would seem that once again
we are to accept as normal the exercise of selective
justice. We should not be surprised that in comparable
situations where heinous crimes are committed, some
are considered appropriate to be referred to the Court
while others are not. On the other hand, there seems
to be an attempt to make us believe that undermining
the integrity of legal instruments in no way hinders
the objective of achieving justice. In some cases,
transcendent values are invoked, whereas in others
sophisticated arguments are brought into play, although
they mainly lean on the pragmatic principle that the end
justifies the means. We have learned from experience,
however, that not every means leads to the desired end.

For Argentina and many other Member States,
neither the normalization of arbitrary behaviour, nor
legal regression nor pragmatism without values are
valid options. In our view, every heinous crime must
be subject to justice, wherever it may be committed and
whoever its perpetrators may be. Just as with human
rights, we cannot claim to respect some but not to
recognize others. We cannot maintain that we defend
the applicability of some provisions of a norm, but not
its entirety.

In 2005, when the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005), referring the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court, Argentina, as an elected
member of the Council at the time, maintained that
certain elements of the resolution should not become
permanent. However, today, we face the same scenario,
since the draft text before us reflects the intention
to refer only certain individuals, allows exemptions
regarding the scope of the jurisdiction of the Court
and the obligation to cooperate with it, and includes
a paragraph stating that the Council recognizes that
expenses incurred in connection with the referral will
not be borne by the United Nations but by the States
parties to the Rome Statute or through voluntary
contributions, thereby contradicting the provision of
the Statute. Is it necessary to recall that the Security
Council has the authority to compel all Members of
the United Nations, both parties and non-parties to
the Rome Statute, to cooperate with the Court? It is
disappointing that the Council does not put that ethical
obligation into practice.

With regard to exceptions of jurisdiction for
States not party to the Statute and the lack of United
Nations funding for referrals, I must mention not only
Argentina's strong objection to such provisions but also
our understanding of the outcome, including for the
two previous referrals. In accordance with the Rome
Statute, in a referral the Court exercises its jurisdiction
over nationals of parties and non-parties to the Rome
Statute. The Security Council does not have the power
to declare an amendment to the Statute in order to grant
immunity to nationals of States non-parties who commit
crimes under the Statute in a situation referred to the
Court. That is to say, nothing in the text of paragraph
7 or of any other paragraph of the draft resolution on
which we have just voted would have had the power
to amend the standard of the Statute with regard to the
Court's jurisdiction in a given situation or the fact that
ifa decision is needed, the Court is ultimately the judge
ofits own jurisdiction.

With regard to the funding for referrals, the
provision in paragraph 8 is not in accordance with the
Rome Statute and the Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court; Relationship Agreement. It is blatantly unfair.
Argentina disagrees with the Council's claim that the
expenses of the referrral will not be met by the United
Nations. The Council cannot assume powers that it
does not possess, such as that of deciding the funding
of the referral. Under the Charter of the United Nations,
that is within the General Assembly's jurisdiction. That
is also clear in paragraph 8, which refers to General
Assembly resolution 67/295. When it considers it
timely, the General Assembly therefore can, under
the Relationship Agreement, decide on the funding of
referrals made by the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to say that this is an
extremely sensitive and regrettable meeting. What
we should have done in good faith and failed to do by
speaking with one voice was in the end achieved through
powerlessness. Countless victims have heard that the
Council was unable to reach agreement on putting an
end to the deadly violence, eliminating the humiliating
impunity or helping to restore the lost peace in Syria.

However, the noble task and functioning of the ICC
in a multilateral system that seeks to end impunity,
establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve a lasting peace
in accordance with international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
stated in the Kampala Declaration, does not allow us to
believe that we will never achieve what we have been
unable to do so to date. There is too much injustice for
us not to be fully confident that the Security Council
sooner rather than later will change its perception of
power and its way of working.

