Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I am very grateful to the delegation of the Kingdom
of Morocco for convening today's open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their statements.

As we said in our statement in the most recent
debate on this topic in July (see S/PV.6805), we
understand that the Security Council has a central
role to play in organizing support for post-conflict
countries, promoting the building of lasting peace and
an environment conducive to comprehensive ongoing
development, based on the rule of law, respect for
fundamental rights and the progressive collective
exercise ofhuman, civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights, as well as promoting the strengthening
of democratic institutions. The task is one of the
greatest challenges the international community faces
today, and one to which my country attaches particular
importance.

We believe that, when confronted with those
challenges, it is necessary to support post-conflict
strategies based on three elements. First is the principle
of national responsibility in peacebuilding activities,
based on the protection and promotion of human rights,
guaranteeing the involvement of the societal sectors
concerned throughout the reconstruction process, and
honouring the priorities of local authorities, in such a
way as ensure broad, inclusive, pluralistic discussions
that will lead to engagement in collaborative actions
aimed at addressing post-conflict challenges directly,
effectively and in a legitimate manner.

Secondly, the role that the United Nations plays in
peacebuilding, which is to coordinate all international
assistance, is an element that is indispensable to the
success of peacebuilding efforts and to peacekeeping
efforts as well. Thirdly, we point out the role of regional
and subregional organizations, in accordance with the
provision of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and the need
to strengthen the capacities of regional systems in order
to support countries that need to recover and rebuild
after a conflict.

Considering those elements, we appreciate the
usefulness of the Secretary-General's latest report
on post-conflict peacebuilding (S/2012/746). We
particularly note the progress made in implementing
the programme proposed by the Secretary-General in
2009, which sought to make the United Nations capable
of more coherent, timely and effective responses
to peacebuilding needs, by, among other things,
encouraging greater interaction and collaboration
between United Nations teams on the ground and
strengthening ties with regional organizations.

Despite that progress, it is clear that a long road lies
ahead. For example, in the matter of women and peace
and security, we share the Secretary-General's concern
about the slow pace of progress in implementing his plan
of action on women's participation in peacebuilding
initiatives in the various countries concerned. That
is not only a matter of ethical and legal principles. It
is a matter of noting and embracing practices known
to foster coherence and effectiveness in restoring
lasting and sustainable peace as well as in promoting
sustainable development. We also call attention to the
need to include young people and to respect the right of
children to participate and be heard in those processes.

On the other hand, we see a positive trend in
providing civil capacities to affected countries,
opening the way for innovative approaches to technical
cooperation and for strengthening South-South
cooperation.

We agree with the Secretary-General about the
need to give greater attention to an inclusive approach
to peacebuilding, with full national involvement in
building lasting peace. However, we should all recall
something that we in Argentina know from our
own experience, namely, that no strategy aimed at
achieving genuine reconciliation can succeed unless
it incorporates the principles of truth, memory, justice
and reparation, and rejects impunity for any perpetrator
of serious, heinous violations of human rights in the
course of the conflict we are trying to recover from.

Lastly, about the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we join the Secretary-General's call to
strengthen the work of the Commission to promote
greater coherence and to adapt donors' support
to national peacebuilding plans. We also support
strengthened relations between the Commission and the
Security Council, including through interactive dialogue
before the renewal of United Nations peacebuilding
mission mandates, so that the Commission can fulfil
the assessment role assigned to it by the United Nations
and the Council can benefit more from the experience
that the Commission has to offer.

Finally, we express our solidarity with and respect
for the work of the non-permanent members who are
coming to the end of their terms on the Council. As
Argentina is about to embark on a term itself, we also
pledge our country's commitment to fulfilling the
responsibility to build on our accumulated common
experience to help the Council strengthen, maintain and
revitalize its mission, which is to maintain international
peace and security.

