Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation shares the concern over
developments in the situation in Sierra Leone.

The activities of the fighters of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) have brought the peace process in that
country to the brink of collapse. Today, when the air is
heavy with renewed fighting in Sierra Leone, stirring up
memories within the international community that have not
even had time to fade - memories of acts of inconceivable
cruelty with which the eight-year history of the conflict is
rife - we call on the leadership of the RUF to think again,
to cease violating the Lome Peace Agreement and, together
with other political forces in the country, to help overcome
the consequences of this conflict. At the same, we deem it
necessary to remind the RUF leaders that the amnesty
provided for in the Lome Peace Agreement does not extend
to crimes committed after its signing.

Events in Sierra Leone have challenged the
peacekeeping operation which the Security Council
authorized in support of implementation by the parties of
the commitments they freely agreed to in the Lome
Agreement. The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) has suffered losses. United Nations
peacekeepers have been captured by bandits, as has been a
Russian military observer. We convey our condolences to
the families of those who have given their lives for peace
in Sierra Leone, which has suffered so terribly. We firmly
demand the release of detained United Nations and other
international personnel.

The mandate given UNAMSIL in Security Council
resolution 1289 (2000) allows sufficiently strong measures
to be taken to ensure the safety of international personnel
in the country and of the Government of Sierra Leone. Of
key importance here is the effective exercise by the military
contingent of its mandate. In this connection, we attach
paramount importance to the speedy increase of the
numbers of UNAMSIL to 11,100 soldiers and officers, as
approved in resolution 1289 (2000). Russia and the United
Nations are currently addressing the practical issues of
providing an airlift to Sierra Leone for additional units
being made available to UNAMSIL and of sending a
number of Russian military helicopters to Sierra Leone.

We have no doubt that UNAMSIL - which, once
fully deployed, will become the largest United Nations
peacekeeping contingent - will be able to stabilize the
situation in the country. This will create the necessary
conditions for the Council calmly to consider the various
options for overcoming the crisis in Sierra Leone.
Without excluding any options, we continue to believe
that no peacekeeping operation, including a peace-
enforcement operation, can replace a political settlement
of the conflict, which is possible only if the parties have
the political will.

