Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-GeneralJean-PierreLacroix,Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and Mr. Festus
Mogae for their very comprehensive briefings.

Poland is deeply concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The
humanitarian situation is extremely disturbing.
One-third of the population has been displaced, with
over 2 million seeking refuge in neighbouring countries
and nearly half of the population estimated to be
experiencing severe food insecurity. It is humanitarian
aid that keeps people alive. Poland therefore strongly
insists on ensuring full and safe access for humanitarian
actors in the country.

As in any other conflict, women and children
suffer the most and are exposed on a daily basis to
acts of violence, including ethnically motivated and
gender-based violence. I would like to underline that
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians lies
with the Government, and it is the Government that
must take concrete action to alleviate their suffering.
All parties have to comply with their obligations under
international law and put an end to the violations and
abuses of human rights. It is of critical importance that
are part is implement the Agreement on the Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access. We encourage the authorities to build credible
and sustainable institutions based on the principle of
good governance.

There can be no other solution to the crisis in
South Sudan than a genuine and inclusive political
process. In that regard, Poland supports the High-level
Revitalization Forum led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which we see as the
most viable initiative for peace at this time. We hope
that the second phase of the forum will serve as vehicle
for developing sustainable arrangements on power-
sharing, governance and security in South Sudan. We
call on all parties to engage in good faith and to deliver
on their commitments.

While we understand that the IGAD High-level
Revitalization Forum is a process and not an event, we
would like to stress that it cannot be an open-ended
process that drags on indefinitely while the population
suffers. We fully agree with the policy of bringing the
perpetrators of war crimes or crimes against humanity
to justice. The Security Council should stand ready to
take more decisive steps, in coordination with IGAD
and members of the African Union.

Poland commends the efforts of UNMISS, which
plays a critical role in protecting civilians, and looks
forward to the finalization of the strategic review of
the UNMISS mandate. We find it deeply regrettable
that UNMISS continues to face several difficulties in
delivering on its mandate. We would like to stress that
the harassment of United Nations staff and restrictions
on their movement are unacceptable. We also note
with regret the level of deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and call on the Government to
facilitate is completion.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our appeal to
all South Sudanese parties to engage in genuine political
dialogue and to work constructively with international
partners towards the aim of bringing peace and stability
to the population, who have suffered over the past five
years more than more than anyone ever should.

