Mr. Roet (Israel): Allow me to take this opportunity
to congratulate Uruguay onjoining the Security Council
and on acceding to the presidency this month. We are
quite aware of how difficult it is to be a President of the
Security Council, but even more so in one's first month
of membership. We wish you good luck, Sir, and give
you our thanks.

Let me start by quoting the Force Commander of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda,
Major General Rome'o Dallaire, in his haunting account
of the Rwandan genocide:

"[T]he worst eyes that haunt me are the eyes of
those people who were totally bewildered. They're
looking at me with my blue beret and they're saying,
'What in the hell happened? We were moving
towards peace. You were there as the guarantor.
How come I'm dying here?' Those eyes dominated
and they're absolutely right. How come my mission
failed?"

Twenty-one years have passed since the Rwandan
genocide, but the mission of protecting civilians remains
a pressing challenge and a primary responsibility ofthe
international community. Over the past decade, the
number of people in need of international humanitarian
assistance has tripled. The overwhelming majority of
those people are civilians affected by armed conflict
and other stressful emergencies. Today, men and
women in numerous places around the world are at risk.
Civilians have become pawns in a game in which State
and non- State actors use them to gain political leverage.
Attacks directed at civilians have become depressingly
routine, and we receive daily reports of new atrocities
that shake the human conscience.

Nowhere in the world is the situation more
heartbreaking than in Syria. Al-Assad's murderous
regime has been attacking and killing civilians by
the hundreds of thousands. Despite the fact that the
Security Council has adopted numerous resolutions
demanding that the Syrian Government allow free
access for United Nations humanitarian aid, attempts
to deliver cross-border and cross-line humanitarian aid
are being impeded because of the challenging security
and operational environment. In the meantime, people
continue to suffer.

We have all witnessed the struggle of the people of
the Syrian town of Madaya, where 42,000 people have
been taken hostage by Al-Assad and his Hizbullah allies.
The town and its people are under siege and surrounded
by barbed wire, land mines and snipers. Left without
basic access to food, men, women and children have
been dying on a daily basis due to starvation and the
harsh winter weather. They find themselves resorting
to eating household pets and making soup from grass.
A Cable News Network report on Syria described the
situation on the ground: "The starvation here is no act
of God - not the result of drought or flooding or crop
failure. This famine is man-made."

Let me state the obvious. The use of starvation as a
weapon of war is deplorable, and it is a war crime. The
dire situation in Madaya is an example that has captured
public attention, but it is estimated that this is merely
a tenth of the number of those stranded in besieged or
hard-to-reach areas as conditions grow steadily worse.
Hizbullah, the enforcer of Iranian and Syrian orders,
the recruiter of children to fight in Syria, is the prime
organization terrorizing the people of Madaya. That
should not come as a surprise. Terrorizing civilian
populations is part of Hizbullah's modus operandi.
This is what they do. Israel has warned time and time
again that letting Hizbullah's actions go unchecked will
only result in more death, pain and suffering. Over the
course of years, Hizbullah has been indiscriminately
firing rockets towards heavily populated areas in Israel,
while using the people of southern Lebanon as human
shields.

One example is the southern Lebanese village
of Muhaybib, where Hizbullah has moved military
infrastructure into that and other villages in the
surrounding area. Those villages, where innocent
civilians go about their daily lives, have been
transformed into military bases. Who speaks for these
people? Who protects these people from Hizbullah?
According to recent reports, the village, consisting
of 90 houses in total, contains no less than nine arms
depots, five rocket launch sites, four infantry positions,
three underground tunnels, three anti-tank positions
and a command post. Let me again state the obvious.
Deliberately putting the lives of innocent civilians in
harm's way is a war crime.

As Uruguay is a new member of the Security
Council, I would like to inform you, Mr. President,
that unfortunately the threat to the lives of Lebanese
and Israeli civilians alike is rarely mentioned in the
Chamber. It is the responsibility ofthe Security Council
to identify rising threats and to prevent such situations
from escalating. The Security Council should send a
clear message to Hizbullah, as well as to Lebanon, that
this cannot be tolerated. The tactic of taking civilian
populations hostage for political and military advantage
has steadily become a primary method ofwaging war by
States and non-State actors. Protecting civilians under
such circumstances, while holding non-State actors to
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
is our biggest collective challenge.

Reviewing the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), we are
encouraged that it recognizes that, in cases of imminent
threat, the United Nations must rise to the challenge
of protecting civilians. Furthermore, recognizing
the linkage between a wider political approach and
the United Nations responsibility towards civilians
will enable the setting of realistic mandates with a
possibility of implementation and plan of action.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to the
brave men and women peacekeepers who have lost their
lives while serving in the most dangerous places on the
globe. To those who continue to serve, let me reiterate
Israel's appreciation for their work. They have had a
life-changing impact on millions of people that are in
dire need of protection.

Next week the General Assembly will mark the
International Day of Commemoration in memory of
the victims of the Holocaust. We know all too well
the horrors that humankind is capable of. Promises
have been made, yet the international community has
failed at too many junctures. We must fulfil what we
promised 70 years ago - never again. We must not
allow dictators and terrorist organizations to dictate the
rules of the game. Too many lives are at stake. That is
the message the Council should send today.

