Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
Ms. Ameerah Haq on her first briefing to the Council
in her new capacity as Special Representative. I would
also like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, and to thank him for his statement.

We are very pleased with the positive
developments in Timor-Leste over the course of the
past year. The security situation has remained generally
calm and the success of the suco elections
demonstrated the growing trust of the people in
democratic governance. Progress has also been made in
the area of capacity-building.

The issue of internally displaced persons is one of
those remaining since the 2006 crisis and is being dealt
with, and we are hopeful of an early satisfactory
solution of that pending issue. We applaud the efforts
of the Government and the people of Timor-Leste. We
are also grateful for the indispensable role that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the countries concerned have played in

support of Timor-Leste's efforts to achieve such
progress.

Yet, we should remind ourselves that even a calm
situation may contain a hint of fragility. It is essential
to continue to ensure security, for instance, so as to
conduct municipal elections in a free, fair and safe
manner later this year. In that regard, a key task of
UNMIT is to support the Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste (PNTL) in steadily resuming the policing
responsibility. We welcome PNTL assumption of
responsibility in four districts and three units last year.
We hope that steady progress will continue to be made
throughout this year.

However, we should not rush the process by
setting a rigid timeline before the National Police
acquire the necessary capacity. The transfer of policing
responsibility should be based on an assessment of the
capacity of the local police and objective criteria.
Therefore, we support the Secretary-General's prudent
approach to reconfiguring the UNMIT police
component. The downsizing of the police should take
place on a district-by-district basis and on the basis of
an assessment of the capacity in each district.

The focus of the United Nations police is
naturally shifting to its role in training and mentoring
the PNTL, which is expected to carry the primary
responsibility for public security. Here, I would like to
stress the importance for the Government to lay out
clearly the future vision and orientation of the
PNTL - what kind of national police it would like to
develop, for instance, with emphasis on community
policing.

Timor-Leste is at a critical juncture in its efforts
to consolidate its achievements and to pave the way for
self-sufficiency and sustainable development. As I
have stressed on many occasions, the security and
durable stability of any country, including Timor-Leste,
can be achieved only with the corresponding
socio-economic development. As UNMIT carries out
its mandate, integrated peacebuilding efforts should be
accelerated.

In that regard, I applaud Prime Minister
Gusmao's leadership in preparing a National Strategic
Development Plan to advance socio-economic
development, given the lack of economic opportunities
for the young population. I believe that vocational
training and job creation should be given the highest
priority in the Timorese Development Strategy.

10-2486]

I also stress the importance of rural development,
agriculture and infrastructure, such as roads and water
resources, in the 2010 national priorities. All
resources - domestic and external, bilateral and
multilateral, public and private - should be mobilized
to support those priority activities.

The presence of UNMIT is an essential
stabilizing factor for Timor-Leste. The various
contributions of the members of UNMIT are greatly
appreciated. We therefore support the extension of
UNMIT's mandate for another 12 months, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. We believe
that the Security Council should begin discussing in
due time the future role of the United Nations in the
country. As a lead country in Timor-Leste, we suggest
organizing a Security Council mission some time this
year to make the review process meaningful in defining
the future role of the United Nations as the critical year
of 2012 approaches.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
continued commitment to standing by the Timorese
people in their nation-building effort.

