Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in from Spanish): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on organizing this
open debate, the culmination of your active and skilful
presidency this month.

I first thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the
comprehensive information he has provided this
afternoon. His presentation clearly shows the
magnitude of the excellent work done by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) over the past few months. I particularly
highlight the initiatives taken to make sure that the
Timorese increasingly shoulder the responsibility of
the day to day running of their affairs. The institutions
set up by UNTAET, in consultation with
representatives of the local population, will be very
useful, bringing an increasing degree of autonomy to
East Timor, leading to independence. We trust that
these and other measures that Mr. Vieira de Mello has
told us about will lay the foundations for elections in
the middle of next year in preparation for East Timor's
accession to full independence.

Turning to another matter, I must express our
concern about the recent violence in East Timor and
particularly the attacks on United Nations forces. I
congratulate UNTAET on having responded decisively.
In future, in the context of the robust mandate given by
the Council, the United Nations forces should take all
the measures at their disposal to defend themselves
against any hostile act by the militias.

I would also like to restate the Argentine
Government's strong condemnation of the brutal
murder of staff of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on 6 September in
Atambua. As the Council knows, my country attaches
the greatest importance to the protection of United
Nations personnel and associated staff. We are
convinced that States must guarantee the security and
personal integrity conditions needed for such personnel
to do their duty. Brutal events such as those in
Atambua cannot be tolerated. They must be punished
immediately and firmly.

In this connection, it is clear that the current
problems in West Timor spring from two closely
related and mutually reinforcing questions: the
presence of refugees and the activity of the militias. On
previous occasions we have said that measures must be
taken immediately so that refugees wishing to do so
may return to East Timor, and that those remaining
should be resettled elsewhere on Indonesian territory.
Today we add a request that the refugee camps in West
Timor be dismantled as soon as possible, thus ending a
situation that has lasted for over a year. At the same
time, the militias must be truly disbanded, not simply
disarmed.

On 19 September the Coordinating Minister for
Political, Social and Security Affairs of the
Government of Indonesia, Mr. Susilo Yudhoyono,
informed the Council about some of the initiatives
taken by the Indonesian Government in connection
with the two matters I have just mentioned. We have
heard that the disarming of the militias has indeed
started but has encountered some difficulties. We
support all the efforts made by Indonesia to disarm the
militias, as a preliminary step to their being disbanded.
We hope that this can take place on the basis of
persuasion, but if that is not possible it is incumbent
upon Indonesia to use force. No effort must be spared
to complete this process in the shortest possible time.
We believe that the Indonesian Government should be
given whatever assistance it needs to bring this about.

In the light of what I have said, we place great
hopes in the visit of Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mr.
Shihab to New York on 11 and 12 October, when we
hope to be able to discuss with him every aspect of the
implementation of resolution 1319 (2000) and of
deciding a date and mandate for a mission to be sent by
the Council to Indonesia to study progress in
implementing the resolution and to support and assist
the Government of Indonesia in bringing about full
compliance with it.

Finally, Ijoin previous speakers in conveying to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the staff of UNTAET
the gratitude and appreciation of the Argentine
Government for their unfailing courage, dedication and
perseverance.

