Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

Recent events in the Palestinian occupied
territories and in Israel and the resulting loss of
innocent lives have proven to be more tragic than
anyone could have imagined. The situation has now
reached desperate proportions and clearly constitutes a
threat to the stability of the region and international
peace and security. These events are taking place in the
context of a world changed by the events of 11
September and the resulting renewed vigour of the
international community in the search for global peace.

My delegation is therefore disheartened that in
relation to the situation in the Middle East, the Security
Council has failed to take any formal action since
September 2000. At that time, in resolution 1322
(2000), the Council called, inter alia, for the immediate
cessation of violence and for all steps to be taken to
ensure that the cycle of violence was brought to an end.
The Council also committed itself to fully supporting
the role of the Secretary-General in facilitating the
peace process, and we wish to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his continued efforts to
bring peace to the region through the use of his good
offlces.

We also take the opportunity to express our
appreciation to those countries and organizations which
have sought to play a mediating role. But as the
situation continues to deteriorate, it is crucial for the
Security Council to carry out its Charter
responsibilities. We must continue to encourage the
parties to move from the brink of total chaos back to
the negotiating table. It is my delegation's firm
conviction that it is the Security Council's
responsibility - indeed, its duty - to be engaged on
this issue, and that the international community expects
no less from the Council in keeping with its mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

The provisions of the Sharm El-Sheikh agreement
and the recommendations of the Mitchell report remain
the best basis on which to move the peace process
forward. In this regard, the parties should immediately
take steps towards implementing their commitments on
the basis of their previous agreements. We also support
the call for the establishment of a monitoring
mechanism, as it would serve the interests of the
parties in their implementation of the recommendations
of the Mitchell report and help to create a better
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We continue to support the sending of an observer
force to the Palestinian territories. We still believe that
the deployment of such a force could act as a deterrent
to further violence and serve as a confidence-building
measure between the parties.

Jamaica reiterates its unqualified support for
efforts to achieve a just and lasting settlement within
the framework of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and based on the principle of
land for peace. Action by the Security Council will
clearly demonstrate our resolve to assist in the peace
process. The draft resolution presented to us by Egypt
and Tunisia, inter alia, demands the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence, provocation and
destruction, as well as the return to the positions and
arrangements which existed prior to September 2000. It
also condemns all acts of terror, in particular those
targeting civilians, and condemns all acts of
extrajudiciary executions, excessive use of force and
wide destruction of properties.

In this context, Jamaica fully supports the draft
resolution contained in document S/2001/1199 and will
vote in favour of its adoption.

