Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): France pays tribute to the Secretary-General for
the report that he has prepared. It is remarkable in two
ways. On the one hand it contains precise and honest
analyses of realities and of past experience and also
makes useful and well-founded proposals; on the other, it
is remarkable in its timeliness: at a moment when Africa
is in transition to a search for peace and sustainable
development, the report attests to the interest and
involvement of the United Nations.

 

A week ago, the Secretary-General told us that he
wanted his report to mark a new beginning in relations
between the United Nations and Africa. We share that wish.

The Secretary-General has drawn a varied picture of
the situation in Africa. What has been called "Afro-
pessimism" was able - and is still able - to feed on
statistics about conflicts and their cortege of tragedies,
refugees, the development of per capita income, major
pandemics and desertification. As a counterpoint, however,
we must note all the positive and encouraging
developments: some crises have been contained before they
degenerated, thanks to preventive action; lasting solutions
have been found to some conflicts; and many African
countries have made real efforts to achieve democracy and
good governance and in recent years have seen sustained
growth.

As the Secretary-General recalled, much depends on
Africans themselves. However, this does not exempt the
United Nations and States outside the continent from
continuing action that benefits Africa.

It is true that in recent years some events have led us
to wonder whether the United Nations was not tempted to
abandon Africa to its own fate. In the area of conflict
prevention and settlement, the unfortunate experience in
Somalia led to a clear hesitation to be involved on the
ground. Such reservations and fears were then confirmed in
Rwanda, where very few States came forward to act, as
well as in the east of former Zaire and in Congo
(Brazzaville).
The action of the United Nations and its Member
States should, however, support the efforts made by the
African countries themselves to resolve their problems. This
applies first of all to the resources made available for
conflict prevention. It is necessary to strengthen cooperation
and coordination among the different levels concerned: the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity and
regional organizations or initiatives. It is in this spirit that
France will this year provide assistance of $1 million to the
Organization of African Unity for its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.

But the growing role of regional organizations and
initiatives must be backed by the United Nations and the
Security Council so that the concerns and just interests of
all of the Members of the Organization can prevail. Several
recent examples demonstrate the importance and
effectiveness of good coordination between the United
Nations and bodies at the regional level: the competent
African mediation in the Central African Republic and the
actions of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in Sierra Leone show how such bodies
turned to the United Nations to obtain support.

The Secretary-General underlines the importance of
sanctions as an instrument for applying pressure, but he
also notes the humanitarian problems that their application
poses. He believes that sanctions must be targeted well.
How could we not share that concern?

The Secretary-General has expressed concern about
the flow of arms. The question of illicit arms transfers, in
particular small arms, is crucial. Several African countries
have taken courageous steps that deserve support. In this
respect we should pay tribute to the initiative of Mali.

The United Nations has played a positive role in
Africa with regard to peacekeeping, particularly in
Namibia, Mozambique and Angola. The Secretary-
General believes that all options must be kept open, as
particular situations demand. These range from complex
and multidisciplinary peacekeeping operations to simple
observer missions. The financial constraints, however
important they might be, must not become the
determining factor in decision-making.

In the same spirit, there can be a complementary
relationship between the United Nations and multinational
forces. In the Central African Republic, the Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB), having successfully fulfilled its
own mandate, handed over to the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINURCA), which has
a broader mandate.
The essential element is the capacity and will of
Member States to respond to the needs of the moment. As
the Secretary-General has often forcefully stressed,
Member States must show the political will to act and to
give the United Nations the financial, material and human
resources to intervene.

In this spirit, it is important to strengthen the
capacities of African States to play their part in
peacekeeping in the world, especially in Africa. That was
the intent of the initiative presented jointly last year by
France, the United Kingdom and the United States, which
is aimed at coordinating international cooperation in this
field under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity.

 

The effort of France to strengthen African capacity for
peacekeeping will this year amount to approximately $40
million. This includes assistance to African countries for
training in peacekeeping, including the opening, in
cooperation with Cote d'Ivoire, of an international training
centre; the deployment in Dakar of equipment that can be
used by all the States of the region for training and for
peacekeeping operations; and the organization in February
1998 by several West African States and France of a
multinational peacekeeping exercise involving contingents
from Africa and other continents.

This encouragement by France for a multinational
treatment of security problems in Africa is also reflected in
its concrete support for peacekeeping operations. That is
why my country provided logistical and financial support to
MISAB for 15 months and why we are providing a
logistical contribution of more than 200 troops to
MINURCA.

The Secretary-General expresses legitimate concerns
about the problems of human rights and humanitarian
assistance. It clearly remains unrealistic to believe that, with
regard to fundamental rights, all countries can progress at
the same pace. It is nevertheless essential to avoid creating
the impression that in this area the United Nations would
tolerate a double standard. That would cause lasting damage
to its credibility and authority.

As for refugees, the Secretary-General rightly believes
that their rights and safety must be assured, and that is it
also necessary to ensure the security of the host countries
and to help them to deal with the sometimes considerable
problems caused by the flow of refugees. We must also
avoid refugees being used by any side as a pretext for
political or military action whose goals are unrelated to the
fate of the refugees. In this respect we must take into
consideration the proposals of the Secretary-General.

We pay tribute to the remarkable work done in Africa
by humanitarian organizations, in particular the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We
believe that all States have a duty to facilitate and help their
action on the ground.

The Secretary-General rightly points out that in many
cases a lasting solution to instability and conflict comes
through the establishment of a sound basis for State
administration and the functioning of the economy.

The establishment of a State based on the rule of law,
which requires clear rules, transparency in administration,
a judicial system that functions normally, respect for
commitments and the payment of public and private
debts, cannot in our view be separated from lasting
democratization. It is gratifying to note that several States
are already embarked on this course.

In countries that have experienced internal conflict,
particular attention must be given to national
reconciliation. Only this can make it possible to re-
establish the foundations for common life, which is an
indispensable prerequisite for ensuring lasting peace. It is
necessary to find a balance between majority rule, which
is fundamental in a democracy, and the equally necessary
respect for the rights of those people who belong to
minorities.

Good governance has to a significant degree become
one of the central themes of international cooperation,
particularly through the action of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Organization of African
Unity. The Nineteenth Conference of Heads of State of
France and Africa, held in Ouagadougou in December
1996 and which gathered together 46 heads of State and
Government or their representatives, was devoted to this
topic. The action led by France at a bilateral level and
within the European Union is increasingly aimed at
consolidating the progress of democracy and the rule of
law.

The Secretary-General emphasizes all the reforms
that must be adopted by African States in order to lay the
foundations for sustained growth and lasting development.
He is right to stress the importance of social development.
The success of a policy cannot be gauged only by the
"fundamentals" and financial indicators. There can be no
real peace and development without a substantial rise in
levels of education and training, an improvement in health
care systems and a fair distribution of the fruits of
growth.
The responsibility rests primarily with the African
States, but that does not free other countries of their
obligations.

In this context, how can we not share the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General about the brutal
reduction in assistance for Africa in recent years?
Assistance for development is an indispensable
complement to the policies of the African countries, and
it must be sufficient and effective. This is of particular
concern with respect to the least developed countries,
three quarters of which are African.

 

For its part, France will maintain its own assistance
effort. It is devoting almost 0.5 per cent of its gross
national product, or $7.5 billion in 1996, to official
development assistance, of which half is allocated to Africa,
making France the largest donor to that continent. France
has taken important steps to write off debts for the poorest
and most indebted countries of sub-Saharan Africa. It has
recently decided to adapt its cooperation and development
aid measures to make them more effective and more
coherent.

In international forums, France has unceasingly
advocated an active solidarity with Africa: at the G-7
Summit in Lyon in June 1996, France called upon the most
industrialized countries to increase their aid to Africa and
managed to have a new global partnership defined among
developing countries, developed countries and multilateral
institutions. On that occasion, we also contributed to the
launching of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative and successfully advocated a substantial increase
in the percentage of debt relief granted by the Paris Club.
During the annual meetings of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in the spring of 1997, France
defended the need for a flexible implementation of the Debt
Initiative, making it possible to take the specific situation
of each poor country into account. Within the European
Union, France worked in 1995 to have loans made available
to the Eighth European Development Fund maintained in
real terms, agreeing, to this end, to increase our own
contribution to the Fund. In the debate on the future of the
Lome Convention, France had already expressed its
commitment to maintaining the privileged relations between
the European Union and the countries of Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific. It should be recalled that this
relationship is reflected in the fact that 100 per cent of
industrial goods and 97 per cent of agricultural products
imported from Africa by the countries of the European
Union enter those countries without paying any customs
duties.
In this spirit, France believes that Member States and
the international bodies concerned must give the greatest
attention to the remarks and recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report as regards the restructuring
of international aid, the alleviation of the debt burden, the
opening of international markets and support for
cooperation and regional integration. We hope his message
will be heard and will have an effect.

The Secretary-General invites the entire international
community - the African States, the other States, the
multilateral bodies - to display political will in order to
consolidate and strengthen peace and development in
Africa. France is ready to respond to the Secretary-
General's appeal and to work to that end in the Security
Council and in all the other relevant bodies of the United
Nations.

