Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
Yamamoto for his excellent briefing, and we take this
opportunity to express our firm support to him in
carrying out the work that has been entrusted him. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank
him for the information he has provided.

On the political front, we acknowledge the efforts
of the Government and the people of Afghanistan in
taking the electoral process forward, which will allow
them to strengthen their democratic institutions,
and we reiterate our commitment to upholding its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We recall the interconnected nature of the challenges
facing Afghanistan and sustainable progress in terms
of security, development and governance, which are
mutually reinforcing. We stress the Government's
resolve to implement its four-year plan on security
sector reform aimed at increasing the capability of
Afghan security forces despite the current difficulties
involved in sustaining them.

We believe that strengthening and unifying the
security forces are key elements to combating the threat
of destabilization and, above all, the barbarity of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, whose attacks
and criminal acts we condemn in the strongest terms
possible. Unfortunately, there was evidence during
the reporting period under review of a clear increase
in the number of attacks against civilian installations,
such as schools and training centres, as well as attacks
against medical and humanitarian personnel and
medical facilities. Between January and August alone,
86 incidents were recorded, doubling the total number
of incidents reported for all of 2016, which stood at 41.
In that regard, Bolivia reiterates in the strongest terms
its condemnation of all terrorist acts as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever, whenever and by whomever
they the are committed.

Moreover, according to the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/783), random constraints have been
placed on the deployment of a humanitarian assistance
by various parties to the conflict, and 214 incidents
have been registered since January that cost the lives of
12 aid and medical workers. In that regard, we reiterate
to the parties and those involved in the conflict that
they must allow and ensure security and safety of
civil and humanitarian installations and their staff,
while avoiding identifying them as military targets,
for whatever reason, and observing the principles of
international humanitarian law.

I would be remiss ifI did not express our concern
about the high number of internally displaced persons,
which, according to the report of the Secretary-General,
increased to more than 32,000 individuals during the
period under review. That figure adds to the more than
200,000 new internally displaced persons worldwide
this year. We call for the pooling of efforts to support
the return of citizens and their sustainable reintegration
to their countries of origin. Accordingly, international
organizations must provide concrete support for
Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons so as
to facilitate their voluntary and safe return.

We commend the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) for the work that it continues to
carry in Afghanistan by providing education and
training in transit centres so as to ensure that refugees
returning to their places of origin are aware of the
presence and the danger of anti-personnel landmines,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants
of war. Nevertheless, the continued risk represented by
anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices found on the ground have
been reflected in the increase in the number of victims
as compared with last year's statistics. Consequently,
we call for the urgent implementation of resolution
2365 (2017) and for the continued support of UNMAS
in the removal of those explosive devices, which pose a
threat to the security of the civilian population.

Bolivia is grateful to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for the work that it has carried
out in providing logistical and technical support
for the Afghanistan-led process, while supporting
democratic and governmental initiatives to bring about
a peaceful settlement to the conflict. We reiterate the
crucial importance of promoting regional cooperation
as an effective way to promote security, stability and
economic and social development in Afghanistan. We
also wish to express our deep gratitude and appreciation
for the work and carried out by various United Nations
agencies throughout in providing humanitarian
assistance in such a difficult context given the high risk
involved in realizing their work.

Lastly, we convey our support for the political
dialogue under way in Kabul and reiterate that there is
no military solution to the situation. On the contrary,
that dialogue must be an inclusive process led by and
for the Afghan people.

