I thank the German presidency of the Security Council for convening this discussion in the form of an open debate. Ihave the pleasure to submit the following statement on this important topic on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. The protection and promotion of human rights is at the core of the United Nations mandate, constituting one of its three fundamental pillars. Effective integration of human rights and gender equality across and within all pillars of the United Nations is crucial for the Organization's ability to contribute to sustaining peace and to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Human rights integration into peace operations is a vital achievement, affirming that respect for human rights is a key condition and prerequisite for lasting peace. Human rights components should be standard in peace operations, in order to enhance their quality and effectiveness, not least in the promotion of human right and the protection of civilians. Mandates must be matched with adequate funding so missions have the capacity to undertake these tasks and fulfil their objectives. We need to integrate and mainstream human rights throughout all United Nations work, including on the peace and security pillar. The Human Rights Due Diligence Policy remains a core tool in that endeavour. The Nordic countries pursue a human rights-based foreign and security policy. Our countries are long-term supporters of United Nations peacekeeping, and the human rights-based approach lies at the centre of our participation in international crisis management. Human rights and its gender dimensions are an integral part of the training we provide to our peacekeepers and experts. We have also consistently supported initiatives within the United Nations to improve the monitoring of and compliance with human rights, both in the field of training and in human rights screening. This includes the development of the concept of "human rights readiness" and the implementation of the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces as an important component of our commitment under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We would like to emphasize three key elements of effective peacekeeping that have a direct bearing on the protection and promotion of human rights: training, the participation of women, and taking a comprehensive approach in crisis management. With regard to training, human rights, including efforts towards ensuring accountability, need to be an integral part of all military and police training, including predeployment training for uniformed and non-uniformed peacekeeping personnel. A good example is specialized training courses focusing on topics such as integrating human rights into strategic planning as well as implementing the women and peace and security agenda. International cooperation offers opportunities to share best practices, compare and develop training modules and materials, exchange trainers and students, and create and harmonize standards. In this regard, special thanks go to the United Nations Integrated Training Service for its support and guidance to Member States. Regarding women in peacekeeping, the Nordic countries have a long-term commitment to promoting gender equality and women's full enjoyment of human rights. Integrating a gender perspective into all aspects of the work of the United Nations, including peacekeeping, is a necessity. The inclusion and effective participation of women in peace processes are a prerequisite for sustainable peace. Likewise, participation of women in peacekeeping improves operational effectiveness, including through increased access to local communities. Better understanding of the challenges facing those communities strengthens a mission's capacity to prevent and end human rights violations. It also enhances a mission's ability to implement its protection of civilians mandate, with a particular focus on protection of women and girls, women's participation and preventing conflict-related sexual violence. Women peacekeepers help build a closer relationship with women, thereby bolstering community relations and situational awareness. The Nordic countries consider it essential to increase the participation of female peacekeepers. We need to ensure that the United Nations gets the people best qualified. As an example, we would like to cite the training of female peacekeepers through UN-Women, gender parity courses and the efforts undertaken by the Police Division in the Department of Peace Operations to increase the number of female police officers in United Nations operations. Turning to a comprehensive approach in crisis management, peacekeeping - like all other efforts towards peace - is inherently political. It should not be carried out ina vacuum. Peacekeeping has to be an integral part of an inclusive peacebuilding process that creates ground for reconciliation, social cohesion and sustainable peace and development. Regular monitoring and analysis of the patterns of human rights violations, such as their incidence and severity, should constitute a key input into a mission's early warning analysis and thereby contribute to the implementation of protection of civilians mandates. Human rights violations can be drivers of conflict, and restoring respect for human rights will often contribute to addressing root causes and to sustaining peace. From the outset, the United Nations system must simultaneously aim to build the national capacity needed to address these challenges. As per the thinking on the humanitarian-development-peace nexus, peacekeeping, political processes, development cooperation and humanitarian aid should be planned and implemented hand in hand. Joint context analysis and common outcomes are vital to ensuring a well-coordinated and successful use of the tools working towards sustainable peace. Another aspect of comprehensiveness is the need to ensure that the United Nations mission and the host country share the objectives of the mission and that the different elements, civilian and military alike, of each mission work seamlessly together and with the local authorities and population. These three elements - training, the participation of women and a comprehensive approach - will continue to be cornerstones of the Nordic approach to effective peacekeeping and crisis management.
