Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's briefing on the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I
congratulate Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie on her recent
appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel and thank her for her briefing. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the former Special Envoy,
Mr. Romano Prodi, for his work and contribution in the
launching and initial implementation of the strategy for
the Sahel.

Since the last briefing on the strategy, the regional
security and humanitarian landscape have continued to
be of concern. Porous borders and weak State structures
throughout the region, compounded by specific
challenges in Libya and Mali, and the increasing
activities of Boko Haram in Nigeria, especially along
the borders with Chad and Cameroon, provide an
enabling environment for increased illicit activities
and potential instability in the subregion. Although
several initiatives and meetings have taken place, the
pace of implementation of concrete projects aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflicts and creating
resilience in the populations of the region needs to
be accelerated. In the same vein, we would like to
emphasize the importance of ownership, political will
and trust among Governments of the region, which are
critical for the success ofthose initiatives. In that regard,
the development of the 2014-2016 implementation plan
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
is encouraging. Allow me to make a few comments on
some of the pillars of that strategy.

On governance, we welcome activities that were
undertaken to address challenges related to women's
participation in the political process, the promotion of
social cohesion andjob creation and income-generating
activities, with a focus on youth. In addition, we would
like to stress that strengthening the capacity of the
countries of the region to ensure the effectiveness of
the State authority will enable regional States to protect
populations and borders. In that regard, there is a need
to associate and coordinate with different regional
actors, such as the Economic Community of West
African States, Maghreb countries, the African Union
(AU) and United Nations agencies.

On resilience and the humanitarian situation, we
are pleased to note the development of the strategic
response plan for 2014-2016. The region is facing
chronic humanitarian needs, with more than 20 million
people in need, including refugees and internally
displaced persons. Unfortunately, the response to those
needs has been below expectations. We call on partners,
especially the financial partners, such as the European
Union, World Bank and the African Development
Bank, to honour their pledges by supporting enabling
projects for the people of the region. It is also important
that countries of the Sahel region, as well as the Whole
African continent, improve the management of natural
resources in order to move towards self-resilience and
long-term sovereignty.

On security, the scourge ofterrorism and extremism
has not spared the Sahel region, with unprecedented
security and humanitarian consequences. There is
a need for a regional response to a regional threat,
as demonstrated by the increased terrorism in the
region and in Libya and northern Mali. Terrorism is
increasingly becoming interconnected throughout
Africa - from Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar Dine in Mali, and
Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya to Al-Shabaab in Somalia,
and from the Maghreb to East Africa and the Horn
through West Africa, with links to Syria, Yemen and
other parts of the world. This is a worrying situation,
threatening the African and world stability. We need
now to have proactive policies and mechanisms and
concrete measures to prevent the proliferation of those
negative groups. Those measures can succeed only
if the United Nations works hand in hand with the
regional and subregional organizations to enhance and
sustain innovative mechanisms aimed at foreseeing and
preventing terrorist activities instead of managing their
deadly consequences.

Rwanda would like to stress that security should be
one of the key priorities of the Sahel strategy, with a focus
on enhancing cross-border cooperation and building
capacity for better border control and management.
At the same time, we would like to encourage regional
initiatives to enhance security cooperation in the Sahel
in order to combat terrorism, transnational crime, and
arms and drug trafficking more effectively. In that
regard, Rwanda welcomes the holding of the meeting
organized by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in Nouakchott in May 2014.

In conclusion, Rwanda commends the important
work done by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoys in coordinating initiatives with the African
Union, represented by President Pierre Buyoya, AU High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel; the World Bank;
the African Development Bank and other interlocutors
in the region, with a view to giving momentum to the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We
pledge our continued support for those activities and
call on Governments of the region to fully utilize the
demonstrated international will to support the Sahel
region.

