Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for his briefing. We are grateful to him and
his team for their work to ease the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen.

China expresses its condolences to the Yemeni
victims of tropical cyclone Luban and extends its
sincere sympathy to their families. We wish a speedy
recovery to all who are injured.

Against the backdrop of the ongoing conflict in
locations such as Al-Hudaydah, the humanitarian crisis
inYemenhas worsenedandthe sufferingofthepeoplehas
increased. Despite the firm support of the international
community, overall economic and social conditions
in Yemen have continued to deteriorate. Basic public
services such as medical care are dwindling. Food and
fuel prices, which affect people's livelihood, are on the
rise and the threat of famine looms ever larger. Armed
conflicts have increased civilian casualties, destroyed
infrastructure and impeded access to humanitarian
assistance - a situation that has further exacerbated
the humanitarian crisis. The international community
must take action with a view to alleviating the current
grave humanitarian situation in Yemen. China would
like to make the following points.

First, the parties to the conflict should create
conditions for easing the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. We urge them to abide by international law,
cease hostilities, provide effective, safe and timely
access for the delivery of humanitarian supplies, and
guarantee the normal movement of commercial items.
That will help to stabilize prices and ensure the timely
distribution of humanitarian relief, thereby meeting the
basic needs of the Yemeni people.
Secondly, the international community should
continue to increase humanitarian assistance and provide
medicine, food and other materials in a targeted manner
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. We
appreciate the efforts of the World Health Organization
(WHO), the World Food Programme and other agencies
to reduce the threat of cholera and famine, including
the WHO delivery of cholera vaccines to more than half
a million Yemenis in early October.

Thirdly, advancing the political process is the only
fundamental and lasting solution to the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. The international community should
step up its support for the mediation efforts of the
United Nations and Special Envoy Griffiths to jointly
push the parties to set aside their differences, pursue
de-escalation, adopt confidence-building measures,
such as releasing prisoners, relaunch face-to-face
political dialogue as soon as possible, and establish a
sustainable negotiation process.

In recent years, China has provided several
tranches of assistance to Yemen, including food and
medical supplies, through bilateral channels and
in cooperation with international agencies. In July,
President Xi Jinping announced a new assistance
initiative for Yemen at the eighth ministerial meeting of
the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum. China will
actively honour its commitments to helping alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We will continue
to provide assistance to the Yemeni people to the best
of our ability.

