Mr. Nambiar (India): The Government of India
has strongly condemned the heinous terrorist attack in
Grozny, which killed the President of the Chechen
Republic of the Russian Federation and others. We
extend our condolences to the Government and the
people of the Russian Federation and to the bereaved
families on this tragic occasion.

We felicitate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Gunter Pleuger of Germany
for his capable stewardship of the Council during the
eventful month of April.

It has been almost two years since Timor-Leste
attained its independence. That period has seen rapid
progress in the emergence of Timor-Leste from conflict
into confidence as a new member of the international
community. In an era increasingly characterized by
global conflict and conflagration, the success of this
peace-building exercise, spearheaded by the United
Nations, represents optimism and hope for the future.
We are happy to have Senior Minister Ana Pessoa
Pinto participating in this meeting of the Council.

The comprehensive support of the international
community - mainly in the form of assistance for
political and socio-economic development, capacity-
building and security has been instrumental in
facilitating Timor-Leste's emergence as a viable State
within the international community. This process needs
to be consolidated. India supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation, as contained in his report
dated 29 April 2004 (S/2004/333), that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
be extended for a further, one-year phase to enable
Timor-Leste to attain a critical threshold of self-
sufficiency.

 

The three broad programmes that the extended
United Nations mandate would facilitate appear fully
justified, given the reduced size of the Mission and the
imperative of ensuring a sound and logical conclusion
to one of the most successful exercises in post-conflict
peace-building that the United Nations has undertaken
in recent years. We note from the Secretary-General's
report that the first programme, for public
administration and justice, would be undertaken by 58
civilian experts; the second programme, for the
development of law enforcement, would be advanced
through 157 civilian police advisers; and the third
programme, support for the security and stability of
Time-Leste, would be effected through 42 military
liaison officers, 310 formed military and 125
gendarmerie.

Those support measures indicate a minimum,
truncated international presence. The Secretary-
General has noted in his report that it was the
extraordinary progress that had taken place which
permitted this swift downsizing in the international
presence on the ground, leaving no doubt as to the
momentum of the transfer of responsibility to Timor-
Leste.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he
counsels Timor-Leste and its sagacious leadership to
further build on and consolidate the gains achieved by
taking full advantage of the assistance and by making
practical and policy decisions in a timely manner.
Among the critical issues that require to be addressed
early by the Government of Timor-Leste are the
adoption of key legislation for public institutions,
preparation for local elections through voter
registration and other logistical arrangements,
measures to enhance economic development and self-
sufficiency, and the consolidation of Timor-Leste's
security institutions.

The international community cannot remain
permanently engaged. The United Nations role and
assistance in Timor-Leste will have to cede to the
country's growing capacity and confidence in
governance. Multilateral assistance of the current scale
will also have to be substituted progressively by
bilateral and regional cooperation.

India's relationship with Timor-Leste is
characterized by exceptionally close bilateral ties
marked by full understanding and support for one
another's concerns. We welcomed the emergence of
Timor-Leste as an independent nation in May 2002 and
have keenly followed its successful efforts at
democratic institution-building as well as economic
development. We have assisted in Timor-Leste's socio-
economic development through bilateral technical
training programmes in capacity-building, university
education and the deputation of experts for rural
development. We take this opportunity to compliment
the Timorese leadership for its steadfast and exemplary
commitment to democracy and its transparent and
accountable governance, which have greatly facilitated
nation-building.

The continued cooperation and good relations
between Timor-Leste and its neighbours, especially
Indonesia, are important not only for regional harmony
but also in the larger interest of South-South
cooperation. The commitment displayed by the
leadership of Timor-Leste and Indonesia towards
forging a harmonious, good-neighbourly relationship
must find practical expression through the completion
of agreements on the land border, the resolution of the
problems of refugees and the provision of socio-
economic opportunities for people living on either side
of the border.

In conclusion, I wish to join other delegations in
paying special tribute to the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the late
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to the current Special
Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for their
capable and dedicated leadership. We also pay tribute
to the members of UNMISET and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor for their
exceptional contributions. Their actions provide a
shining beacon to inspire the international community
even as the United Nations continues in its effort to
foster peace and development in other parts of this
troubled world.

