Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Mkapa for their briefings and the work they have
done. We also welcome the statements by the
representatives of the Sudanese parties.

The exercise in expressing the will of the people
was a success thanks to the commitment of the
leadership in North and South Sudan to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Russia respects the
outcome of the voting, which reflects the choice of the
people of South Sudan. The issue now on the agenda is
to resolve the main issues of contention between the
Sudanese parties during the transition period, such as
the status of Abyei, the demarcation of the borders, the
distribution of oil revenues and the questions of
citizenship and external debt.

It is fundamentally important that the parties
continue to express their readiness to resolve those
problems and, more generally, to build their relations
in a spirit of constructive cooperation. That is the only
valid choice in meeting the interests of the people of
the Sudan and addressing the challenge of ensuring
long-term peace in the territory of this country and the
region as a whole. We hope that the leaders in
Khartoum and Juba will live up to their responsibilities
in this fundamentally new emerging phase of Sudanese
history.
There is of course a need for significant
international assistance in establishing effective
statehood in South Sudan, which will gain its
sovereignty on 9 July. The activities of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan continue to be an
important factor in supporting stability during the
upcoming transition period. Any changes in the
configuration and mandate of the United Nations
presence should be agreed with the Sudanese sides.

A key task in the coming period will be to settle
the conflict in Darfur. That will be possible only by
reaching comprehensive political agreements by all
parties in Darfur. We support the focus of the current
mediation mechanism in Doha to conclude a
framework agreement for a settlement in Darfur in the
near future. We hope that the Doha process, which
continues to be the main platform for reaching peace
agreements with the Darfur rebels, as well as other
initiatives on a political process in Darfur, will be
carried out on a mutually complementary basis.

We welcome the readiness of the Government of
the Sudan to continue its constructive participation in
the Darfur political settlement process. A priority task
today is to ensure that all the main rebel groups in
Darfur join the process without preconditions. The
international community should put pressure on those
rebel leaders who obstinately refuse to participate in
the negotiations.

Russia will continue to actively support the
establishment of lasting peace, stability and
development in the Sudan, in cooperation with the
United Nations, the African Union and other interested
partners.

