Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Permanent
Representative of Belgium and the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations
for their briefings.

The seventh report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/492) reflects the same tone of concern and
increasing alarm of many Member States over the past
several weeks. The report comes as Iran continues to
destabilize the Middle East, not only through support
to terrorist groups and proxy forces but now through
attacks on commercial shipping. The findings and
information presented in the Secretary-General's report
add to the deeply troubling picture of Iran's behaviour.

The report details the Secretariat's inspection of
arms and related material, recovered in Yemen, that
were clearly manufactured in Iran, including a new
type of unmanned aerial vehicle and a new unmanned
surface vessel. The inspection negates the repeated
excuse that that weaponry was in Yemen's arsenal prior
to the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015). It clearly
was not.

Groups supported by Iran still openly talk of the
military assistance they continue to receive from Tehran,
in violation of the United Nations arms embargo. The
report cites a televised speech by Hamas leader Yahya
Sinwar and an Al-Quds Brigades spokesperson in May,
each of whom spoke of Iran's military shipments to
Hamas and to Palestinian Islamic Jihad in the Gaza
Strip. Pursuant to the arms embargo in resolution 2231
(2015), all Member States must take the necessary
measures to prevent arms transfers from Iran unless
they are approved by the Security Council.

Coordinating Iran's military support efforts is Maj or
General Qasem Soleimani, Commander of the Al-Quds
Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, whom
the report notes continues to travel freely in the Middle
East despite the travel ban provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). That is not the first time the Secretary-General
has reported to the Security Council on the Major
General's travel. The report notes that other designated
Iranian officials are also travelling in violation of the
travel ban. The fact that those violations continue for
years on end is evidence of lax implementation of the
restrictive measures outlined in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015).

Meanwhile, we see concrete examples of how Iran
is destabilizing the region by threatening international
shipping and air space, prolonging the violence in
Yemen and supporting the expansion of terrorist groups
and proxies throughout the Middle East. These data
points lead us to the conclusion that Iran continues
to send weapons across the Middle East, in blatant
violation of the Council's resolutions.

On 8 May, Iran announced that it would take steps to
cease performing certain core nuclear commitments - a
step that most agree threatens to undermine peace and
security in the region and beyond. As a first such step,
Iran said it plans to expand its stockpile of low-enriched
uranium beyond 300 kilogrammes by 27 June. It also
said that, if its conditions are not met, Iran will also
start enriching uranium to higher levels in a return to

a nuclear-reactor project at Arak that was well suited
to producing plutonium. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has already reported that Iran
has installed additional advanced centrifuges and is
operating them in numbers that violate its agreed limits
on such mechanical testing.

Iran is taking these steps even as it refuses to
acknowledge that it hid and preserved a secret nuclear-
weapons archive from the world. Had Israel not
removed that archive from Iran, it could have been a
source from which Iranian scientists could have drawn
should the regime decide to reinitiate its previous
nuclear-weapons programme. Iran's actions are deeply
counterproductive and will increase it Iran's isolation.
Notably, resolution 2231 (2015) provides a mechanism
for the Council to address significant non-performance
by Iran of its nuclear commitments.

Iran's defiance of the Security Council and its
reckless behaviour threatening peace and security
globally must not be downplayed in the name of
preserving a deal that does not fully cut off Iran's
path to a nuclear weapon. Iranian provocations
have been relentless and its excuses for every
provocation - from launches using ballistic missiles
technology to procurement of prohibited items, to
support for the Houthi, to flagrant violations of the
arms embargo - strain credulity. Responsibility for
Iran's economic woes belongs to Tehran, whether
through gross economic mismanagement, corruption
or the redirection of its money for militaristic purposes
around the region. Iran's own behaviour has caused its
economic decline.

The false narrative that the United States is to
blame for Iran's economic woes strays beyond the
bounds of annex B's intention in resolution 2231 (2015).
References in the report to other Governments' efforts
to work around those measures are inappropriate.
The report of the Secretary-General outlines in detail
some important facts: that are Iranian arms and
related materiel are showing up beyond its borders in
conflict zones in the region, that its missiles and related
technologies are hitting civilian targets, and that its
terrorist proxies, Hizbullah and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, are speaking openly of the support Iran provides
to them. Does anyone really believe that Iran is not
behind these transfers?

The United States has made clear its willingness
to engage in dialogue with Iran to negotiate a deal that
will better serve international peace and security. But in
the meantime, we will not - and the Security Council
should not - sit idly by while Iran perpetrates attacks
on our partners in the region and on commercial vessels
in the Gulf. We intend to do everything in our power
to curb malign Iranian behaviour, including through
updates to the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 2231 (2015), which, as the report of the
Secretary-General highlights, are necessary to ensure
implementation. We hope our partners on the Council
will join us.

