Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before I begin my formal statement, I wish to convey
our condolences to the Republic of Korea for the loss
of five of its peacekeepers and to the bereaved families.

The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his special report and Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his briefing.

Since Timor-Leste achieved its independence, the
overall developments there have been encouraging.
The Government has conducted nation-building in all
its aspects in an orderly manner. On the domestic front,
it is trying to achieve broad-based democratic
participation; on the diplomatic front, it has actively
established and developed friendly relationships and
cooperation with all countries of the world, especially
those of the region. China is pleased to note that
Timor-Leste and Indonesia are seeking to enjoy good-
neighbourly relations that will have a positive effect on
the long-term stability of the country and the region.

China expresses its appreciation to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
for its supportive role. We will continue to support its
work.

In the past few months, however, violence and
armed attacks have erupted in Timor-Leste, threatening
the national security situation of that young country
and raising the concerns of the international
community and the Security Council. In his report, the
Secretary-General indicates that these incidents and
developments are having an alarming effect on the
country, which is in the early stages of its political and
economic development.

China expresses its concern over this situation.
Security and stability are preconditions for nation-
building and development. The ongoing economic and
social reconstruction of Timor-Leste, in accordance
with the aspirations of the international community,
will depend on the creation of long-term stability and a
continually improved security environment. In the final
analysis, this will depend on the efforts of the people of
Timor-Leste themselves. However, as experience in
other countries and other regions shows, the
international community and the United Nations must
provide the necessary assistance in this process if the
situation is to be stabilized and if the country is to
build its capacity. These are of vital, even
indispensable importance.

Under the Security Council's mandate,
UNMISET has played a positive role in helping the
authorities of Timor-Leste to undertake capacity-
building. After a careful analysis of the Secretary-
General's recommendations, China agrees if necessary
to reconsider with a flexible attitude the downsizing
plans and appropriate adjustments so as to establish the
conditions for UNMISET to fulfil its mandate.

The international community has contributed to
the independence of Timor-Leste. It has also made
commitments to helping that young country pursue its
reconstruction and sustainable development. While we
are proud of the progress made to date, we should also
continue responsibly to honour our commitments to
helping Timor-Leste to address the challenges it faces.
China has long supported the independence of Timor-
Leste and will continue to support its people in their
efforts to maintain national stability. We will also
continue to provide assistance within our ability to do
so.

