Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in the open
debate on children and armed conflict and wishes to
express our appreciation to the delegation of Viet Nam
for organizing this debate. My delegation believes that
this open debate should mark the beginning of a
concentrated effort on the part of the Security Council
to comprehensively address the issue of children in
armed conflict, as set out in the concept paper of 7 July
2008.

Allow me to also take this opportunity to note
with appreciation the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and a number of United Nations
agencies - UNICEF, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees - and many other
international and local non-governmental organizations
that work to protect children in areas of armed conflict.
The employees of those agencies endure numerous
hardships, including threats to their personal security,
and deserve to be commended.

My delegation firmly believes that tackling the
issue of children in armed conflict requires a holistic
and coherent approach. In that respect, we view
conflict prevention as the key to addressing this
scourge. Conflict and poverty act as enablers and lead
to children unwittingly getting caught up in or coerced
into armed conflict. Extreme poverty can lead to
conflict, and inevitably children and women become
the first victims. It is therefore imperative that
concerted attention be given to addressing poverty by
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and
through conflict prevention.

The Great Lakes region has experienced the
challenges posed by genocide and armed conflict and
endured the consequences first hand. Rwandan
refugees and nationals of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are being held hostage by the members of
the former Rwandan Armed Forces and Interahamwe,
also known as the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR), in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The FDLR continues to use
that position to kidnap and forcefully recruit children
into its ranks for use as soldiers, workers and even
sexual slaves. In addition to this generation of young
people being denied a future, they are indoctrinated
with a genocidal ideology. Those young people are
trained to carry and use guns and taught hate instead of
arithmetic. That leaves the prospects for future peace
and stability in the region severely threatened.

The Secretary-General's report contains some
useful recommendations on the way forward. I will
focus on two of them. First, the focus on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups in conflict afflicted areas has yielded
some positive outcomes in the Great Lakes region and
in other areas. However, it needs to be accompanied by
a strengthening of the capacity of local authorities to
enable them to establish the socio-economic
infrastructure required to absorb demobilized former
armed militias and to resettle internally displaced
persons and refugees.

Secondly, my delegation believes that the
Security Council should be firm and show leadership in
dealing with the threat posed by armed groups in
conflict-affected areas. My delegation welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1804 (2008),
which seeks to comprehensively deal with the threat
posed by the FDLR in the Great Lakes region. It is that
kind of action that, if comprehensively implemented in
concert with a development approach, will help rid us
of the scourge of children in armed conflict.

The plight of children in armed conflict is not an
abstract concept or the subject of television
documentaries or films - it is anathema to us all. The
people of Rwanda, more than any in recent times, have
experienced the absence of real peace and security and
the impact it has on our children. My delegation
therefore wishes to reiterate its firm commitment to
addressing the plight of children in armed conflict and
to international peace and security through our
contributions to United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping missions.

We remain committed to actively supporting the
Security Council in its efforts to adopt both a
development and a conflict-prevention approach to
addressing the plight of children in armed conflict.

