Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I, too, should like to
thank Ambassador Chowdhury for his briefing today. I echo
Ambassador Levitte's sentiment that the report is perfect in
each paragraph. I also echo Ambassador Levitte's concern
that it has not proved possible for some States members of
the European Union with a close interest in Kosovo to
express their views in this debate today.

Ambassador Chowdhury and the mission did an
excellent job in Kosovo. They travelled widely, meeting
representatives of all ethnic groups, and they produced an
excellent report for us to study. We have looked at the
report carefully and agree with its findings and
recommendations.

Before commenting on the report in detail, I would
like to underline its key finding. This Council set the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) an enormous challenge in resolution 1244
(1999). The mission is operating within its mandate as
laid out in that resolution. Ably led by Bernard Kouchner,
it has made very significant progress in circumstances that
are far from ideal. There is still a long way to go, but we
should all take this opportunity to put on record our
thanks to Mr. Kouchner and his team for the excellent
work they have done so far.

I would like to address three detailed issues raised in
the report. First, the report makes clear that there is
enormous public concern about the fate of those Kosovo
Albanians who are detained elsewhere in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia or have been missing since the
end of the conflict last year.

The international community's efforts to make
progress on this issue need to be given a higher profile.
The United Kingdom therefore strongly supports the
appointment of a special envoy to look into the question,
in cooperation with UNMIK. The Special Representative
should address the fates of all detained and missing
persons, regardless of their ethnic origin.

Secondly, the mission was right to highlight the
importance of reinforcing the justice system in Kosovo.
For our part, the United Kingdom stands ready to offer
the United Nations some candidates for posts as
international judges and prosecutors in Kosovo. The
Kosovo Police School is doing fine work and its multi-
ethnic character should serve as a model for other
institutions, not least the Kosovo Protection Corps.

Thirdly, we agree that it is crucial to manage an
orderly returns process for refugees, both from the rest of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and from abroad.
Adequate security for all returnees is essential. We
welcome the establishment of the Joint Committee on
Returns to coordinate this process.

We should use this meeting to make one thing
crystal clear. UNMIK is not only operating effectively,
but it is also doing so within the mandate set out in
resolution 1244 (1999). And that resolution, as the
mission has said, is being implemented.

