The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Egypt, Germany, Japan, Liberia, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Namibia, Norway, Rwanda, the Sudan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda, Uruguay and
Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I am pleased to invite Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, to sit at the side of the Council Chamber, under
rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

Pursuant to the invitations extended by the
Council under rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer for the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Abdul Wahab, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting and invite them
to take seats at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/l48, which contains the text of a letter dated
14 March 2007 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South
Africa.

This is not the first time that the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union (AU), in the
maintenance of international peace and security has
been discussed in the Security Council or the General
Assembly. The reason is that we are seeing an
increased reliance on regional organizations in
resolving some of the conflicts currently facing us.

South Africa believes that the time has come to
look into ways of strengthening the relationship with
regional organizations as foreseen in Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Our hope is that during our
tenure in the Security Council, we can contribute to
better articulation and clarification of this important
matter.

At the most recent summit of the African Union,
African heads of State or Government called upon the
United Nations

"to examine, within the context of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, the possibility of
funding, through assessed contributions,
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
African Union or under its authority and with the
consent of the United Nations".

The decision of the African Union followed up on the
Outcome Document of the 2005 World Summit
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), which called for
further strengthening of the partnership with regional
organizations, in particular the African Union.

Such engagement is informed by the benefits of
the synergies that we have witnessed in those instances
in which the United Nations has worked with regional
organizations in diverse places such as Liberia, C6te
07-28578
d'Ivoire, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Kosovo and the Sudan, among others. In
all those instances, the cooperation ranged from ad hoc
arrangements to structured co-deployment in
peacekeeping missions.

That cooperation, however, does not absolve the
Security Council of its Charter-mandated responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council remains the principal organ
entrusted with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, we believe strongly that we should coordinate
our collective security efforts under the United
Nations.

At the same time, we have witnessed regional
organizations make contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The African Union has
intervened in some situations where the United Nations
was unable to intervene, as well as in situations where
rapid interventions by the United Nations were
necessary but not possible. In some cases the United
Nations processes themselves take a long time to
finalize at the time when security situations on the
ground are deteriorating. Regional organizations can
therefore help to address those practical shortfalls.

Regional organizations bring advantages to the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including their proximity to, and an informed
understanding about, specific conflict situations. They
have greater flexibility to intervene, especially during
initial stages, and can also be involved in mediation
efforts when conflicts arise.

Our experience in Burundi was that the African
Union chose to intervene at a time when the United
Nations, in the absence of a permanent ceasefire
between the parties, could not deploy a peacekeeping
mission. There have been other instances where the
Council has given retrospective endorsement to the
involvement of regional organizations. That has caused
the Council to be perceived as not acting in a
consistent manner; hence the need for us to further
clarify the relationship with regional organizations.

Furthermore, the African Union created the Peace
and Security Council, whose agenda complements that
of the United Nations Security Council. That has raised
the question of how the decisions of the AU Peace and
Security Council can relate to those of this Council.
There have been occasions when this Council has
07-28578

responded to decisions of the Peace and Security
Council. However, there have also been occasions
when that has not been the case, thereby drawing
attention to the need to strengthen the relationship
between the two bodies.

In the case of Burundi we saw how the work of
the African Union complemented the decisions of the
Security Council. We hope for a similar process in
Somalia. It is up to the Security Council to transform
the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia into a United Nations force in six months, as
the African Union has requested.

In the case of the situation in Darfur, both the
Security Council and the African Union face complex
challenges. Nonetheless, there is no doubt that the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) has played a
useful role in Darfur. Despite limited resources, AMIS
has contributed to the protection of the civilian
population and assisted humanitarian workers in their
difficult task. Through the presence of AMIS in Darfur
we have a better understanding of the challenges facing
the international community.

One thing is clear, however: the African Union
cannot bear the burden of Darfur alone. It was for that
reason that the African Union appealed to the United
Nations to become involved in Darfur after 30 June
2007, when our troops are expected to leave the Sudan.
We therefore hope that there will be speedy
implementation of the AU-United Nations hybrid
mission in the Sudan.

There are also other challenges that make the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations more concrete and operational. There is a
need for predictability, as agreed during the 2005
World Summit. The existing ad hoc arrangements are
not sustainable and will always remain fragile. We
need to articulate a clear form of burden-sharing
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
That has to be based on the understanding that the
goals of the African Union and the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security are
the same. However, we must understand that
circumstances have changed and that we therefore need
new solutions to address today's realities. The rigid
doctrines of the past relating to our support of
peacekeeping missions can no longer hold. Regional
organizations, and in particular the African Union, are
partners in carrying out the mandate of the United
3
Nations, especially that of the Security Council. That
requires us to think anew in determining the forms of
concrete assistance that can be provided to regional
organizations to address the challenges we all face.

We are therefore pleased that the Security
Council has adopted a presidential statement that
contains language enhancing the relationship with
regional organizations, including the intention to
explore ways to share the burden of maintaining
international peace and security. My Government
remains ready to work with all members of the
Security Council in the coming months as we continue
to seek ways to address this common challenge,
thereby responding to the call of the Summit of the
African Union.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

I now give the floor to Mr. Annabi.


