Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Congratulations,
Sir, and welcome to the presidency. You have our
strong support in what promises to be a very busy
month.

My thanks also to Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for the briefing he has given us today.

We are here at a pretty crucial time for the future
of policing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have noted
what Hedi Annabi has said about the Secretary-
General's View that the United Nations should not
provide the successor mission to the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). This
will be one of the issues under discussion at the
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC)
Steering Board in Brussels today and tomorrow, and we
will, of course, be in touch with the United Nations
about the outcome of those deliberations.

Significant progress has been made in
UNMIBH's mandate. The rule of law is a prerequisite
for a fully functioning democracy, and that applies as
much to Bosnia and Herzegovina as to other parts of
the world. UNMIBH is continuing to make an
important contribution in this area. However, further
work is needed, in particular to create an apolitical
police force, to improve crowd control capacity and to
increase the unacceptably low minority representation
in the police, as Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius has
said.

UNMIBH, as the Council knows, aims to
complete its core mandate by 31 December next year.
However, in recognizing that fact, we also have to
recognize that the task of police reform is not
complete. Serious structural weaknesses remain. A key
challenge will be to get politics out of policing. The
follow-on police mission must address police reform as
part of a wider strategy for judicial reform and for
establishing the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This will be one of the considerations that will
motivate our contribution to the PIC in Brussels this
week.

It is also important to begin detailed planning for
the follow-on mission as soon as possible. UNMIBH
will have a crucial role in ensuring the success of the
incoming mission.

I would like to end by saying that we hope that
the successor mission will be able, as I am sure it will,
to rely on the active support of UNMIBH during the
handover phase.

