Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, and congratulate his
country on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2013. I also take this opportunity to
welcome the decision taken on 10 December 2012 by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the European Union to
recognize Ukraine's European aspirations and to work
towards achieving political association and economic
integration based on respect for common values within
the Eastern Partnership. I shall limit myself to making
three observations.

First, on the relationship between the two
organizations, the United Nations and the OSCE have a
common goal - for the former at the global level and
for the latter at the regional level 4 to strengthen links
and dialogue among States so as to better ensure their
security. We know that dialogue between organizations
usually raises complex political issues. We see that at
work, for example, in the dialogue that the Council has
with the African Union, the League of Arab States and
many other organizations. But that dialogue has become
an essential element in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
provides a framework that, in our view, has withstood
the test of time and events. From Central Asia, Georgia
and Kosovo to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the OSCE
and the United Nations have shown their ability to
work harmoniously on the ground. We believe that that
relationship remains an essential element for security
in Europe. It can also be a source of inspiration in terms
of useful and innovative cooperation in other regions.

My second point concerns the future of the
OSCE, which covers a vast area, from Vancouver to
Vladivostok. With the recent accession of Mongolia,
it includes 57 countries that share common values
and a belief that the security of the Euro-Atlantic and
Euro-Asian areas goes hand in hand with the promotion
of human rights, democracy and the rule of law.

However, we note in Vienna a worrying tendency
by some members of the organization to reconsider their
commitments in that regard. We expect the Ukrainian
chairmanship of the OSCE to guarantee and promote
the commitments made in the three areas covered by the
OSCE. In that regard, we attach particular importance
to freedom of expression and freedom of the media.
Similarly, the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights must be able to continue to play its role
in monitoring elections, and its autonomy must be
preserved to that end.

France fully supports the dialogue initiated at the
Dublin meeting ofthe Ministerial Council on the future
of the OSCE within the "Helsinki+40" process and in
the light of the fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki
Final Act in 2015. The process should not limit itself
to reaffirming, as was done at the Astana summit in
2010, the validity of the Helsinki obligations and of all
of the significant achievements of the OSCE. Instead,
we must find ways to fully implement the commitments
made by the participating States and to reaffirm our
commitment to that security arrangement based on
common values.

My third point has to do with the commitment on
the ground. The OSCE today has 15 field missions
in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans, often
alongside the United Nations. Its role remains, in our
view, essential. Therefore, after having contributed,
along with the United Nations and the European
Union, to the cessation of inter-ethnic violence in
Kyrgyzstan, the OSCE has implemented a community
safety initiative to help ease tensions between Kyrgyz
and Uzbek communities. It actively contributes to
stabilizing the borders of Afghanistan and Central
Asia, in particular by training border guards in Central
Asia, including Afghanistan. It also cooperates with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fight
against transnational threats, and it has just renewed a
joint action plan for 2013-2014 with that Office. That is
a good example of successful cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations.

In the Caucasus, we remain committed, as part
of our co-chairing of the Minsk Group along with
the United States and Russia, to helping Armenia and
Azerbaijan find a peaceful settlement to the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. The co-chairs are continuing their
mediation work while calling on the parties to respect
the ceasefire and to refrain from actions and statements
likely to fuel tensions. The co-chairs have repeatedly
expressed their concerns about the start of civilian
flights to Nagorno Karabakh and the continuing
violence at the line of contact.

With regard to the OSCE office in Baku, we trust
that the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office will arrive at a
solution that will enable that field mission to maintain
and fulfil its mandate.

On the subject of Georgia, France lends its full
support to the Geneva discussions and to the OSCE role
in that process, alongside the European Union and the
United Nations. Those discussions must be continued
in order to build confidence among the parties and
improve the situation of local populations. Of course,
we reaffirm our commitment to the principles of
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
recognized by international law.

In Transdniestria, we are encouraged by the
increasing number of meetings in the "5+2" format held
in 2012. We hope that that positive trend will continue
in 2013 and that substantive progress will be possible.

In the Balkans, the facilitation ofthe OSCE allowed
binational Serbian voters in Kosovo to participate
peacefully in the Serb legislative and presidential
elections of 6 May 2012. It was a difficult task, which
the OSCE carried out with professionalism, thanks in
particular to its substantial presence on the ground.
The OSCE has once again been asked to help organize
the partial municipal elections, under the agreement
reached on 19 April in Brussels between Belgrade and
Pristina and confirmed by both parliaments.

Finally, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that
will be on the Council's agenda next week, the OSCE
presence covers a substantial number of activities, such
as governance, the rule of law and respect for human
rights, as well as the management of stockpiles and
surplus ammunition, a subject that the OSCE should at
the forefront of.

I conclude by once again expressing to Ukraine all
our best wishes for its chairmanship and by assuring it
of France's full support.

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America) I
would like to welcome to the Security Council the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, Foreign Minister
Kozhara, and to thank him for today's briefing on
OSCE activities under the leadership of Ukraine. We
commend the Chairperson-in-Office for his priorities,
including efforts to revitalize existing negotiation
processes, combat transnational threats, including
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
support human rights education.

The Security Council and the OSCE have shared
interests in ending active conflicts and mitigating
future threats to international peace and security.
The United States is committed to working with the
Chairperson-in-Office, the OSCE secretariat and other
participating and partner States to further the OSCE's
comprehensive approach to security, which closely
complements the work of the United Nations.

The OSCE continues to contribute to peace and
security, notably through its field missions, the work
of its special representatives and its promotion of
military transparency. In Kosovo, where the head of the
OSCE mission concurrently serves as deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the
complementarity of the OSCE and the United Nations
is clearly evident. The United States commends the
OSCE for its active role in helping to develop and
advise Kosovo's democratic institutions and protect
human rights. We urge the OSCE to support, within its
mandate, the important 19 April agreement between
Serbia and Kosovo.

The OSCE's effort to promote progress on Europe's
protracted conflicts in Moldova, Georgia and Nagorno
Karabakh is long-standing. In Moldova, we welcome
the progress of the "5+2" talks towards a comprehensive
settlement of the Transdniestria issue and we hope that
the additional measures can be undertaken to improve
confidence on both sides of the River. As a co-chair
of the Minsk Group, the United States appreciates the
support of the chairmanship as we work to help the sides
reach a solution to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The United States also supports the OSCE's work as
a co-chair of the Geneva international discussions and
its ongoing work to address security and humanitarian
issues in the conflict-affected areas of Georgia.

Secondly, the United States commends the
OSCE's efforts to share expertise and promote
dialogue beyond Europe through its Mediterranean
and Asian partnership for cooperation programmes.
We were especially grateful for the OSCE's support
for Afghanistan's transition through improving
border security, combatting narcotics trafficking and
promoting development. Programmes such as the
joint OSCE-United Nations Development Programme
training for Afghan and other Central Asian officials
at the OSCE Border Management Staff College in
Dushanbe not only develop the skills of border and
customs officers, but also enhance regional cooperation
in crucial areas.

Thirdly, the United States supports and urges the
OSCE to continue its advocacy with participating
States on countering transnational threats, including
cyber threats, drug trafficking, counter-terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The organization's work in the new field of cyber
security to identify emerging trends and potential
counter measures is critical for addressing not only
virtual but very real threats, including terrorists' use
of the Internet. We also welcome the OSCE's efforts
to implement Security Council resolutions to counter
terrorism and proliferation and its work to strengthen
the international legal framework against terrorism
by facilitating international cooperation in criminal
matters and through its joint initiatives with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

Finally, the United States looks to the OSCE as
an important player to help protect human rights,
promote tolerance and non-discrimination, implement
support for citizens' exercise of fundamental
freedoms and advance the goal of gender equality in
its region - commitments to which all participating
States have fundamentally agreed.

We fully support the OSCE's efforts to increase the
political participation of women, expand the capacities
of legal systems to address domestic violence and
promote mentor networks for women's empowerment.
We greatly appreciate the significant support and
advice that the OSCE has provided to participating
States through its Forum for Security Cooperation,
as they strive to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security. We urge all participating
States, partnerships and the broader United Nations
membership to uphold the principle of gender equality.
Within the OSCE, gender focal points have been
appointed in all field operations, institutions and
departments of its secretariat. It serves as an illustrative
example of how organizations can effectively implement
gender mainstreaming.

As we approach the fortieth anniversary of the
Helsinki Final Act, we are reminded of the accords
that affirmed an inextricable link between the security
of States and the security of citizens. We reaffirm our
commitment to that objective and support the OSCE's
tremendous efforts in achieving it.

