Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
Ambassador Wittig and the German Mission, for
hosting this important debate and for your leadership
as Chair of the Security Council Working Group. We
also very much appreciate the important statements by
the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Coomaraswamy and UNICEF Executive Director Tony
Lake.

Abuses against children in armed conflicts do not
just tear at our hearts, they also rip the fabric of our
societies, undermine our shared security and challenge
us all to do far more to bring these outrages to an end.
The toll never ceases to shock. According to a recent
UNESCO report, between 1998 and 2008 an estimated
2 million children were killed in conflicts and 6 million
were left disabled. Approximately 300,000 children are
reportedly being exploited as soldiers. Let there be no
doubt: we are failing the world's children so long as so
many continue to suffer such brutality and abuse.

This is not to diminish the work that has already
been done to assist children in armed conflicts around
the world. Since 2004, the United Nations has signed
15 action plans in nine conflict zones, and concluded
five of them. The Special Representative and United
Nations agencies in the field have had a measurable
impact on the ground. One of the brightest spots in the
Secretary-General's otherwise depressing report
(S/2011/250) is the number of child soldiers who have
been released. An estimated 6,300 children were
released from such servitude this year in the Sudan,
Nepal, Chad, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burma and Sri
Lanka. We have increased the spotlight on grave
abuses. We have built up our information-gathering
capacity, including comprehensive reports by the
Secretary-General. We have listed serious perpetrators
and frankly examined individual country situations.

All those steps by the Working Group help to
keep such abuses squarely on the international agenda
and to bring them to the urgent attention of national
authorities. But, as we all know, a great deal more
needs to be done. For instance, I have just returned
from witnessing the birth of the Republic of South
Sudan. Some progress has been made throughout the
Sudan, notably the release over the past year of almost
1,200 children from the terror of armed groups. The
United Nations has concluded action plans and signed
memorandums of understanding with several groups in
the Sudan. But the abuses persist, including by the
Lord's Resistance Army and others. The Government
of the Sudan and the Sudanese Armed Forces have not
yet signed and implemented an action plan. Separately,
we urge the former Sudan People's Liberation
Movement to continue to implement its now-expired
2009 action plan, as well as to sign a formal extension
of that plan.

In Burma there are still child soldiers within the
ranks of Government forces and armed groups. The
Government of Burma has committed to stop the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and to develop an
action plan with the United Nations. We urge it to do
so as soon as possible and to draw from the expertise
of relevant agencies, such as the International Labour
Organization and UNICEF.

We are deeply troubled as well by the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Half a dozen
groups from that country are listed in annex I of the
report of the Secretary-General. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has failed to
engage meaningfully with the United Nations to end
abuses against children committed by its armed forces.
As a result, child recruitment has risen in some areas.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should move immediately to remedy those
alarming violations, including by finalizing and signing
a long-overdue action plan with the United Nations.

This year's report also documents another
appalling trend, namely, increased attacks on schools
and hospitals, in particular in Afghanistan, C6te
d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Burma, Pakistan, Yemen and the Philippines. In Cote
d'Ivoire alone, according to UNICEF, 224 schools
were attacked during the post-election crisis, disrupting
the education of some 65,000 children. The report of
the Secretary-General documents such attacks. With
today's resolution (resolution 1998 (2011)), the
Secretary-General will have the mandate to name and
shame those who perpetrate such attacks on a recurrent
basis.

Overall, we remain deeply concerned that
persistent perpetrators continue their violations against
children with impunity. Sixteen parties to armed
conflict listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report have been listed for five years or more. That is
plainly unacceptable. Thus, the United States urged the
inclusion in today's resolution of the Council's time-
bound commitment to consider a broad range of
options to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators.
The Council's unanimous support for that commitment
is an important step towards holding egregious
violators accountable for their actions.

Today, let us rededicate ourselves to working
towards a world in which all children have the security,
opportunity and hope that we seek for our own sons
and daughters.

