Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank and warmly congratulate
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta and the entire
Egyptian team for all of their work this month. With
great professionalism, they led us through a month that
was very busy in every way, particularly with meetings
with regional organizations - with the African Union
(AU) all oflast week and with the Arab League in Cairo,
which was a first, as well as with the European Union.

Mr. President, as you have invited us to do, I will
address only three of the topics on the agenda of the
Council this month. I would like also to say a few words
about the main deadlines that we can expect during the
month of June.

Mr. President, let me begin by saying that you started
off your presidency with a major event, imperative for
all of us: the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of medical personnel in armed conflict.
Attacks against hospitals have increased in recent
years in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Afghanistan and
elsewhere. We deem it very important that the Council
has sent a strong message, and we will have to provide
strict follow-up of the resolution in order to ensure that
such violations of international humanitarian law do
not go unpunished. France will remain mobilized in
that regard.

Turning now to the Middle East, I would like to
come back to the issue of Syria and to the peace process.
The adoption ofresolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016)
made it possible to see some progress in resolving the
Syrian crisis. After very positive dynamics in March,
early May saw a loss of ground. The Geneva talks
were suspended and violence resumed, hitting Aleppo
even harder than before the coming into force of the
cessation of hostilities.

Humanitarian access was very minimal in its
progress owing to the siege imposed by the regime,
of which Daraya has become a symbol. Given this
series of negative developments, the Special Envoy,
supported by France and other delegations, called for
the holding of another ministerial-level meeting of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG). The Vienna
communique' adopted on 17 May made it possible to
reaffirm the commitment of ISSG members to creating
the conditions for a credible resumption of negotiations.
Most importantly, the communique unambiguously
reaffirmed the need for the next round of negotiations
to focus just on the transition and its modalities for
implementation, and this by 1 August.

To date, progress is still minimal, as confirmed
by the Special Envoy during the consultations held on
26 May. While the goal of a resumption of political
negotiations has been set, we should not be too
hasty regarding a fresh inter-Syrian round of talks if
conditions to ensure their credibility have not been
met. The next few days should focus on the effective
implementation of the 17 May communique, using, if
necessary, those tools that have been agreed to, that is,
a ministerial-level meeting of the ISSG and the Security
Council.

In the immediate term, the main issue is
humanitarian access. If impediments to humanitarian
convoys to all areas under siege are not lifted before
June 1, we will have to begin humanitarian air drops.
After five meetings of the ISSG and two Security
Council resolutions, we should be seeing some real
progress in this regard.

Turning now to the peace process, to which we
drew the Council's attention on 15 May, we hope that
the ministerial-level meeting that we will be holding
in Paris on 3 June will make it possible to give a new
political horizon for the two-State solution. France has
for several months seen the threat of generalized unrest
on the ground. That threat is increasing on a daily basis
owing to the daily injustices suffered by the Palestinians
and the increasing insecurity of the Israelis.

That French initiative was the subject of extensive
consultations, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs in
April and the Prime Minister last week both Visited
Israel and the Palestinian territories. The Minister
also consulted with our partners in the region and the
Quartet in order to build a broad-based consensus. The
ministerial-level meeting to be held on 3 June in Paris
must be the starting point for political mobilization.
The President of the Republic, Francois Hollande, will
open the meeting, in which the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the United States Secretary of
State have already confirmed their participation.

Our approach is collective and complementary to
the action undertaken by the Quartet, whose upcoming
report should provide important information for moving
forward. We thank the very large majority of Council
delegations as well as others that have supported and
continue to support our efforts.

I cannot mention the month of May in the Security
Council without revisiting some of the significant
events that made it possible for the Security Council
to interact with regional organizations, particularly
the African Union, throughout the past week. The
Council's meetings with the AU Peace and Security
Council and the League of Arab States during its trip
to Cairo and with the European Union's Political and
Security Committee have reaffirmed the importance of
cooperation with regional organizations and to promote
mutual understanding of the crises of the day.

On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
consultations with the African Union, we must
remain resolutely engaged in bolstering this strategic
partnership. The effectiveness of United Nations
action, like that of the African Union, cannot but be
improved through that. In that regard, we welcome the
Egyptian presidency's initiative in organizing a Council
trip to Somalia, a case in which good cooperation
with the African Union is essential to promoting
peace and security in the region. That field mission
and consultations with the African Union will enable
us to better adjust the mandate of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which we will renew in a few
weeks, in terms of both offensive actions and respect
for human rights.

In conclusion, let me say a few words about the main
priorities of our presidency, which begins tomorrow. It
will be an extremely busy month of activities for the
Council, which we can organize into three main pillars.

First, peacekeeping will serve as the veritable
backbone of the month of June. With the ministerial
debate on 10 June, led by Minister for Foreign Affairs
J ean-Marc Ayrault, we will together take the opportunity
to deepen, in the presence of the Secretary-General and
the President-elect of the Central African Republic, our
understanding of effective and modern peacekeeping
in protecting civilians. The exchange will enable us to
set the tone of a month will that will be particularly
active in the area of renewing peacekeeping mandates,
including those of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan
Heights, and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, without mentioning the anticipated
results of the strategic review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. That is to say, Africa will
be at the heart of our presidency.

Secondly, the month of June will also be marked
by many important deadlines with regard to the
Middle East, including Syria, of course, in all its
dimensions - political, chemical and humanitarian.
Libya will also be on the agenda, along with Yemen
and the peace process, which I have already mentioned.
In late June, the Security Council will also receive
the Secretary-General's report on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) on Lebanon. June will also
be very active with regard to elections in the United
Nations. Specifically, we will elect new members ofthe
Council on 28 June.

Lastly, a word on the process of the election
of the Secretary-General. The General Assembly
will organize new informal dialogues between the
candidates and Member States on 7 June. As in April,
I am certain that they will elicit very strong interest on
the part of Member States. We commend and encourage
this welcome opening. It will be up to the Council to
move ahead with its own work within the framework of
its responsibilities. In that regard, I thank Ambassador
Aboulatta of Egypt for the constructive discussions
undertaken under his presidency. It is in that spirit that
we will work during our June presidency to ensure the
organization and all necessary arrangements for the
Council to proceed to the initial voting ballots at the
appropriate time.

Again, I thank and congratulate the Egyptian
presidency for the high quality of the work in May. You
have set the bar very high, Sir.

