Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
presidency of the Council for convening this important
meeting, and I thank Mr. Fedotov for his
comprehensive and useful briefing. I fully share in his
analysis and comments, and would like to reiterate
Portugal's full support for the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

Transnational organized crime, as no one
disputes, has an increasing impact on international
peace and security. That is why it is important to
discuss the issue here today. The dimensions of this
phenomenon, with its political and security
repercussions, require an enhanced coordination effort
on the part of the international community. We
welcome the action taken by the Council in 2009 and
2010 to acknowledge the serious implications and
global nature of this threat. They point in the right
direction, stressing the need to mainstream the issue of
organized crime into conflict-prevention strategies,
conflict analysis and integrated mission assessment, as
well as peacebuilding support.

The Council must now take a step forward by
solidifying this approach, aiming at early detection of
conditions conducive to or favouring organized crime
that could trigger severe implications for regional or
international security, as well as by ensuring that
missions in the field are prepared to tackle such
challenges as potential threats to peace and security,
and that the institutions and the legal framework they
are helping to build are robust enough to resist and
counter organized crime. Fighting international
organized crime also prevents conflicts from occurring
or spreading, and today conflict prevention is more
central than ever to the Security Council's concerns.

The nature of the threats posed by transnational
crime at the national, regional and international levels -
by exploiting, among other things, structural State
weaknesses, conditions of poverty and porous borders -
seriously undermines development, democratic
governance, the rule of law and stability in a growing
number of States and regions. The complexity of the
challenge we have before us requires developing
resolute and effective international and regional action
under United Nations coordination. This is more
imperative now, as we face the evidence of increased
synergy between transnational crime networks and
terrorist groups.

Transnational crime networks will not be easily
deterred. They have enormous resources and means at
their disposal. They will always strive to be one step
ahead of our efforts to counter them. They will persist
in diversifying further and becoming more and more
global. Many of them have already developed close
links with non-State armed groups. No part of the
world is immune to this threat, which often affects
countries in post-conflict transition struggling to build
their own fragile institutions and sustain their
development processes.

Assisting such countries in countering these
threats, in close coordination with the respective
regional and subregional organizations, is thus
essential, as their own success has a direct effect on
stability and security at the regional and international
levels. I would like to mention in particular UNODC
support for the Economic Community of West African
States regional action plan against organized crime. We
fully support the important role of UNODC in helping
to build the capacity needed to counter organized crime
and strengthen the rule of law, and we commend
Mr. Fedotov's efforts to increase the international
community's awareness of the crucial importance of
these activities.

I would like to make two final comments, the
first of which is related to the particular situation of
children and young people caught in the net of
organized crime activities. As in conflict situations, the
manipulation of children in organized crime and armed
violence disproportionately affects young people. This
is, however, still largely unrecognized as a priority and
thus has failed to lead to strategic action. However, the
reasons why young people join organized armed
violence or fall victim to armed gang crime are indeed
very similar to those that lead to joining armed groups.

My second and last remark relates to the issue of
trafficking in persons, a growing phenomenon that
threatens the very foundation of our societies.
Sometimes, however, we forget the human beings
behind the numbers. The international community, and
every single Member State, has a fundamental
responsibility to prevent and combat this practice, to
alleviate the suffering of trafficked victims and to
punish the traffickers. And yet the number of
trafficking prosecutions worldwide every year is very
low. Portugal is fully committed to effective
international cooperation in combating trafficking in
persons that integrates a victim approach and human-
rights dimension with a law-enforcement perspective.
As a co-facilitator in the process of drafting the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking in Persons, it was for me
extremely significant and gratifying to be able to
integrate that dimension into the text adopted by the
General Assembly almost one year ago (General 
12

Assembly resolution 64/293). The protection of victims
should always be a central element in our
anti-trafficking efforts at the national, regional and
international levels. In that context, the establishment
of a trust fund for victims was a natural and
indispensable outcome of the negotiations.

In conclusion, let me add that Portugal has been
actively engaged in efforts to counter international
crime. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
active contribution of my country in the fight against
drug trafficking and related criminal activities in the
West African region. We will continue our engagement,
aiming at a more active role by the Council in
addressing international organized crime in its different
components and in its relation to peace and security.
With that in mind, reports and briefings by UNODC
such as this one are particularly useful, and we would
expect the Council to be regularly updated on the
activities undertaken by the Office in this important
area of work.

