Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is regrettable that, despite all of the efforts
of the Arab Group in general and of the Syrian
delegation in particular, and notwithstanding the
flexibility and patience that we have shown in the past
few days, we have not been able to achieve the desired
result. We were not able to do so in spite of the fact
that the draft resolution, which was supported by the
Non-Aligned Movement, was extremely balanced. We
wish to emphasize in this respect that the wording used
in most of the paragraphs of the draft resolution was
inspired by the language of earlier resolutions that were
adopted by the Security Council, given the evolution of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

The fact that the delegation of the United States
used its veto is greatly to be regretted. International
law is being threatened, and the fact that that veto did
not allow the Security Council to carry out its functions
with respect to an issue of international peace and
security is regrettable. That will only further
complicate an already complex situation in the Middle
East and have a negative impact on the general
situation there.

We made every effort to reflect the discussions
that took place, as well as the dynamic that we have
observed in the international community with a View to
halting Israeli actions, stopping the destruction that has
been taking place in the past few years and putting an
end to the deaths, which now number thousands. Israel
has also tried to expel the Palestinian people from their
land and to build settlements on Palestinian territory.
Recently, Israel threatened to kill or to expel the
Palestinian President. That is contrary to the principles
of international law, the United Nations Charter and, in
particular, the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Despite the fact that the draft resolution was not
adopted, during deliberations yesterday the Security
Council stated that it rejected the actions and policies
of Israel. Syria therefore believes that Israel bears the
responsibility for its illogical policy and that Israel is
also responsible for having scuttled the peace process
in the Middle East, as well as for all of the
consequences that flow from that policy.

I would like to express our gratitude and
appreciation to those States members of the Council
that supported the draft resolution and voted in favour
of it. We would also like to note that Syria's
commitment, within the United Nations, to resolve all
of the problems that we are confronting today,
particularly in the Middle East, remains steadfast. Our
people look forward to the day when a just and
comprehensive peace will reign in the Middle East, and
when the occupied Palestinian lands, as well as those in
Syria and Lebanon, will be returned to their rightful
owners in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and in conformity with the Madrid terms of
reference, the principle of land for peace and the
resolutions adopted at the Beirut Arab Summit of 2001.

