Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): I would like at the outset to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mariano
Fernandez, for his most useful report (S/2012/128),
which reminds us of the progress that has been made
but above all also of the immensity of the task that
remains to be accomplished.

I welcome the presence in the Chamber of our

Haitian colleague, Ambassador Jean Cazeau. Like

other colleagues, I thank him for all the support his

Government provided to our recent visit to Haiti. We

naturally share the perspective that will be presented
later in this meeting on behalf of the European Union.

Today's discussion naturally concerns not only
the activities of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), but also the situation
in Haiti and its challenges: security, reconstruction,
economic and social development, functioning
institutions and strengthened rule of law, as well as the
defence and promotion of human rights, all in a context
affected by very considerable obstacles, as we have
just heard and as we recently saw for ourselves.

Indeed, the Haitian people and authorities face
the particularly daunting challenge of building a
working democracy in a context of weakened security,
widespread shortages of basic goods, generalized
suffering and specific problems with respect to
economic and social development. This is not,
unfortunately, an entirely unprecedented situation. In
order to confront it, however, and to overcome the
challenges, the first requirement is political stability,
clearly defined goals, determination and effective
cooperation among the institutions that were
legitimized by the democratic election. The resignation
of Prime Minister Conille a mere four months after his
appointment is naturally cause for increased concern,
since it affects the normal functioning of national
institutions and the accomplishment of critical and
urgent tasks. My delegation has full confidence in the
sense of responsibility of Haitian officials and in their
commitment to democratic values and practice, the
reconstruction of the country and a democratic State.
We call on them to act accordingly.

Security has long been a central issue in Haiti.
Despite being strengthening, the Haitian National
Police it is still not in the position to enforce law and
order throughout the country. That is why MINUSTAH
still has an important role to play in this sphere, even
in the context of the progressive drawdown of its
personnel. Nevertheless, the drawdown to the level of
January 2010 must take place without reducing
capacities of the MINUSTAH police and the Haitian
National Police.
It is evident that ensuring security and peace in
Haiti is first and foremost the responsibility of the

Haitian people and authorities. The international
community does not want to substitute for the national
authorities and can act only in support of the
stabilization and development that Haiti itself carries
out.

During the recent Security Council visit, the issue
of training a Haitian national army was raised. We
know that the question was discussed during the
electoral campaign and studied at the national level.
Naturally, we do not question the right of Haiti's
independent and sovereign State to an army. The
question is rather to determine whether this is the right
moment to allocate and spend significant material and
human resources on a project whose effective
contribution to resolving the serious and urgent
problems that Haiti faces remains unclear. That is why
we call on the Government of Haiti to act to ensure that
the issue is broadly and transparently discussed,
allowing conclusions anchored in reality.

The humanitarian situation and the protection of
human rights remain causes of concern for us. The
marginalization of particularly vulnerable groups, the
significant number of internally displaced persons and
gender violence are a problem for us. We congratulate
MINUSTAH on its work with UNICEF and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) to
harmonize the law on human trafficking with the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, ratified by Haiti in
2009.

The Secretary-General's report also voices
concerns regarding impunity. The efforts carried out by
the Haitian authorities and MINUSTAH are
commendable, but we believe that additional efforts,
above all the in the cases specifically highlighted in the
report, will still be necessary in the key area of
consolidating the rule of law.

In conclusion, MINUSTAH is adapting to new
human and material conditions in order to fulfil its
mandate in a difficult and sometimes adverse
environment. It is sometimes the object of denigration
the basis for which cannot be objectively determined.
This increases the pressure on MINUSTAH officials,
international partners and the Haitian authorities. It is
important that we be able to continue giving our
solidarity to the Haitian people and to MINUSTAH,
which is clearly committed to its mission. For our part,
this unwavering support cannot be called into question.
Allow me also to assure the Ambassador of Haiti of the
continued support of Portugal for the stability,
reconstruction and development of his country.

