Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Malaysian delegation of for
organizing today's meeting. We are also grateful to the
Force Commanders of the military components of the
missions in South Sudan, Mali and the Middle East for
their very comprehensive briefings. We believe that
this type of meeting format - by now traditional in
nature * is most useful. It allows us to better grasp
problems facing United Nations contingents on the
ground and to understand operational issues concerning
the activities of missions. This dialogue is especially
important in its consideration of the new challenges
and threats facing today's United Nations peacekeeping
operations, whose mandates are increasingly complex
and comprehensive.

One of the most dangerous trends is the growth of
non-traditional, non-State actors jeopardizing the safety
of peacekeepers. That places additional responsibilities
on the Security Council, which formulates the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Currently, the majority of
peacekeeping operations are tasked with the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. We are
convinced that the effectiveness of their implementation
is based on unswerving compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and the Security
Council's mandates, which, in turn, must be clear and
not subject to multiple interpretations.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a harbinger of hope for States in situations
of conflict. The population expects support to be
provided from the Organization, as well as measures
to suppress violence. That is why inaction on the part
of missions - just like the excessive use of force that
goes beyond the parameters set by the provisions of the
mandates - has a negative impact on the standing ofthe
United Nations and undermines the local population's
trust in the United Nations presence. In that context, the
imperative is to forge constructive daily cooperation
between peacekeepers and local authorities and to
promote capacity-building by host States, which
bear direct responsibility for the protection of their
own population. That applies, first and foremost, to
missions where the protection of civilians is a primary
objective. For example, the Security Council initially
entrusted the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) with a fairly strong mandate to protect the
civilian population. Unfortunately, however, as a result
of various factors, including systemic shortcomings in
terms of political and military analysis and forecasting
and operational planning in South Sudan, the Mission
was not always ready to tackle the tasks that had been
set. We expect that a careful analysis of the experience
of the leaders of UNMISS, the provision of regular
information to the Security Council about the situation
on the ground, as well as the allocation of substantial
additional resources to the Misison will have a positive
bearing on its effectiveness.

Of significant concern are the asymmetric threats
that have arisen in areas where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed. Among
these were a string of violent acts targeting the
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers, which led to
numerous casualties. In that regard, we note some work
on past mistakes made by the leadership ofthe Mission.
It has become clear that the effective implementation of
sanctions within the framework of Security Council-
granted broad mandates is feasible only ifpeacekeepers
are perfectly prepared and specially trained and
psychologically hardened, as well as supplied with the
appropriate modern equipment and transport assets.
Contingency deployment locations must be fortified in
military and engineering terms. Proper coordination
and exchange of operational data are also essential.
That process should involve host States and their
security forces, with strict respect for their sovereignty
and that of neighbouring and other interested States
and, if present, that of other foreign military presences
on the ground.

We think that the implementation of the aforementioned
tasks is impossible without appropriate and clear
command structures. However, the concept of military
responsibility is not limited to giving orders, but also
includes responsibility for the safety and security
one's subordinates. That is why a careful analysis of
emerging threats to United Nations personnel must
be an indispensable component in the planning of
operations. Achieving objectives should not take place
to the detriment of United Nations Blue Helmets. The
timeliness of the issues being discussed is borne out
by the fact that they were also clearly reflected in
yesterday's presentation to the Secretary-General by
the experts of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations of their report and recommendations,
which need to be carefully analysed and discussed.

