Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): This is the second time
this year that members of the Security Council have had the
opportunity to discuss the situation in Afghanistan and to
hear the views of other countries concerned with this
extremely difficult issue.

Six months ago the participants in the Security
Council's open debate on Afghanistan restated their
commitment to a negotiated settlement of the Afghan crisis.
Many of them underlined the importance of implementing
the principles enunciated in General Assembly resolution
50/88 B. In particular, they reaffirmed their support for
ongoing United Nations efforts to establish a fully
representative and broad-based authoritative council as the
most appropriate mechanism leading towards national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. They were in agreement that
the mandated tasks of that body should include, inter alia,
to negotiate and oversee an immediate and durable
ceasefire; to create and control a national security force to
provide for security throughout the country through various
undertakings; and to form an acceptable transitional
government. Obviously, for these objectives to be attained,
political will for peace among the warring Afghan parties
was needed.

Unfortunately, over the past six months the warring
factions in Afghanistan have not renounced the idea of a
military solution to the conflict. On the contrary, there has
been no end to their protracted armed struggle, and no
progress towards a comprehensive peaceful settlement. The
situation has been constantly deteriorating; the prospects for
stability are gradually fading.

The lack of normalization in Afghanistan has led to
the build-up of tensions, which persist around its perimeter.
The events unfolding over the last few weeks in
Afghanistan have aroused serious concern in the
international community. Military confrontation, as its
recent intensification clearly proves, leads nowhere.

All warring factions and all political forces in
Afghanistan must understand that it is not possible to

 

govern the country without embarking upon a serious
political dialogue aimed at national reconciliation.
Continued adherence by the parties to military options can
only perpetuate the present ordeal and will ultimately
threaten the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Afghanistan, with all the ensuing consequences for the
whole region.

The recent developments in Afghanistan again
brought to the attention of the international community
the other grave consequences of the conflict, namely the
humanitarian situation of the population and the problem
of human rights. According to international aid
organizations, the takeover of Kabul brought about the
exodus of as many as 250,000 residents, who fled to
northern areas of the country and to neighbouring
Pakistan. In our view, the negative impact of such
phenomena on the future of Afghanistan can hardly be
overestimated. It is worth noting as well that events of
this kind constitute in themselves a destabilizing factor in
the overall situation in Afghanistan.

The same can be said about matters such as the
dramatic deterioration of the social and economic status
of women in Afghanistan, which contravenes the
provisions of relevant international treaties. We call upon
the parties concerned in Afghanistan to respect the human
rights of their people. We also appeal for tolerance and
moderation in the exercise of control in all its dimensions
over the various parts of the territory of Afghanistan.

The Polish delegation is gravely concerned at recent
developments in Afghanistan and at the prospect of
continuing military hostilities. At this critical juncture we
wish to reaffirm our well-known position with regard to
Afghanistan's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well
as to the right of the Afghan people to determine their
own destiny. Hence, we call again upon all States in a
position to do so to assist the people of Afghanistan in
their search for a peaceful future in their country. In this
context, we wish to point to the critical importance of
restraint: restraint should be exercised by all concerned
with regard to supplying the parties with weapons and
other war-related materials.

Just as it did six months ago, the Polish delegation
continues to believe that only genuine national
reconciliation and respect for the interests of all the ethnic
and religious groups in Afghanistan, as well as for the
centuries-long tradition of Afghan statehood, can provide
a real basis for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. The
warring factions in Afghanistan should accept the fact that

 

their country is the common heritage of all Afghans and
that the development and reconstruction of Afghanistan can
only be enhanced through the participation of all ethnic and
cultural groups in the affairs of the country.

My delegation is still of the opinion that the United
Nations has an important role to play in bringing about the
cessation of civil war in Afghanistan and in achieving a
peaceful settlement to the Afghan conflict. We support the
diplomatic efforts of Mr. Norbert Holl, Head of the United
Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan, to mediate between
the warring parties and to bring them to the negotiating
table. In View of the seriousness of the situation, we declare
our readiness to examine ways in which the Security
Council can respond to the challenges posed by the present
state of affairs in Afghanistan.

These are the comments of my delegation, in addition
to the statement which is to be delivered by the presidency
of the European Union, who will speak also on behalf of
Poland.

