The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Georgia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/ 1999/ 1087.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 22 October 1999 (S/ 1999/ 1087).

"The Security Council warmly welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Boden as resident Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and hopes the
parties would see this as an opportune moment to give
renewed impetus to the search for a political
settlement.

"The Security Council welcomes the acceleration
of bilateral contacts at all levels between the Georgian
and Abkhaz sides and calls upon them to continue to
expand their contacts.

"The Security Council notes with grave concern
that, notwithstanding positive developments on some
issues, no progress has been made on the key issues
of the settlement, particularly the core issue of the
status of Abkhazia, Georgia. The Council therefore
strongly supports the intention of the Special
Representative to submit as soon as possible further
proposals to both sides on the distribution of
constitutional competences between Tbilisi and
Sukhumi, as part of a comprehensive settlement,
with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders, working in close cooperation
with the Russian Federation, in its capacity as
facilitator, the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General, and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand that
the parties to the conflict widen and deepen their
commitment to the United-Nations-led peace
process, in particular by resuming regular meetings
of the Coordinating Council and of its working
groups, and agrees with the Secretary-General that
they must continue to meet regularly regardless of
the constraints of domestic politics. The Council
calls upon the parties to agree upon and to take, in
the nearest future, the first concrete steps towards
the full return to Abkhazia, Georgia, of refugees and
internally displaced persons in safe, secure and
dignified conditions. The Council reminds the parties
that this would enable the office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to provide
substantial material assistance. The Council reiterates
its view on the unacceptability of any action by the
Abkhaz leadership in contravention of the principles
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
that the security situation has slightly improved, in
particular the reduction of tension along the line of
separation of forces, while noting the persistent
precariousness of the security of the United Nations
personnel. The Council reiterates its condemnation
of the hostage-taking of seven United Nations
personnel on 13 October 1999, welcomes the release
of the hostages, and stresses that the perpetrators of
this unacceptable act should be brought to justice.
 

The Council welcomes UN OMIG keeping its security
arrangements under constant review in order to ensure
the highest possible level of security for its staff.

"The Security Council pays tribute to Mr. Bota
for his valuable work while serving as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The Council
welcomes the important contributions that the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and
the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS peacekeeping force) continue to make in stabilizing
the situation in the zone of conflict, notes that the
working relationship between UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force has been good at all levels, and
stresses the importance of continuing and increasing
close cooperation and coordination between them in
the performance of their respective mandates."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.

