Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As we initiated today's meeting, and as a
number of assertions have been made concerning, in
one way or another, with the content of our statement
and the Russian position, I would like to make a few
remarks.

First, in some statements, there were affirmations
that Russia, in its statement in today's meeting, sought
somehow to call into question the investigations
conducted by the Dutch Safety Board, and that is
absolutely not true. However, the Council will agree
that it is somewhat strange that the Board has published
a preliminary report in which there is not even one
reference to resolution 2166 (2014). In the report, the
Board, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs noted, very
accurately, professionally and correctly formulated the
targets of its work so as to prevent the recurrence of
such an incident in the future, and that is quite right.
However, let us be honest. We are not experts, but I
think that everyone here today knows what is necessary
to ensure that such a tragedy does not happen again.
Flights should not be sent into conflict areas, and
civilian aircraft should not be targeted.

However, as our German colleague rightly
stated, there are many pending questions, and these
questions, we believe, lie in the area between the Dutch
investigation and resolution 2166 (2014). We are not
proposing abolishing the Board or creating a new one.
The first thing we are going to do is send our questions
to the Board. Then we shall continue to work with it,
with the broader participation of international bodies
such as the International Civil Aviation Organization,
which is mentioned in resolution 2166 (2014), and draw
on all the resources that the United Nations has to
offer. The need for cooperation is also mentioned in the
resolution.

Now, some rather strange bits of information were
cited that I must comment on. Our Ukrainian colleague,
for example, said that rebels at the crash site attempted
to somehow hide evidence, and the United States
representative surprisingly quoted something a rebel
had allegedly said to the effect that Moscow wanted the
black boxes. If Moscow had wanted those black boxes,
why did they end up London? If my colleagues are going
to be so literary in their expressions, I would ask them
to follow the chronology. Two or three days after the
crash, the black boxes were transferred entirely intact
to the Malaysians present at the crash site, and the
Malaysians then provided them to London. Now, how
could Moscow receive those black boxes from London,
when the report states that they were indeed intact? We
should in fact thank the rebels that the black boxes were
kept intact and transferred to the experts who are now
working with them.

The United States also accused Russia of blocking
access to the crash site for 10 days. That is not true. The
Australian delegation, I think, can underscore that this
is not the case, because as soon as resolution 2166 (2014)
was adopted, the question of the security of the area
arose. Telephone calls were made between the President
of Russia and the Prime Ministers of the Netherlands and
Australia. During those phone calls, we discussed the
possibility of adopting yet another Council resolution
that would ensure a presence at the crash site that would
guarantee the security of the investigations. Moreover,
with our Australian colleagues, we even presented a
draft text on that issue. I recall that we asked them if
they might care like to author the draft resolution and
did not insist that it be our draft, but stated that if they
wanted something, there it was. We offered to adopt it
that very day. However, Australia and the Netherlands
took a different decision, as was their right. They
decided to start negotiations with the Ukrainian side.
Why did those talks go on for 10 days? That is their
right and a question of their relations with Ukraine,
but Russia was ready to do everything in its power to
ensure that international investigators came promptly
to the crash site.

Certain questions have been raised regarding
security. Once again, the rebels have somehow been
blamed for everything. The rebels controlled the area
of the crash site. Why was there gunfire at the site?
The most important security issue was ensuring that
the Kyiv authorities did not attempt to seize that area
in violation of resolution 2166 (2014). Moreover, Russia
twice attempted to stop such incursions into the crash
site so that the investigation might proceed normally.
On 28 July, when Kyiv threatened to seize the area of
the crash site, we proposed a draft press statement for
the Security Council calling for the implementation
of resolution 2166 (2014), and for some reason three
Security Council members blocked it. On 7 August,
when the Ukrainian Government had declared that it
would bypass the ceasefire regime, and that its decision
had been approved by the investigating countries,
we again convened a Council meeting and called for
compliance with the resolution. For some reason,
Council members could not agree once again. So if
security has not been upheld, Russia is not to blame.
The sponsors of the Kyiv Government and their military
actions are the ones to blame.

Regarding the shots fired on the monitors of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on 14 September, for some reason people said that
the rebels were responsible. That is not right. There
were two shots, coming from the north, which was
the position of the Ukrainian armed forces, and one of
those shots happened at a border crossing point that was
controlled by rebels. The rebels would not have been
shooting at themselves, would they?

Another issue has been raised that I do not think
is appropriate for the Security Council, since we are
not here to discuss various versions of what happened.
However, as some colleagues have allowed themselves
to get into such analyses, I must respond. Our United
Kingdom colleague, for example, said that a Buk missile
system with three missiles instead of four was seen, as
he affirmed, moving towards Russia, and that it was that
system that shot down the Malaysian aircraft. Indeed,
such images were distributed by the Kyiv authorities
and made their way around the world. But why would
one believe that the Buk missile system was heading
for Russia? The most important thing here is that it was
clear from those images that the launch system was
heading west, towards an area controlled by the rebels.
The Kyiv authorities were therefore incriminating
themselves by claiming that the Malaysian aircraft was
shot down by that system. That would have meant that
they had launched the missile.

Once again, Russian officials have accused no one.
We shared our information. We asked questions and
asked for clarifications, but we did not accuse anyone,
and we said that there should be investigations. Some
colleagues were hasty in saying that the investigations
had shown that the aeroplane was shot down by a rocket.
We do not see anything about that in the preliminary
report. It speaks of three civilian aircraft in the area of
the Malaysian aeroplane, but we do not see any evidence
stating that there was no military aircraft.

With regard to the information provided by our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, we wonder if there has
been any contact at all between the Board and the
Ukrainian armed forces. We do not know. Perhaps,
under the Board's standard working regulations, they
cannot be in contact with military officers but only
with civilian representatives. In that case, the Security
Council might do something to broaden the scope of the
work and ensure that they are in contact with those who
can respond to those questions.

Furthermore, with regard to the exclusion of the
type of aircraft in the preliminary report, I recall that
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe who saw the remains in the very
first days said that even an amateur could understand
that the aircraft had been shot down by an air-to-air
system. I am no specialist, but that is what the evidence
indicated.

Now if we want to talk about the versions put
forward recently in the German Parliament, an answer
to the question posed by a Deputy of Parliament was put
forth. The answer was based on information provided
by NATO, which had said that it could have been a
different anti-aircraft rocket system that is not used by
the Russian army but is used by the Ukrainian army.
Once again, the Security Council is not the place for
members to be putting forward various hypotheses. It is
a place to assist with the investigations and clarify the
questions to which we want answers. I repeat, we will
send our questions to the Dutch Safety Board and hope
that they will be addressed credibly and transparently
and that the questions will be distributed as a Security
Council document.

Let the entire world work collectively to ensure
that this tragic incident is fully clarified without any
insinuations, intimations or references to evidence
that has not been brought forth. If members are not
sharing information, what they are providing is not
an eyewitness account, but rather fiction. That is not
suitable evidence for the investigation.

