The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2002/l415, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to bring to the attention of members of the
Council an editorial error in paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution: the word "other" should be deleted.

I wish also to bring to the attention of Council
members photocopies of the Kabul Declaration on
Good-Neighbourly Relations. The text of the
Declaration will be circulated as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol 8/2002/1416.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it (S/2002/l415), as orally corrected. IfI hear no
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:

Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab Republic, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution, as orally
corrected, has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1453 (2002).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.

