Mr. Jurica (Croatia): We would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abadallah, for
his briefing. We are also very grateful for all his hard
work in Somalia. In addition, we appreciate the
intervention by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

We share the encouragement expressed around
the table with respect to the positive political
developments in the Djibouti peace process, in
particular the election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
as President of Somalia. We hope that his election and,
more important, his future actions will encourage those
Somali partners still outside the Djibouti process to
join in. In that connection, we expect that the
determination of President Ahmed, as expressed in his
inaugural speech, to reach out to all Somalis will yield
concrete results quite soon, thus paving the way for
more inclusive political arrangements and genuine
national reconciliation. The Council, for its part, will
use all its leverage to provide support for the ongoing
political process, including by persuading others to join
in.

Unfortunately, the security situation does not
offer the same encouragement, which makes the recent
positive developments on the political track even more
vulnerable. Although the worst possible scenario of
widespread fighting in the aftermath of the withdrawal
of Ethiopian forces did not materialize, the continuing
insurgency by Al-Shabaab and the increased targeting
of AMISOM. troops and humanitarian workers are of
the utmost concern.

As for the security options before us, we firmly
believe that Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of
16 January 2009 has offered the only viable and
realistic security options available at present, namely,
the enhancing of AMISOM. and Somali capacity-
building, in particular of the joint security and police
forces established under the Djibouti peace process.
We have fully supported the realism and the gradual
nature of such an approach as the basis for our future
actions. Also, we find the conclusions of the technical
assessment mission - in particular the benchmarks for
the eventual peacekeeping operation, as set out in the
report (S/2009/132) * helpful in that respect.

Equally, we very much welcome the intention of
the Secretary-General, as expressed in the report before

us, to convene a donors conference and set up trust
funds for AMISOM. and for the capacity-building of
Somali institutions. In addition, we wish to express our
appreciation to AMISOM, whose troops are operating
in extremely difficult conditions, in particular since the
withdrawal of Ethiopian forces. We commend the
troop-contributing countries Uganda and Burundi for
their persistence and offer the hope that others will
follow suit in honouring their pledges.

My delegation shares the grave concerns
expressed by Council members regarding the effects of
the continuing deterioration in security on an already-
dire humanitarian situation and on the civilian
population. In a situation in which more than 3 million
Somalis are in dire need of assistance, humanitarian
access should continue to be a priority for the
international community as a whole. Furthermore, we
find the reports from the field about civilians being at
the mercy of all parties involved in the conflict -
including the targeted killings of persons linked to the
Transitional Federal Government, the Islamic Courts
Union, the United Nations and civil society
organizations - extremely disturbing.

All parties to the conflict should be held
accountable for violations of international
humanitarian law, including guarantees for the
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid. In that light,
we call once again for an end to the culture of
impunity. We commend the initiatives by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, to start the deliberations on the need to
set up a mechanism to deal with the issues of justice
and reconciliation. We hope to see concrete results
from that praiseworthy and much-needed effort in the
near future.

Finally, as the latest report of the Secretary-
General on piracy (S/2009/ 146) has reminded us, there
remains a critical need to tackle problems in Somalia
with a multifaceted approach. My country subscribes to
that view, which aims to ensure that the political
process, the African Union's peacekeeping efforts, the
strengthening of law-enforcement institutions and
capacity-building initiatives work in tandem. In
conclusion, I would like to mention that the Croatian
Government has provided several military officers to
join Operation Atalanta in the fight against piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

