Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome Serbian
Prime Minister Ivica Dacie to the Council and thank
him for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hashim
Thaci and thank him for his statement.

We wish to begin by expressing South Africa's
appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK, under
the capable leadership of Mr. Zarif, in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

While the situation in Kosovo is somewhat
stable, the incidents brought to our attention in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/603) underline the
fact that fault lines still exist that have the potential
to negate the gains made, resulting in pushing the
parties farther apart, unless they are addressed and a
solution is found. We welcome the recent visit to the
region by the Secretary-General and his call for strong
efforts towards the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, including a true, serious and
sincere commitment to dialogue.

My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, as mandated by the General
Assembly. We are pleased that the new Serbian
Government, in particular the new President, has
reaffirmed its commitment to that negotiation process
and to honouring all agreements reached thus far. South
Africa encourages all sides to strengthen that dialogue
process in order to reach agreement on outstanding
and contentious issues, including the difficulties being
encountered in the implementation of agreements
already reached. Implementation should be done in
the same good faith manner in which agreements were
reached in the first place.

The successful holding of the Serbian elections in
Kosovo should not be underestimated. The peaceful and
orderly manner in which they took place is a positive
sign that there is political will to peacefully resolve
issues. The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe is to be commended for its role in facilitating
that process. We are, however, concerned that the
security situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile.
The continued outbreaks of violence and increased
tension between ethnic groups are symptomatic of the
largely unresolved matters between Serbia and Kosovo.
That is not conducive to creating the conditions for
peace and national reconciliation to take place. Both
sides should work towards exercising restraint and
preventing violent confrontations from occurring. We
call on all sides to utilize regular, direct dialogues as
an important confidence-building measure to improve
trust and allow the parties to address the outstanding
and contentious issues.

We welcome the progress achieved so far in
identifying the remains of some missing persons. The
parties' commitment and cooperation on the issue
of missing persons is to be commended. We remain
confident that, with the support of UNMIK and
assistance from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, much can be achieved.

The treatment of ethnic minorities and the lack of
protection measures appear to be impeding progress on
their voluntary return to Kosovo. We have noted that the
figures on the returnees are much lower, as compared
to the previous year. The international community must
affirm that it remains the responsibility of Kosovo's
authorities to ensure that safe conditions on the ground
are present, to protect the rights ofminorities by law and
that protective measures are employed in that regard. My
delegation again urges the parties to show the necessary
flexibility and to cooperate in finding solutions to this
outstanding issue. The successful resolution ofthe issue
ofthe treatment of ethnic minorities in Kosovo could be
used as an important confidence-building measure to
improve trust and create the climate for the parties to
address other outstanding and contentious issues.

My delegation remains concerned that cultural
and religious sites in Kosovo continue to face security
risks, including vandalism. We call on Pristina to
reinforce security measures to guard such sites.
The public reconciliatory pronouncements from the
leaders on both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.

Regarding the allegations about organ trafficking,
we have noted the progress that has been achieved thus
far, and we wish to reiterate our position that a credible,
third-party, impartial and independent inquiry into the
allegations should be conducted.

In conclusion, South Africa maintains that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the
basis for the resolution of the situation in Kosovo. It
is therefore incumbent on the international presence in
Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, to maintain a steady,
neutral position in the execution of their mandates, in
line with the Security Council's previous decisions. The
two sides should refrain from any actions that could
undermine the achievements attained in the dialogue
process. We therefore call on the parties to exercise
flexibility and to enhance their engagement in order
to resolve outstanding matters and for reconciliation to
prevail.

