Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): Like other
colleagues, I would like to convey our heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh on the tragic death of nine peacekeepers in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Sukehiro Hasegawa for his comprehensive briefing and
to commend him for his excellent work. I also
welcome the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste to the
Security Council.

Denmark associates itself with the statement that
the representative of Luxembourg will make on behalf
of the European Union.

It is very promising that the positive
developments and progress in Timor-Leste have
continued during the past three months. The
democratic process has been further consolidated by
the holding of local elections and by the National
Parliament's law-making process. We welcome the
Government's efforts to fulfil its reporting obligations
under international human rights instruments and, in
that respect, we urge the Government to urgently select
the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice.

The presence in Timor-Leste of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
has been an important stabilizing factor, and
UNMISET has ensured significant progress in
institution-building. But much still remains to be done
in key areas such as capacity-building in the public
sector and the consolidation of a legal framework. The
task for UNMISET now is to complete a smooth
transition from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding
operation that can ensure a sustainable development
assistance framework.

It is clear, as described by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2005/99), that Timor-Leste will need
the support of the United Nations system also after the
termination of UNMISET's mandate. My Government
supports a continued United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste in order to successfully complete the work
the Council initiated in 1999. In that respect, we note
the Secretary-General's recommendations for a
restructured mission and look forward to further
discussion in the Council of those recommendations.

In considering future United Nations assistance to
Timor-Leste, including on capacity-building in the
public sector, my Government will support an approach
based on national ownership that places Timor-Leste in
the driver's seat. The number of international United
Nations advisers must be reduced over the coming
months to give room for the Timorese to assert their
leadership.

My Government has noted with great satisfaction
the improved relationship between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. It is our hope that the improved relationship
will soon be translated into concrete progress on the
delineation of the two countries' common land border.
We urge the two parties to spare no effort to resolve the
pending issues.

Denmark fully shares the view of the Secretary-
General that the issue of serious crimes committed in
Timor-Leste in 1999 is a concern not only for the two
countries, but also for the international community at
large. The fight against impunity is of outmost
importance, and the perpetrators of those crimes must
be brought to justice.

My Government therefore welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1573 (2004), to establish a
commission of experts to conduct a thorough
assessment of the progress made in the legal
proceedings at the two national human rights tribunals
in Jakarta and Dili respectively. We strongly urge the
two parties to fully cooperate with the expert
commission.

Denmark also welcomes the formation of a
bilateral Truth and Friendship Commission by
Indonesia and Timor-Leste and hopes that the
Commission will further contribute to progress in the
fight against impunity.

