Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina considers it an honour to have in our midst
today the Presidents of the International Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, Judge Meron and
Judge Mose, as well as the Prosecutors, Ms. Carla Del
Ponte and Mr. Hassan Jallow, to whom we have
listened with attention.

As the Council is aware, my country, which has a
long tradition of support for international law and
international justice, has been following actively the
work of both Tribunals. That work is without question
an important milestone in the evolution of international
law. In this context, my delegation wishes to express
its thanks for the updated report on the work of both
Tribunals and on their completion strategies
(S/2005/343 and Corr.1), presented pursuant to the
Council's resolution 1534 (2004). Since the
information provided is complete and detailed, I have
just a few specific comments on issues that my country
considers important.

First, with regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we
appreciate the fact that an increase of 50 per cent in the
number of indictees awaiting trial: 51 currently,
compared with 34 when the last report (S/2004/897)
was reported. We must understand that while that
increase may indeed slow the pace of the work, it is
important. Thus it seems appropriate to us that two
working groups of judges have been established,
responsible for studying procedures and practices in
order to speed the processing of trials. Along those
lines, we believe that the possibility of having recourse
to ad litem judges is a way in which to swiftly and
efficiently lessen the workload. We hope that the
election of ad litem judges - which has had to be
postponed more than once because of an insufficient
number of candidates - can finally take place. In our
View, further modification of the Statute should be
considered in all such instances, since the reform
implemented under resolution 1597 (2005) has clearly
not been sufficient. We do not believe that the election
should continue to be delayed.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Argentina takes note of
the fact that the number of accused whose trials have
been concluded or are under way has now risen to 50,
with 16 accused awaiting trial. That indicates to us the
Tribunal's workload. We believe that the referral of
cases to national jurisdictions is another option that
will make it possible to lighten the workload and speed
up the cases before the Tribunal. It is important that the
Tribunal and the Office of the Prosecutor keep the
Security Council informed about their discussions with
various States with a view to transferring indictees to
national jurisdictions. In this case, it is essential that
the Tribunal obtain sufficient guarantees from those
national courts that they will ensure respect for due
process in all cases.

As stated in the report before us, the ICTR
Appeals Chamber's workload, which is shared with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), will increase as progress is made
in the completion strategy. The report indicates that at
some point it will be necessary to increase the number
of judges so that they can resolve the submitted appeals
by 2010 at the latest. We support that.

The Appeals Chamber will gradually become a
key factor in ensuring that the Tribunals can conclude
the completion strategy by 2010, as the Security
Council called upon them to do in resolution 1503
(2003). I believe it is important that there be a clear
procedure in the Statutes and in the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence providing for the permanent assignment
of judges to the Appeals Chamber. The current lack of
a clear mechanism permits the discretionary
reassignment to a Trial Chamber of judges currently
serving in the Appeals Chamber. That could affect the
work of judges in ongoing trials by removing them,
without any expressed reason, from the cases that they
are hearing. In our view, such a situation should be
prevented by correcting the statutes as soon as
possible.

In conclusion, Argentina hopes that despite the
new factors that, as indicated in the reports, could
affect the implementation of the completion strategy,
the Tribunals will be able to complete their work
promptly, as requested by the Security Council. We
must reiterate that the work of both Tribunals deserves
Argentina's full support. Undoubtedly, once the
pending cases have been finalized, they will constitute
a precedent of fundamental value for the work of the
International Criminal Court.

