Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank our
briefers, Special Envoy Kafando for his update and
Ambassador Lauber for updating us on his trip to
Burundi and the region, and for so clearly setting out
his recommendations. I would also like to welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028),
which provides a valuable record of factual information
on the current situation in Burundi, and we look forward
to discussing the set of options that the Secretary-
General will present to the Council on the United
Nations continuing role in Burundi.

The United Kingdom agrees with the Secretary-
General and so many Council members here today
that the East African Community (EAC)-led
inter-Burundian dialogue, led by the region, is the only
viable option to guarantee open and inclusive elections
in 2020. We also recognize the importance of the
African Union in supporting the EAC efforts in that
regard. We commend the EAC for its engagement so far
and the efforts of the EAC facilitator, former President
Mkapa, and Special Envoy Kafando, despite the many
challenges to progress. There is still a long way to go
before inclusive, fair and credible elections can take
place in 2020, and the credibility of those elections will
be essential for the stability of Burundi. Citizens must
have faith in their political process in order to accept
its results.

For that reason, we share the disappointment of the
representative of Peru and many other speakers here
today that the Government of Burundi did not attend
the fifth round of the inter-Burundian dialogue. Its
participation is crucial to making that process a success.
We therefore encourage the EAC to redouble its efforts
to remain engaged and continue to push for a tangible
inclusive dialogue. A harmonized road map that all
parties can support and which preserves the gains of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement is
crucial. We hope that discussions on how to achieve
that will take place at the summit of the EAC Heads
of State. We also call on the Government and its allied
parties to continue to engage in dialogue with the region
and, in doing so, send a clear signal of its continued
commitment to resolving the ongoing political crisis.

We continue to be deeply concerned by reports
of human rights violations, abuses and related crimes
that have continued since our last briefing in August
(S/PV.8325). The Special Envoy mentioned that issue
during his own briefing. The recent suspension of
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
is of deep concern. Those NGOs support the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable in Burundi, including
refugees and those with infectious diseases. The
humanitarian situation will inevitably deteriorate
without those actors, and therefore we hope that the
registration of the NGOs can continue without delay.

I would also like to agree with my Polish colleague
when he spoke about the centrality of human rights
issues to the work of the Council. We heard earlier this
year from Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, former United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, that
human rights violations and abuses can often be the
canary in the coal mine when it comes to predicting a
conflict; therefore, it is very important that, as a Council,
we remain seized of these issues. I also note that many
speakers have noted the role that the Human Rights
Council has to play on Burundi. I would therefore urge
the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully with the
Human Rights Council's mechanisms, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

It is clear from the Secretary-General's report- and
from wider discussion here today - that Burundi
should remain on the Council's agenda. Although the
security situation may have improved, armed attacks
continue, and we have deep concerns about the political
crisis and the humanitarian and human rights situation.
As we have seen many times before, those are often
the root causes of conflict and must be addressed by
the Council.

