Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to welcome
Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Hyseni. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.

It goes without saying that the changes in the
situation on the ground since Kosovo's declaration of
independence and the deployment of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) have made it
possible to appropriately reconfigure the Mission and
its activities. In that context, I should like to
congratulate the bureau of the Mission on having taken
the concerns of communities into account. We believe
that it is extremely important that those efforts
continue, in particular with regard to the minorities.
That will allow for the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons, the monitoring and protection of
human rights and continued mediation among local
communities.

Despite the prevailing calm and recent positive
developments in Kosovo, such as the return of certain
Serbian police to carry out their duties, we remain
concerned about the tense situation in the northern
municipalities, since they are functioning in isolation,
separately from other areas of Kosovo, and in some
cases are linked to separate conflicts between Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians. In that connection, we
would like to commend the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as mediator and its efforts to reduce tension and begin
reconstruction, with the assistance of EULEX and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We condemn any attacks on
the United Nations Mission and its property in Kosovo,
and we wish to stress the need to ensure the safety,
security and rights of United Nations personnel,
wherever they might be.

We share the opinion expressed by the Secretary-
General with regard to inviting the parties to adopt an
approach based on common interests, to adopt a
constructive policy concerning reconciliation between
various ethnic groups, to exhibit restraint and to avoid
any incendiary statements that could lead to an
escalation of violence in the region. All parties must
refrain from any act that could destabilize the region.
We are aware that there are differing points of view
concerning the status of Kosovo, and we await the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on that issue. However, we are hopeful that dialogue
and constructive cooperation will continue so that all
sects and communities can coexist in an atmosphere of
cooperation far removed from acts of violence.

We have taken note of the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2009/497), and we join others in thanking the
Mission for its efforts to strengthen dialogue and
pragmatic cooperation among communities and
between Pristina and Belgrade in order to establish
stability in Kosovo and in the Balkan region in general.

