Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on the tragic situation of the
Venezuelan people.

Indeed, for nearly three years, Venezuela has
been plunged into an unprecedented crisis - with a
depleted economy, a population deprived of basic
necessities and the tyrannical and brutal repression
of opponents and peaceful protesters, as well as the
exodus of more than 3 million Venezuelans, both
migrants and refugees, eager to flee a situation that is,
quite frankly, chaotic. The problem goes beyond the
borders of Venezuela itself and is a destabilizing factor
for regional security. It is therefore perfectly legitimate
for the Security Council to address this issue as part of
its role in conflict prevention. In that context, I would
like to emphasize two priorities in moving towards a
resolution of the crisis.

The first priority is nothing less than respect for the
will of the people. In that regard, France applauds the
bravery of the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators
who have been taking to the streets of Venezuela since
23 January. As said by the President of the Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, democracy must be restored in
Venezuela. Nicolas Maduro, who seeks to undertake a
second term on the basis of a mockery of an election,
must immediately announce the organization of new
presidential elections. They must be democratic - that
is to say, free and transparent - and in accordance
with the Venezuelan constitutional order and under
international observation. France has campaigned
tirelessly for a negotiated political solution to the crisis,
and the European Union has repeatedly offered its help
to achieve that goal. Nicolas Maduro must understand
that he must now seize this last opportunity.

If such elections are not announced in a timely
manner, the European Union, in accordance with the
declaration that has just been adopted by its 28 members
in Brussels, will take new measures, concerning in
particular recognizing the Venezuelan authorities
in accordance with article 233 of the Venezuelan
Constitution. As President Macron announced this
morning, France is therefore ready to recognize
Juan Guaido, within 8 days, as interim President of
Venezuela in order to initiate a political process.

Furthermore, France urges the Venezuelan
authorities to respect the rights of the National Assembly,
the only democratically elected institution, especially
the principle of the immunity of its members, and to
cease all acts of repression against the population.

Apart from its institutions, the men and women who
are politically engaged in the defence of human rights
and Venezuelan democracy must be able to pursue
their activities without fear of threats or reprisals. The
excessive use of force is simply unacceptable, especially
against democratically elected representatives, civil
society representatives and peaceful protesters. The
Venezuelan people have the right to make their voices
heard. In that respect, France recalls its commitment to
the freedom ofthe press and the protection ofj ournalists,
who must be able to exercise their profession freely.
The second, and equally urgent, priority is to put an
end to the humanitarian crisis. Millions of Venezuelans
have had to leave their country in the absence of a
State capable of providing basic services, including
medical care and basic necessities. The solidarity of
the countries of the region - in particular Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru and Brazil - in the face of this human
tragedy is to be welcomed. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, which have
appointed a joint special representative, are also doing
an outstanding job. France, in its national capacity,
and the European Union are also contributing to this
humanitarian effort to mitigate the suffering of the
Venezuelan people.

As the situation continues to deteriorate, France
urges the Venezuelan authorities to allow and facilitate
the work of international humanitarian actors and
non-governmental organizations that seek to provide
humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable men
and women in society, in particular children, people
with disabilities and the elderly. As a staunch proponent
of freedom, equality and fraternity in accordance
with its national motto, France stands alongside the
Venezuelan people and hails the courage of all those
who stand ready to defend the freedom and democratic
institutions of their country.

