Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this important discussion on threats to
international peace and security and for providing us
with a very helpful concept paper (see S/2010/94) to
facilitate the discussion. We thank the Secretary-
General for his invaluable views on the subject. We
also thank Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for his succinct
briefing. We commend the role of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and its partners,
both within and outside the United Nations system, in
addressing the myriad problems of drug trafficking and
related transnational organized crime.

Drug trafficking remains an endemic and
lucrative organized transnational crime and thus a
major threat to global peace and security. No country is
totally immune to its devastating consequences. None,
indeed, can fight and win the anti-narcotics war in
isolation. In Africa, drug trafficking, cultivation,
processing and abuse are on the rise, inevitably
constituting barriers to the continent's development
efforts. International drug cartels from other regions of
the world continue to exploit the under-resourced law
enforcement capability of most African countries and
to turn them into major transit points for prohibited
drugs and arms.

The subregion most affected by their nefarious
activities is West Africa, which is fast emerging as a
major warehouse and transit point for cocaine and
other illicit drugs. The activities of these drug cartels
constitute a major threat not only to the subregion's
fledgling democratic structures but also to good
governance and the rule of law. Indeed, they constitute
serious impediments to subregional efforts to promote
human prosperity, genuine wealth creation, productive
work, development and peacebuilding. Drug trafficking
has led directly to increased violent crime, small arms
proliferation, human trafficking, systemic corruption,
money laundering and political and economic
instability. Drug trafficking nourishes the illicit trade in
firearms, which in turn provides the fuel for conflicts
to flourish in our subregion.

The fight against organized transnational crime
should not be left to one country or region. It requires
coordinated, comprehensive and effective global
cooperation. That approach obliges not only the
Council but also the international community to always
take into account the larger question of drug supply
and drug demand control channels, as they are
invariably interrelated. If we adopt a supply control
approach it will facilitate the investigation, arrest and
prosecution of drug traffickers. Seizure of assets in
countries from which the drugs emanate should be
vigorously encouraged. On the demand side, measures
must be taken to promote drug education and increased
public awareness on the consequences of illegal drug
use and trade in countries where the drugs are
consumed. Such measures should be complemented
with enhanced information exchange and intelligence-
led policing.

We support the mainstreaming of crime
prevention in conflict prevention strategies, conflict
analysis and integrated mission assessment and
planning. To achieve this, it is important to build
capacities of regional and national authorities to enable
them to fulfil their international obligations on narcotic
drugs, terrorism, arms control and transnational
organized crime.

Indeed, a multifaceted approach at the national,
regional and global levels, in the wider context of
poverty eradication and human development, is
required. Criminal justice and law enforcement
responses must be supported with programmes aimed
at addressing the root causes of crime and the
eradication of poverty. In that regard, the United
Nations system as a whole should recommit itself to
the goal of assisting countries to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by the target date of
2015.

We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and committed and concerted action by
the international community. Our discussion today has
afforded us yet another opportunity to reflect on the
consequences of transnational threats to regional and
international peace. We already have the legal
instruments and tools to make crime unattractive and
unprofitable. What we need most at this time is to
mobilize the requisite political will and resources to
win the war against organized transnational criminals.

We support the draft presidential statement to be
issued at the end of this debate.

