The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Australia, Belgium,
Brazil, Burundi, Canada, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Georgia, Germany, Ireland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and
Thailand to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, Mr. Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and Mr. Vijay Pillai, Adviser in the Office of
the Vice-President of the African region of the World
Bank.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service of the European Union; and Mr. Pascal
Couchepin Roger, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2016/223, which contains a note verbale
dated 8 March 2016 from the Permanent Mission of
Angola addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/232, containing the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

I further wish to draw the attention of Council
members to the letter dated 17 March 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which conveys the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017.
This letter will be issued as a document of the Council,
in the coming days, under the symbol 8/2016/255.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

