Mr. Brattskar (Norway): Norway regards the
protection of civilians as an important issue on the
Security Council's agenda. I would like, through you,
Madam President, to thank Mr. Oshima for briefing us
today. We would have hoped that the work would have
proceeded somewhat further than seems to be the case,
but we do understand that the particular challenges
over the last couple of months have made it necessary
to give priority to more immediate challenges.

We do hope and trust, however, that the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will
be able to ensure further progress in the weeks and
months ahead, and we are encouraged by the
suggestions that informal discussions be organized on a
more substantial basis early next year. I look forward to
a briefing on further progress as soon as feasible
thereafter.

At this stage I would like to ask Mr. Oshima,
through you, Madam President, to elaborate somewhat
on the following two questions. First, the current
situation in Afghanistan represents a number of
challenges with regard to protection of civilians. It has
also struck many of us that the recommendations of the
Secretary-General are highly relevant in ensuring an
adequate international response to the humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan. To what extent is the United
Nations dealing with the Afghanistan situation, making
use of the framework being established for the
protection of civilians through the reports to the
Security Council and the Council's increased attention
to these aspects of its work?

My second question is related to the preparation
of the aide-memoire referred to in Mr. Oshima's
briefing and in the letter to the Secretary-General. In
our view, this aide-memoire should be short, concise
and comprehensive to increase its value as a practical
reference guide for the Council. In addition to its
resolutions on protection of civilians, the Council had
also adopted resolutions on a number of other
important issues, most recently the resolution on
children and armed conflict adopted yesterday and the
resolution on women, peace and security a couple of
weeks ago. Is OCHA also taking into account the
relevant provisions of these resolutions in preparing the
aide-memoire to ensure the necessary comprehensive
coverage?

