Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing our gratitude to Ambassador
Munoz, Chairman of the Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee, for his briefing to the Council on
the work of the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring
Team and in commending him and his Mission for the
exemplary manner in which they have led the work of
the Committee over the last two years. I would also
like to take note of the second report of the Monitoring
Team, submitted on 15 December, pursuant to
resolution 1526 (2004).

The Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee
has made considerable progress in terms of
harmonizing and coordinating implementation of
sanctions by States in three key areas: the freezing of
financial assets, the imposition of travel bans and an
arms embargo. However, it is obvious that Al Qaeda
continues to pose a threat to international peace and
security.

Today's meeting happens to be the final
opportunity for my delegation to discuss the work of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team as a member
of the Security Council. I would therefore like to
utilize this opportunity to make a few comments.

First, we believe that the Committee should
institutionalize the process of regularly reviewing and
updating the consolidated list to maintain its efficiency
and relevance. It should also improve its listing and
delisting procedures in accordance with the
requirements of due process in order to make those
procedures transparent and efficient and to ensure
greater cooperation with all States.

Second, the notion of "associates of terrorists"
should not be interpreted too expansively, as that can
dilute the focus and effectiveness of the work of the
Committee.

Third, the Committee should help States to
strengthen their national banking and financial
mechanisms to prevent the abuse of alternative
remittance systems. Care should be taken not to unduly
target Islamic charities, hamper their genuine welfare
actions or penalize them for the actions of some of
their employees.

Fourth, we have noted the Chairman's comment
that visited States have found great use in the
Committee's visits. We believe that those visits should
be used, in particular, to identify and facilitate the
provision of long-term, sustainable technical assistance
to those States.

Fifth, the Committee should continue to look not
only at country reports but also at countries' counter-
terrorism actions on the ground, in practical terms, in
order to evaluate their performance in fulfilling the
obligations set by the Security Council.

Sixth, we have noted the Committee's efforts to
cooperate with other United Nations bodies and
Committees. Such cooperation should be pursued
within the respective mandates of the Committee and
the other bodies concerned.

Seventh, the Al Qaeda and Taliban Committee is
dealing with an issue that concerns all States.
Therefore, ways and means should be explored to
associate the larger membership of the United Nations
with the work of this and other relevant Committees.

The threat of terrorism continues to confront the
international community. Pakistan is no exception. The
Al Qaeda and Taliban threat is especially relevant to
Pakistan, in particular because those organizations
have targeted Pakistan and its leadership. We have
taken extensive measures to combat terrorism, and had
taken such measures even before 11 September 2001.
We have strengthened our domestic legal framework
and are working on further improving our financial
mechanisms. Pakistan has extended international
cooperation to both multilateral and bilateral agencies
dealing with terrorism. We have launched actions in
the tribal areas of our western border and arrested more
key Al Qaeda operatives than any other country.

However, all of us, including the 1267
Committee, need to bear in mind that there is a need
for a broader strategy that addresses the challenge of
terrorism - a challenge that is mutating in a
comprehensive and effective manner. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee, which
deals with an important aspect of the terrorist threat,
both have to play an active and cooperative role.

In that regard, we have also noted the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change for a comprehensive strategy
against terrorism. The Secretary-General has promised
to suggest such a strategy in the near future. The Panel
has identified a number of elements for that strategy,
such as dissuasion; promotion of social and political
rights, the rule of law and democratic reform; ending
occupation and addressing major political grievances;
and reducing poverty and unemployment. We believe
that such a strategy must include a more direct
approach to addressing the root causes of terrorism.
President Musharraf has outlined such a
comprehensive approach in his concept of enlightened
moderation. We must include ways to address the
larger systemic and structural issues, including the
reform of the unequal international economic system.

Suggestions have also been made by the Panel for
a legal definition of terrorism. The Panel has rightly
asserted that no cause justifies targeting of innocent
civilians. We believe that it needs to be added that such
terrorism can be committed both by non-State and by
State actors. Terrorist actions by sections of legitimate
national liberation struggles for self-determination do
not in themselves delegitimize such legitimate national
liberation struggles.

