Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Wejoin others in felicitating
you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate.
We also appreciate the concept note prepared by the
delegations of Portugal and India (S/20l2/853, annex).

Pakistan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement later in the debate.

We thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his
leadership and the members of the Portuguese
delegation for their efficient conduct of the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Ambassador Moraes Cabral has
highlighted some of the important achievements of the
Working Group. The delegation of Pakistan actively
contributed to that collective effort.

Improving the Council's working methods is an
integral part of comprehensive reform of the Security
Council, which is a shared objective of the entire United
Nations membership. It is encouraging to note the
enhanced attention to working methods in the Council
itself. The organization of open debates such as this
is a manifestation of the importance that the Council
attaches to this issue, as well as of the keen interest
that it generates among the general membership. We
should reinforce that trend. Such discussions will
translate into tangible benefits only through effective
follow-up. The Council should further deliberate on
practicable suggestions flowing from this debate
with a view to their operationalization. The Working
Group's role is of continuous relevance in that regard.
The implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 is
a work in progress. In our View, such implementation
should incorporate and formalize additional substantive
aspects of working methods, while also reviewing the
status of the measures already integrated.

We would like to focus on three principal aspects
of the debate.

First, transparency, democracy and inclusion
are fundamental to improving the Council's working
methods. Pakistan believes that the advancement
of those principles will enhance the Council's
accountability to the general membership.

Secondly, the importance of working methods is not
merely a procedural matter. In fact, the issues involved,
particularly with regard to the decision-making process,
cut across the entire substantive agenda of the Council,
including the work of its subsidiary bodies. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the general membership
perceives that it has a direct stake in the question.

Thirdly, improving the working methods will
also enhance the Council's efficiency. However, the
effectiveness of the Council and, in turn, its credibility
is more a function of its members' political will and
of the implementation of its decisions and resolutions.
We welcome the additional measures on conference
resources and interactivity agreed in the presidential
note of 5 June 2012 (S/2012/402). Spreading out the
Council's periodic workload more evenly throughout
the year, where possible, and on a case-by-case basis
can also improve planning. The Secretariat's efforts
to enhance the availability of information and data,
including through the Council's website, are especially
laudable.

Allow me to point out some of the areas in which
little or slow progress necessitates further concerted
efforts.

First, in terms of transparency, there is a need to
give real meaning to rule 48 of the provisional rules
of procedure, which provides that "[u]nless it decides
otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in public".
Closed consultations should be kept to a minimum as
the exception they were meant to be.
Inside the Council, the decision-making process
should be more transparent and inclusive. That entails
involvement and consultations with all members,
adequate time for the consideration of issues and
proper negotiations on Council decisions. The tendency
to push decisions with a take-it-or-leave-it approach
should be eschewed. Pakistan supports the Working
Group's ongoing discussions aimed at enhancing the
transparency and inclusivity of the penholder practice,
as well as of the appointment of Chairs of subsidiary
bodies, since they is closely related to that objective.

To improve access and participation for non-Council
members, we should fully implement Articles 31 and
32 of the Charter, within the context both of the work
of the Council and that of its subsidiary bodies. Arria
Formula meetings and informal interactive dialogues
offer additional mechanisms for interaction with
non-members and other actors. It is pertinent that the
presidential note 402 also specifically commits to
enhancing interaction with non-Council members and
seeking their Views. An important aspect of interaction
with non-Council members is ensuring that their
views are factored into the Council's deliberations,
decision-making and outcomes. Pakistan also supports
measures aimed at enhancing the interactivity of open
debates, including alternating statements by Council
and non-Council members.

Given the central role of peacekeeping in the
Council's work, we believe it is essential to have more
enhanced, substantive and regular interaction and
consultation with troop-contributing countries. The
Council should also further strengthen its consultation
and cooperation with regional organizations and be
more coherent and consistent in its approach, in order
to make such cooperation more effective.

The Council should rely more on the pacific
settlement of disputes, as outlined in Chapter VI of the
Charter.

In order to enhance information exchange and
outreach related to the Council's work, its presidencies
could be more proactive, including by interacting, as
required, with non-Council members, the media, the
Secretariat, and with the Secretary-General's Special
Envoys and Representatives. Interaction between the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Council is
also important.
With regard to sanctions committees, we are of
the view that recent best practices, particularly the
institution of an Ombudsperson for the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), merit consideration for other committees.
It is also essential that the process of selecting and
appointing the various expert groups be made more
transparent, balanced and representative.

In the interest of its overall efficiency and
effectiveness, the Council should devote more time
and effort to the core issues of international peace and
security, in accordance with its primary responsibility,
and refrain from encroaching on the mandates of other
bodies.

Over the years, non-permanent members have
made important contributions to improving the working
methods of the Council. That is understandable, since
non-permanent members, because they are elected,
have a sense of accountability to the wider membership
and share the general sentiment on the need to
improve the Council's working methods. Conversely,
the empirical evidence shows no correlation between
the permanent seats and improved working methods.
Adding new permanent members therefore is not
likely to change that pattern. The understanding and
cooperation of permanent members is nonetheless also
important in that process. And it is true that, more
recently, permanent members have also tried to reach
out to wider audiences.

In conclusion, it is in our common interests to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
We should therefore continue to pursue that objective
collectively and vigorously.

