Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
consider the convening of this meeting to be timely, as
the Security Council has from the outset played a crucial
role in efforts to reduce and control the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her
valuable briefing.

In the circumstances that bring us together today,
Peru wishes to reaffirm its historic position in favour
of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation,
as well as its absolute support for all measures and
international instruments that contribute to the
achievement of those goals. We reject any nuclear
threat, as well as the production, manufacture and
deployment of nuclear weapons. That is why we support
a world free of these weapons, through the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and through nuclear-
weapon-free zones, as well as a complete ban on the
testing and deployment of nuclear weapons in outer
space, the ocean or on any other terrestrial site. In this
context, Peru reiterates its appeal to nuclear-weapon
States to adopt concrete measures to at least comply
with their obligations under article VI of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

The current situation is all the more worrisome
given actions that appear to be aimed at the
eventual dismantling of the architecture for nuclear
non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
law. Peru deeply regrets that the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty has been suspended, given
its positive impact in fostering confidence-building,
global security and an international order based on
norms. We encourage the Russian Federation and the
United States of America to resolve their differences
through dialogue and reach agreements on the basis
of the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and
transparency. In particular, we urge both States to
extend the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and
agree on new arms-control policies.
I would like to conclude by stressing that the nuclear
Powers must set an example and prevent a new nuclear-
arms race, which, it should be remembered, will have
the sole merit of having the capacity to irreversibly
destroy life on our planet. We are therefore convinced
of the need to follow the diplomatic path as a means
of safeguarding the international non-proliferation
architecture, in the first instance, and, subsequently,
resuming the progressive elimination of nuclear
weapons. Avoiding unilateral actions or decisions that
could lead to greater instability is critically important
in that regard.

