Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Special Representative
Salame and Ambassador Skoog, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings.

The security situation in Libya remains fragile.
Terrorist forces are running rampant and the problems
concerning refugees and migrants are acute. However,
with the support of the United Nations, regional
organizations and neighbouring States, Libya has
made difficult but steady progress with its political
transition. China has been closely following the latest
developments in the situation in the country. We
welcome the ceasefire agreement signed by the armed
groups involved in the recent hostilities in Tripoli.
We call on the relevant parties to immediately put
an end the conflict, resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiations and continue to advance the
political settlement process with a view to achieving
reconciliation and stability as soon as possible. The
international community should continue to step up
its support to help Libya restore stability and effective
governance as soon as possible.

First, we must stay committed to a path of political
settlement for the Libyan question. The international
community should respect Libya's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and firmly
advance the Libyan-owned and Libyan-led political
process. All parties in Libya should commit to an
inclusive dialogue with stakeholders from both national
and local levels so as to build consensus, narrow
differences and find solutions that are acceptable to all.

Secondly, we must build a better security
environment in favour of the political process.
Countries and organizations that have influence should
play a dual role in engaging with the Libyan parties
so that they will not resort to the use of force at the
slightest provocation. It is through confidence-building
measures that reconciliation can be achieved. A unified
national security agency should be established at
an early date to create favourable conditions for the
implementation of the United Nations action plan.
The Libyan parties should make greater efforts at
dialogue, settle their differences, continue to foster
mutual trust and cooperate in combating terrorism and
organized crime.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the United Nations
role and capacity to offer its good offices. China
supports the Special Representative in leading the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to move
forward the implementation of the relevant United
Nations action plan. We support Libya in advancing
the formulation of a constitution and amendment of
the Libyan Political Agreement in order to prepare and
organize presidential and parliamentary elections. We
hope that Libya's neighbours, the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the European Union and other
parties will increase their efforts to promote peace and
work together towards the implementation of the United
Nations action plan.

China has always held the view that sanctions are
not an end in themselves, rather they are a means that
should always serve the political solution of relevant
problems. While sanctions on Libya remain enforced,
attention must be paid so that such sanctions will not
negatively impact Libyan civilians in third countries.
The sanctions should not harm the overall interests of
Libya or the everyday lives and humanitarian needs of
the Libyan population. The continued loss of Libya's
frozen assets is an issue that deserves close scrutiny.
We hope that the sanctions Committee will speedily
look into that issue and respond appropriately to Libya's
legitimate concerns in that regard.

We support any efforts that will help stabilize the
situation in Libya, facilitate a political solution of the
issue and promote unity among various parties injoining
hands to fight terrorism. We stand ready to continue to
do our part in contributing to the early restoration of
security and stability and the achievement of prosperity
and development in Libya.

