Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Allow me to
take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you, Ambassador Ilkin, for the
invitation to take the floor this morning, and especially
for taking the initiative to convene this extremely
important debate on peacekeeping. I would also like to
express my sincere appreciation to Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra for their thorough
briefings, and I would also like to note that their
remarks have been extremely helpful in setting the
whole tone of our debate and that their leadership in
United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
extremely helpful as well.

In taking the floor today, I wish first of all to
endorse the statement that the representative of the
Czech Republic will make on behalf of the European
Union in his country's capacity as President of the
Union.

Today's debate allows us to focus on how to
further strengthen the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and to ensure an efficient use of
resources. The Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat have all undertaken important
initiatives, while research institutes and internationally
recognized experts are also contributing to shaping our
shared views and our proposals.

The discussion to date now has proven once again
the priority that Member States attach to this effort of
improving our peacekeeping operations and structuring
our peacekeeping potential. All of this is also very
clear in the references that have been made to the New
Horizon project.
My Government believes that the Secretary-
General should indeed be encouraged in the direction
of pursuing reforms aimed at strengthening the
Secretariat and making it more efficient. Given the
growing interconnection between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, a standing rule of law capacity could be
favourably considered based on the model of the
standing police capacity, whose transfer to the Brindisi
Logistics Base as a permanent operative centre for a
genuine United Nations police force will be a first
strategic step in the crucial development of the rapid
response capacity of the United Nations.

With almost 9,000 men and women deployed on
United Nations-led or -authorized missions, my
country is a top contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is a top contributor among
European and the Group of Eight (G-8) countries and
is one of the top 10 of all contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. It hosts and actively
supports a number of programme initiatives and
infrastructure facilities, among which I would like to
mention the United Nations Logistics Base.

We also hold training programmes and make other
forms of contributions. I would like to mention that an
event dedicated to children in armed conflict attended
by Foreign Minister Frattini, Rome's Mayor Alemanno,
Under-Secretary-General Koomaraswamy and other
participants was held last Tuesday in Rome. There we
proposed a joint training programme together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
the protection of children as part of peacekeeping
mandates. We sincerely hope that this new programme
called "See the Light" will come to fruition in future
months.

There is a need for greater coordination between
the Security Council and countries that provide troops
and financial resources. As soon as a mandate is
defined, those who are called upon to operate on the
ground must be fully involved. While the fundamental
responsibility to decide mandates and objectives of a
mission belongs to the Security Council, the definition
of tasks, resources and concepts of operation must also
take into account the expertise of countries that provide
troops and essential resources. As has been stated
repeatedly during our debate, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) recommended a two-step definition of
mandates: first, identifying objectives; and secondly,
defining jointly with contributing countries the
operative details. This is an idea that we should again
consider in the framework of the New Horizon project.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is another very fundamental
aspect. The experience of the European Union in Chad,
for example, taught us that a shared strategy can be
successfully implemented even in a very complex
transition.

The wide majority of peacekeeping missions take
place in Africa, and therefore a shared vision between
the United Nations and the African Union is needed.
Regional dimension and ownership must be supported
and encouraged. Much has been done in that area. The
United Nations-African Union panel that was
established months ago has made several important
recommendations that could be pragmatically
implemented. For example, for missions led by the
African Union under the aegis of the United Nations,
we should contribute to crisis management capacity, to
sustainability in all aspects and to more adequate
financial support. In particular, we could accomplish
that through greater certainty and predictability of
resources and better coordination among decision-
making bodies, both at the level of the United Nations
and the level of the regional organizations.

As president of the Group of Eight (G-8), my
country is presently focusing on aspects of
peacekeeping. We have been actively engaged in
fulfilling the commitments taken by the G-8 leaders at
Sea Island and Hokkaido to strengthen peacekeeping
capacities and structures, in particular in African
countries, in support of the principle of national
ownership. A report will promptly be made available
along the lines anticipated by the declaration adopted
in Trieste last Friday by the G-8 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, stressing the development of police
components, the promotion of rule of law and training.

In that framework, I would also like to mention
the Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units in
Vicenza, which was established by the G-8 countries. It
has trained 2,500 officers in only four years, 1,000 of
whom are from Africa. The Center is increasingly
active in cooperating with the United Nations.

As a global organization, the United Nations
needs an efficient and flexible logistics structure that
would ensure economies of scale and rational use of
resources. The United Nations Logistics Base, whose
strengthening Italy has constantly supported, appears to
be a key element for improving logistics support both
at the global and regional levels. Within that logic, my
Government supports proposals that could strengthen
African capacity-building efforts, including through
regional hubs.

