Ms. Toure (spoke in French): On behalf of the
people of the region of Gao in the northern part of my
country, whom I am representing at this table in this
debate, allow me to convey my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and through you, to your country,
the Netherlands, for providing me with this rare
opportunity to address the Security Council and talk
about the security situation that the northern region of
my country is undergoing on a daily basis. Although
the members of the Council are already aware of the
situation, they need to be informed of certain facts that
may have escaped the Council's attention.

My name is Fatimata Toure. I was born on
27 February 1961 in the Gao region, which is one of the
five northern regions of Mali. I was lucky to be able to
go to school, and of my generation only 10 women had
the chance to pursue a post-secondary education. We
had the highest percentage of women managers in the
Gao region. Following my post-secondary education, I
knew that the best thing I could do was to go home. I
returned to Gao. Together with other women leaders, I
created the Groupe de recherche, d'etude et de formation
femme-action, the main role of which is to promote the
political emergence of women and protect the rights of
women and children.

The Council should remember me as a living
witness to the events that took place from 1990 to the
present day. It is with deep emotion that testify. The
1990 rebellion was incredibly atrocious. Since that
rebellion, which was ended by the Tamanrasset Accord
and the national agreement, the northern regions of
Mali have experienced no real peace to this very day,
as I address the Council.

The security situation has always been characterized
by looting, vehicle theft, kidnappings, rape and armed
robbery. We have reached the point where ambulances
are being attacked, patients are forced off and the
ambulances are taken away. Humanitarian staff cannot
work, drivers cannot work, and women who travel to
work in the weekly markets as a way to provide for
their daily needs can no longer do so. When they travel,
either their vehicles explode on mines and they lose
their hands and feet, or they are stopped, stripped of
everything they have and raped. They are now forced
to confine themselves to their homes, even though they
are the heads of their families.

Why is it necessary to deploy a peacekeeping
mission in the northern regions ofMali? A peacekeeping
mission is imperative because of the resurgence of
rebellion, because the Malian State is incapable of
ensuring the safety of its population and property, and
because the conflict runs the risk ofunleashing national
implosion and subregional, perhaps even international
destabilization. The conflict in northern Mali impacts
all neighbouring countries, notably Burkina Faso, Cote
d'Ivoire and the Niger, and it will certainly affect other
countries as well.

With regard to the conflict in northern Mali, the
rebellion of 2012 was the most catastrophic because it
was the first that was characterized by kidnappings and
gang rape. It claimed 70 per cent of Mali's territory,
which was occupied for 10 months. During that period,
there were no social services and, the independence
fighters having been driven out, the Islamist rebels
made the law, carrying out amputations, floggings and
a host of other such practices. We therefore have a real
need for this peacekeeping mission to provide solutions
to the various problems I have just mentioned.

What about this peace mission? Its core mandate is
centred around two points. There are other points that
are not of interest to us beyond the two main ones. The
first is support for the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the
Algiers process. Where is that support? Everyone knows
that the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
is handicapped. The situation remains unchanged, and
even if it has changed it has not had a direct impact on
the population because it is not a concern of the people.

Within the framework of implementing the
Agreement, 26 structures need to be established.
However, to date only eight have been set up. I note
that women represent only 3 per cent of the staff of
the structures in place, though that is not what we are
concerned with. It is true that the rate of representation
of women is very low in the operationalization of those
structures, but that is not what interests us. What does
interest us is the need for the peacekeeping mission to
accompany the political process. Under the political
process, the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
provides for the establishment of regional councils that
are directly elected by universal suffrage and include
broad executive and administrative powers. If those
measures are taken, almost all of our security problems
will be solved.

The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
stipulates the establishment of a territorial police force.
The decision to create that force was to be followed by
a transitional period of three months. Three years have
passed, and the territorial police force has not been
created. It could have been helping us to ensure our
safety in that time.

I would like to return to the widespread insecurity
because it has a direct impact on the lives of our
communities and prevents us from working, breathing
and moving around every day. As I speak, poor citizens
are being attacked and killed at close range, with total
impunity. Indeed, no investigations or prosecutions are
conducted, negotiations and nothing is done to punish
the perpetrators of the mass killings committed in the
heart of Gao or Timbuktu. Those acts are committed
with impunity and wreak havoc on the lives of our
communities. We are sick of it and heartsore. The
distress we suffer as a result of how we are treated on
a daily basis by the various armed groups runs deep.

With respect to the mandate of the peacekeeping
mission, we have also learned things that have helped
us a great deal. For example, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process
includes a security sector reform component, which
directly addresses communities. Based on that process,
new community violence reduction projects have
been implemented in the various at-risk communities.
Those efforts are therefore helping to reduce the risk of
insecurity in those areas, and that is truly alleviating the
suffering of the people. Sums of nearly $5,000 dollars
are being made available to the communities, which
are then being used it to relieve suffering. With the
DDR component, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is entering areas restricted to others, where water
supply problems alone can result in the deaths of people
and animals. There really are parts that have been quite
successful. Additionally, in the Department of Public
Affairs, there is a component for quick-impact projects,
in which $50,000 has been allocated to populations.
They have worked quite well in those areas.

Indeed, as the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission has said, the mere presence of MINUSMA
headquarters in the Gao region, with which I am most
familiar, has helped to reduce youth unemployment. We
need to talk about that issue. Many young people have
found jobs. Even some who have no qualifications find
resources that enable them to ensure the survival of their
population. So it really is a very important stabilization
measure for us. I am convinced that if MINUSMA were
asked to pack its bags today, the young people from
those areas would leave as well.

With regard to the mandate for the protection of
civilians and for stabilization, to be frank we are
waiting for that mandate to be carried out. It is awaited
simply because no one has yet felt that MINUSMA
is protecting civilians, nor has there been any sense
of stabilization. People are completely dissatisfied
and even have the impression that they have been left
behind, abandoned. There is no protection. Every day
they are attacked, beaten, killed or humiliated. No one
steps in; there has been no intervention. And this is
happening right under the nose of MINUSMA, even
though protecting civilians and promoting stability are
part of its mandate.

What are the sociohistorical facts of the rebellion
in northern Mali that have hampered or will hamper
MINUSMA's mandate? First, the area is isolated, and
more importantly, it is far from large centres, which
generates a common sense of marginalization from any
administration. That disrupts the socioeconomic and
political life of those regions. Then there is the size of
the area. The northern regions represent 75 per cent of
the national territory, with a population density of five
inhabitants per square kilometre. There is the additional
hardship of a hostile climate - 45°C to 50°C in the
shade in April, a hot and dry climate with accelerated
desertification, and with violence that exacerbates the
suffering and misery of the people living there.

There is also the mistrust among various groups,
born in the rebellion of the 19905, which encouraged
everyone to arm themselves with means of self-defence
and which cultivated strong agendas that very often
lead to unfortunate events and violence that are harmful
to culture. Conflicts have been turned into communal
strife - no incident between two individuals of
different groups is seen in an ideal framework, but is
rather seen through the prism of prejudice inspired by
the spirit of retaliation or retribution.

Another factor is the complex and multidimensional
nature of the causes of conflict - historical, political,
economic and sociocultural, internal and external. And
the interests of the actors involved are divergent and
irreconcilable. I do not have to tell Council members
what they already know. There are three types of
actors, three types of rebels in the northern regions.
There are those called independence fighters, who want
to secure the independence of their territories, such as
the members of the Mouvement national de liberation
de l'Azawad, who fight with great conviction. There are
those called jihadists, some of whom, despite what one
might think, also fight with great conviction because
they believe they need Sharia law to move things
forward. The third group is the drug traffickers, who
are the enemies of peace. They are the most powerful
because they are economically and politically robust.
They control the local economy and, what is more,
they do not want peace, because they are not interested
in tranquillity. They only want to secure the drug-
trafficking corridors. They are present in all spheres of
the Malian Administration, with representatives at the
highest levels.

All of those factors obstruct MINUSMA'S mission
in the northern region.

What do the people expect from MINUSMA's
mandate? MINUSMA's mandate to protect civilians
mustbe tailoredto our needs - security needs, economic
needs, sociocultural needs - and to the situation in the
northern regions. To anticipate or counter those threats,
the mandate will need to be robust. There has already
been reference to a robust mandate in one of the recent
resolutions. But there is no difference between the
time when the mandate was not robust and the moment
that it became robust. It must therefore be made much
more robust. We must also bolster rapid early-warning
capabilities by further involving citizens, especially in
areas where civilians are constantly at risk, such as in
the northern regions of Mali.

I thank the Council for its attention and, more
importantly, for giving me the opportunity to present
the security situation in the northern regions.

