Mr. Aboud (Comoros) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all, on behalf of my Government, to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this meeting,
the main objective of which is to consider the
relationship between energy, security and climate. We
are meeting here today to discuss and study together
threats caused by climate change and their impact on
security, and to resolutely commit our countries to
finding viable solutions.

However, we all know how difficult those
solutions are to attain, given the problems that some of
our countries are facing, because of our status as both
least developed countries and small island developing
States. However, we must quickly come up with
sustainable solutions, because we are talking about
saving succeeding generations. But it must be said that
succeeding generations are threatened today by the
negative impact of human activities on the global
climate. The predicted consequences are already to be
seen in several regions, particularly in the small island
developing States. Climatic events which used to be
exceptional or limited to certain regions have now
spread throughout the world. Droughts, torrential
rainfall, flooding and cyclones now occur at a global
level, resulting in sea-level rise, lack of water, famine,
loss of life and material damage. Such is the lot of the
least developed and most vulnerable States, such as our
small island States.

In the case of the Comoros, that is shown by the
destruction of coastal areas, where more than about 80
per cent of our economic and human activities take
place - as is the case for other small island States.

The Comoros is already witnessing great population
movement to areas that are deemed to be more
favourable, in particular to the Comorian island of
Mayotte. In order to travel within their country to
Mayotte, Comorians of the three other islands cross the
sea under unimaginable conditions. These population
movements are due to the loss of agricultural land, soil
degradation and increased rural poverty. Such
displacements of people to other areas will increase
along with the phenomena related to climate change.

At the 2002 Johannesburg Summit, a group of
young people delivered a message of alarm and despair
to the international community when they said,
"Remember we cannot buy another planet". The
survival of each of our countries depends on the
preservation of our natural resources, and on making
the best of them.

Comoros does not cause greenhouse gas
emissions, but climate change increases the difficulties
for the sustainable development of our country, which
is already fragile. The challenge facing the Comoros is
to remain a carbon sink, particularly through the
promotion of new and renewable energy, to meet the
future needs for our sustainable development. We fully
support the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

We also support the principle according to which
one must anticipate phenomena linked to climate
change and prepare for them. However, such efforts
require technical and financial support. Adapting to the
potential impact of climate change is a new area, where
urgent needs are now emerging, and the challenge of
international cooperation is to help small island
developing countries to confront those challenges.

My country would like to recall that the
responsibility of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
stipulated in the Charter of our universal Organization.
Moreover, other questions, including those relating to
economic and social development, are entrusted by the
Charter to the Economic and Social Council.

The questions of energy and climate change are
vital to sustainable development. Responsibilities in
the area of sustainable development are incumbent
upon the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and on their subsidiary bodies,
particularly the Commission on Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Development
Programme. Climate change is covered by the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

I would like to take this opportunity to announce
that in coming days, my country's Parliament will be
ratifying the Kyoto Protocol.

It is time to act now. Let us act together to make
the international community aware of the vulnerability
of the small island States, which are the first to suffer
the negative consequences of climate change. Tough
lessons must be learned, because everyone's future is at
stake now.

(spoke in English)

To conclude, I will cite an anecdote. A first-class
passenger arrived late at the airport. He went to the
counter and said, "Sir, my flight is leaving in a few
minutes". The person at the counter looked at him and
replied, "Sir, the passengers in first class and economy
class have left together on the same flight."

We are all passengers on the same flight. Those
from rich countries, poor countries or island States
should not wait until the last minute to catch the flight.
36
We should act now. Otherwise, those beautiful islands
will disappear forever.

