The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation)

I would like to extend the warmest welcome to
His Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmao, Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste. I would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Portugal about the
admirable role played by His Excellency Mr. Xanana
Gusmao in the history of his young country and about
the significance of this moment. Moreover, the presence
of the Prime Minister among us today provides an
opportunity for us to celebrate the significant progress
achieved and to plan together the next steps to ensure a
future of peace and prosperity for Timor-Leste,

(spoke in English)

I also wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for her briefing and
commend her for her leadership and her work in
Timor-Leste,

Although Brazil and Timor-Leste lie in different
corners of the world, our two nations are very close.
Not only do we share a common history and language,
but we also face some of the typical challenges of
developing countries. Those bonds have given rise to
an intense bilateral cooperation over the past years.

Such cooperation encompasses a broad range of
issues, including security sector reform, education and
justice, to name just a few. Brazil has provided training
for officers of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL). We have sponsored initiatives on private
sector development, professional training, elementary
schoolteacher training and technical education in
agriculture. Brazil has also been involved in the
capacity-building activities and the training of
Timorese judges, prosecutors and public attorneys.

This year Brazil has the special honour of being
the lead country for Timor-Leste in the Security
Council. I take this opportunity to thank Japan for its
role as lead country for the past two years. Brazil
wishes to congratulate the Timorese leadership and
people for the significant progress they have achieved
in the past few years. Important strides have been made
in many areas, from sustained economic growth to
enhanced capacity for delivering social services; from
improved security to the consolidation of democracy;
and from the promotion and protection of human rights
to investment in infrastructure. Timor-Leste stands out
as an example of post-conflict peacebuilding.

Let me focus on four issues that will be
particularly important in the coming months, namely, the
2012 elections, security sector reform, socio-economic
development and preparations for the transition period.

The parliamentary and presidential elections to be
held during the first half of 2012 will constitute Timor-
Leste's most important political event. We agree with
the Secretary-General that a peaceful, transparent and
credible electoral process will be an important
milestone on the country's path to long-term stability
and recovery. Brazil is confident that Timor-Leste will
achieve those goals, thus consolidating its remarkable
gains.

Progress has been particularly evident in the
security sector. Ten districts have been handed over to
the national police, while another two are ready to
follow suit. Both the Government of Timor-Leste and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) should strengthen their efforts to ensure that
the PNTL is ready to resume primary policing
responsibilities in Dili.

As Brazil has often noted, socio-economic
development is a key component in the maintenance of
peace and stability. Again, Timor-Leste has stood out in
that respect, although challenges still remain. The
international community should continue to assist
whenever requested.
The last point I want to comment on is about the
preparations for the transition period. UNMIT has
made an outstanding contribution to the stability and
development of Timor-Leste. It should now adapt to
the new circumstances and assist the Government with
its current challenges. These include socio-economic
development, institution-building and security. Any
decision on a gradual decrease in the number of
UNMIT police officers should reflect the realities on
the ground rather than follow fixed or artificial
deadlines. It should also be thoroughly discussed with
the Timorese authorities.

Brazil is glad to celebrate Timor-Leste's
achievements. Prime-Minister Xanana Gusmao and the
Timorese people can be proud of them. It is now
important for the country to build on that progress in
order to follow a steady course towards peace
consolidation and long-term development. The
Security Council should continue to assist Timor-Leste
in this endeavour.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

