Mr. Abrams (United States of America): The
situation in Venezuela demands our action now. The
corrupt former Maduro regime has caused an economic
collapse that threatens peace and security throughout
the region. Millions of Venezuelans have fled their
country in search of food, medicine and opportunity.
The time for a peaceful transition to democracy is now.
Each member of the international community that joins
in recognizing the Guaido Government is supporting
the people of Venezuela as they strive to reclaim
their democracy.

Regrettably, by voting against this draft resolution
(S/2019/186), some members of the Security Council
continue to shield Maduro and his cronies and prolong
the suffering of the Venezuelan people. This man-made
crisis has extended well beyond Venezuela's borders
and threatens to destabilize the region. Events from this
past weekend show that Maduro will stop at nothing
to maintain power, including the use of gang violence
against unarmed Venezuelan citizens.

Regardless of the results of today's voting, this
draft resolution shows that democracies around the
world - and especially in Latin America - are
mobilizing behind interim President Guaido. The United
States will remain steadfast in our support for the
legitimate Guaido Government and the National
Assembly. We look forward to genuinely free and fair
elections and to a Government that reflects the will and
aspirations of the Venezuelan people.

The United States will pursue all avenues to
increase humanitarian assistance to Venezuelans,
both inside and outside their country. In fact, there
was an additional aid delivery today to the border
region - Cucuta, Colombia - of emergency medical
kits for 40,000 people, enough high-nutrition food for
10,000 infants for two months and hygiene kits for
35,000 people.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our concern about the safety and security of interim
President Juan Guaido when he returns to Venezuela,
and we hope that all members of the Council will join
us in doing so.

Now is the time to strengthen our commitment
to the Venezuelan people. We call on members of the
Security Council to join in that commitment, and I
would like to express satisfaction that a clear majority
of the Council did so today.

