Mr. Valero (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. We acknowledge the work
that is being done by this body in its commitment to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Our delegation asked to take part in this meeting
with the view to assisting, in compliance with the
mandates that are generated by resolutions such as

those the Council is considering today. We all know
how harmful it is for States not to comply with their
international legal obligations when they do not punish
crimes against humanity and terrorist acts that,
generally speaking, lead to the loss of innocent lives
and also have an effect on the strengthening and
promotion of democracy, as well as the establishment
of freedoms for peoples.

Impunity is the absence of justice. Its prevalence
over time is as harmful as the very terrorist act itself,
which weakens the legal structures of States.

Our country reiterates its total condemnation of
terrorism and reaffirms its commitment to fight it in all
its forms and manifestations, in strict compliance with
international humanitarian law. This commitment has
been reiterated by my country in numerous
international forums. We advocate the strengthening of
existing legal standards in this area, and stepped up
regional and international cooperation in the fight
against this terrible scourge.

Venezuela has always complied with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which was
adopted in September 2006 by the General Assembly
through its resolution 60/288. Venezuela's legislation is
an expression of that commitment. We understand that
the exercise of democracy and public freedoms require
the strengthening of legal systems that guarantee the
stability of democratic States.

On 28 May, the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States, at the request of
Venezuela, endorsed a declaration on the strengthening
of cooperation in the fight against terrorism and against
impunity for its perpetrators, on the basis of resolution
1373 (2001). The statement stresses that terrorism in
any form affects the full enjoyment and exercise of
human rights and is a serious threat to peace.

The declaration states that all States must deny
safe haven to those who finance, plan or commit acts
of terrorism or who offer support to these acts. The
statement also stresses that States must ensure the
prosecution of any person who is involved in any way
with terrorism. This statement, in its paragraph 6,
reaffirms the value of extradition as an essential tool in
the fight against terrorism and encourages all of those
States that have received extradition requests for
terrorists from member States to process those requests
in the requisite manner.
Thirty-two years have gone by since the
explosion of the Cuban aeroplane, in which
73 innocent people lost their lives as a result of a
despicable act planned and carried out by Luis Posada
Carriles and other terrorists. This shadowy figure was
sentenced in our country and, as he was serving his
sentence, this confessed and convicted criminal
escaped from a Venezuelan prison with outside
assistance.

The Bolivarian Government, aware of the
presence of this terrorist on United States territory and
of the freedom he was enjoying, issued an extradition
request by which this individual would serve the
sentence imposed upon him by the Venezuelan justice
system, in accordance with the cooperation
mechanisms that regulate both countries in this area.
But the well-known criminal was released on 8 May
2008 after a judge in El Paso, Texas, rejected
immigration charges against him.

We have to recall that the request for extradition
is based on three principle legal arguments. The 1922
treaty between Venezuela and the United States; the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
Against the Safety of Civil Aviation of 1971; and the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings, adopted by the General Assembly
on 15 December 1997.

Thus, this is not only a bilateral matter between
Venezuela and the United States, but it also has a
multilateral dimension which would certainly be of
interest to this forum. In this respect, we maintain that
any domestic legal manoeuvre put in place regarding
international regulations related to the fight against
terrorism runs counter to the mandate established in
resolution 1373 (2001).

The freedom enjoyed by Posada Carriles on
United States territory is an expression of obvious
impunity that threatens even the security of the United
States and, hence, that of other countries. These
undesirable circumstances weaken the actions of the
1373 Committee because they make the fight against
terrorism ineffective. We must recall that resolution
1373 (2001) was adopted in the context of the tragic
events that took place in the United States on
11 September 2001.

The United States of America, as a permanent
member of the Security Council, has been
compromising the very nature of this Organization

which has the obligation to ensure global security.
There are serious contradictions in the United States
Government's fight against terrorism, and these affect
global efforts against these harmful practices. We hope
that new viewpoints and commitments in this struggle
will become evident with the new political reality
which has emerged in the United States following the
elections on 4 November.

To conclude, allow me to reiterate that Venezuela
stresses the importance of complying with United
Nations resolutions and, in this respect, reiterates its
request to the Security Council and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to make use of all mechanisms at
their disposal and to demand compliance with this
resolution, which would make it possible finally to
extradite the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles to
Venezuela.

Our authorities offer full legal guarantees and the
full respect for human rights if the United States
complies with this extradition. In this respect, the
Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
unambiguously protects the rights and legal
proceedings related to acts of this nature.

