Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa remains
deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation in
Cote d'Ivoire, a sisterly country that has always been a
beacon of stability and prosperity in West Africa and
Africa as a whole. South Africa believes that the
African Union (AU), the Economic Community of
West African States and the United Nations must
persist in their quest to find a peaceful political
solution to the current crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, which is
now rapidly slipping into civil war. A political solution
aimed at restoring national reconciliation and unity,
democracy and good governance is the only sustainable
approach to ensuring long-term stability in
Cote d'Ivoire.

In that regard, the African Union Peace and
Security Council, in its summit meeting of 10 March,
endorsed the recommendations of its High-level Panel
on an overall political solution to the crisis in
Cote d'Ivoire. The AU reaffirmed its recognition of the
election of Mr. Alassane Ouattara as the President of
the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire. South Africa wishes to
encourage the Chairperson of the AU Commission to
continue in his efforts to appoint a high representative
whose mandate would be to implement an overall
political solution and to complete the process for a way
out of the crisis.

The indiscriminate violence throughout the
country continues to cause untold human suffering,
with serious regional consequences. The continued
senseless killing of civilians, threats and acts of
intimidation, as well as the rising number of refugees,
are serious violations of the human rights of civilians.
We call on all parties to put an end to these violations
and to avoid a further escalation of hostilities.

South Africa voted in favour of resolution 1975
(2011), as it is fully in line with the road map outlined
by the African Union, which calls for an end to
hostilities, for the protection of civilians, and for the
parties to implement the political road map outlined by
the High-level Panel. Additionally, the resolution
strengthens the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire by allowing it, while impartially
implementing its mandate, to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence, within its
capabilities and its area of deployment.
We urge the parties to comply with the terms of
the resolution just adopted and, through their actions,
to work towards a sustainable political solution that
takes into account the will of all Ivorians. Continued
violence exacerbates instability in Cote d'Ivoire and
the West African region as a whole.

