Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council, by unanimously
adopting resolution 1441 (2002), took upon itself the
serious responsibility of completing the process of
Iraq's disarmament. Today, members have before them
the reports of the heads of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the work accomplished and, in
particular, their proposals as to what must be done in
order to finally solve the problem of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq. We have no doubt that UNMOVIC
and the IAEA, which have deployed an effectively
functioning inspection mechanism in Iraq, are in a
position to carry out their tasks within a realistic time
frame.

The reports submitted by Mr. Blix and by Mr.
ElBaradei show convincingly that the international
inspectors have succeeded in achieving tangible
results. I shall not dwell on specific examples; they are
well known. It is of fundamental importance that,
thanks to the unity of the international community and
to the joint pressure brought to bear on the Iraqi
authorities - including a military presence in the
region - Baghdad has fulfilled virtually every
condition set by the inspectors and has not put up any
kind of serious obstacle to their activities. Thus, we are
in a position to state that the international inspectors -
if they are given the opportunity to continue their
work- have everything they need to complete the
process of Baghdad's peaceful disarmament.

Therefore, the Security Council, as the body that
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has fully shouldered
its obligations by ensuring the deployment of
international inspectors to Iraq and by establishing the
conditions necessary for their activities. It is not by
chance that even those who today cast doubt on the
Council's role in an Iraqi settlement are forced to admit
that they will have no other choice but to return this
issue to the Council, which alone is authorized to deal
with its comprehensive settlement.

Bearing all these considerations in mind, we
believe that first, on behalf of the Security Council, we
should express our highest regard for the activities of
the international inspectors and should extend to
them - as well as to the heads of UNMOVIC and of
the IAEA, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei - our support
and our gratitude for the excellent work that they have
accomplished.

Secondly, we should approve the reports
submitted, which clearly set forth the current status of
prohibited arms programmes in Iraq.

Thirdly, because of the difficult situation
prevailing with regard to Iraq, we should take note of
the Secretary-General's decision to withdraw the
inspectors from Iraq because of the threat to their
safety.

Fourthly, since the mandates of UNMOVIC and
of the IAEA have not been fully implemented, the
inspectors' work in Iraq has not been concluded but
merely suspended. With a View to the further
development of the situation, the Security Council
must return to the issue of continuing this work,
pursuant to resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002).

We can only express regret that, at precisely the
time when the prospect for Iraq's disarmament through
inspections had become more than real, problems were
put forward that have no direct bearing on resolution
1441 (2002) or on other United Nations decisions
concerning Iraq. Not one of those decisions authorizes
the right to use force against Iraq outside the Charter of
the United Nations; not one of them authorizes the
violent overthrow of the leadership of a sovereign
State. Such actions, if they are undertaken, will not
help to strengthen the unity of the international
community at a time when the world sorely needs
solidarity and united efforts, first and foremost, to repel
such a real and universally shared threat as
international terrorism.

Russia is convinced of the need to do everything
possible, as soon as possible, in order to overcome the
present crisis situation and to keep the Iraq problem
within the framework of a political settlement, based
solidly on the United Nations Charter and international
law. Only in that way will we be able to ensure
conditions for the continued, effective and multilateral
cooperation needed to combat global threats and
challenges, while retaining the central role of the
United Nations Security Council.

On 11 September 2001, when the American
people suffered a horrible tragedy, the President of
Russia, Vladimir Putin, was the first person to phone
the United States President, George Bush, to extend
solidarity and support to him. These were sincere
feelings expressed by the entire Russian people.

If today we really had indisputable facts
demonstrating that there was a direct threat from the
territory of Iraq to the security of the United States of
America, then Russia, without any hesitation, would be
prepared to use the entire arsenal of measures provided
under the United Nations Charter to eliminate such a
threat. However, the Security Council today is not in
possession of such facts. That is why we prefer a
political settlement, relying on the activities of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA, which enjoy the full trust of
the international community.

