The President (spoke in Russian): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,

I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the resurgence of unconstitutional
changes of government in a few African
countries. The Security Council expresses its
concern at the possible violence that may
accompany such events as well as the negative
impact on economic and social welfare of the
people and the development of affected countries.
The Security Council stresses the importance of
expeditiously restoring constitutional order
including through open and transparent elections.

"The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and recalls that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continuing important efforts of the African Union
and subregional organizations, consistent with
Security Council resolutions and decisions, to
settle conflicts, promote human rights,
democracy, rule of law, and constitutional order
in Africa.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
decision of the twelfth Ordinary Session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held on 1 to
3 February 2009, which expressed the African
09-32439
Union's concern and condemnation of the
resurgence of coups d'etat that it concluded not
only constitute a dangerous political downturn
and serious setback to the democratic processes
but could also pose a threat to peace, security and
stability of the continent.

"The Security Council further welcomes
preventive measures undertaken by the African
Union and subregional organizations against
unconstitutional changes of government."
09-32439
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2009/11.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
