Mr. Kobler (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would
like to wish peace, harmony and serenity to all those

who observe the holy month of Ramadan in Tunisia
and Libya.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would also like to congratulate Bolivia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am participating in today's meeting to update
the Council on the latest developments in Libya. Today,
I would like to take a moment to reflect on the past
before setting our priorities for the future.

(spoke in English)

When I came to Libya in November 2015, I
continued the work of my predecessor, Mr. Bernardino
Leon, who had patiently forged a political agreement
after a year of diplomacy. As mediators will know,
concluding an agreement is one thing, but implementing
an accord is another. In Libya, the transition process
has not been fully implemented. Parallel institutions
continue to exist. The House of Representatives has not
yet recognized the Government of National Accord nor
has it adopted the constitutional amendment.

That said, the Libyan Political Agreement, however,
has changed the facts on the ground. The Presidency
Council has been working in Tripoli since 2016. Libyan
oil production now exceeds 800,000 barrels per day, up
from 200,000 barrels per day a few months ago. Da'esh,
while still a threat, is a shadow of What it was just one
year ago. Most importantly, whether one is a Libyan
from Benghazi, Tripoli or Sabha, the Agreement
remains the greatest hope for a solution to the crisis in
Libya. The people of Libya desire peace; they desire
security; they desire a country Where their children
have a brighter future.

In my last statement (see S/PV.7927), I laid out
several priorities that still must be addressed. Where
do we stand on the most important issues today?

First, there is consensus that the Libyan Political
Agreement remains the framework of the political
process. Despite criticism, there is overwhelming
national and international support for the Libyan
Political Agreement. However, the Agreement is
not set in stone. After months of consultations with
Libyan, regional and international stakeholders, we are
developing a road map to allow limited amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement through an inclusive
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process.

I also see broad agreement on the areas where
amendments are still needed. There are still different
ideas on the format of talks. There is an agreement on
the principles guiding the future talks however. My
advice to the international community is to provide
the necessary assurances and guarantees to implement
what Libyans will agree upon. They cannot do this alone
without the support of the international community.
They need the Council's strong and unified support.

Secondly, let me turn to the military situation. The
adversaries of a political solution seek to use violence
to undermine efforts to reach a settlement. The attack
on the Brak al-Shatti airbase on 18 May is an example.
Radical elements, including some affiliated with
Al-Qaida, massacred dozens of people. That inhuman
act not only demonstrated complete disregard for
human life, but was a deliberate attempt to undermine
the political process. Unfortunately, the closer a
settlement, the higher the threat of such violence. More
of the same was seen when forces affiliated with the
Salvation Government attacked in Tripoli at the end
of May. Fortunately, forces supporting the Presidency
Council successfully defended the city and now control
the capital.

Thirdly, there is an urgent need to unify the Libyan
security apparatus. Yesterday, 6 June, I once more met
with Field Marshal Haftar in Benghazi. He assured
me that he wants to proceed on the basis of the Libyan
Political Agreement, supporting a political process to
amend the Agreement. I encouraged him to let politics
prevail and not to pursue military confrontation.
We agreed that a united Libyan security apparatus
is vital for peace and prosperity. I recommended to
Field Marshal Haftar that officers from all parts of the
country should meet to discuss military matters. We
stand ready to facilitate such a meeting, as we have
done before.

In Tripoli, the security plan must now be extended
to the entire city. State authority must be expanded.
The authority of the Presidency Council over armed
groups has to be strengthened. Those forces must be
consolidated within the relevant ministries; command
and control must be unified. The unification of the
security apparatus must also occur at a national level.
The only alternative is military violence.

In line with the guidance of Secretary-General
Guterres on the prevention ofconflicts, we do our utmost
to ensure that dialogue prevails over confrontation, that
unity prevails over division and that security prevails
over chaos. The continued use ofthe military to achieve
political goals will only harden positions. Instead, a
political solution, including agreement on a civilian
authority to command the security apparatus, is needed.

Fourthly, weaknesses in the economy and financial
situation need to be urgently addressed. Despite the
increase in oil revenue and the ability of the Presidency
Council to agree on a new budget for 2017, the
fundamentals of the Libyan economy remain flawed.
The division of financial institutions, instability and
low confidence in the banking sector continue to feed
inflation and the lack of liquidity. The Central Bank has
to decisively address the fiscal and monetary problems
of Libya. Libya is still spending beyond its means and
its foreign currency reserves are constantly shrinking.
The dire economic situation and the explosion of the
black market is feeding criminality and violence. It
must be addressed if Libya is to pull itself out of its
downward spiral.

Fifthly,nationalreconciliationisvitalforestablishing
a durable peace in Libya. In that regard, I welcome
the steps taken by the Presidency Council towards
establishing a national reconciliation commission and
beginning official consultations. Women and youth
will play a critical role in any reconciliation effort. I
am awed by the energy and optimism of the Libyan
youth. During the youth conference convened by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in
May, numerous initiatives were proposed and linkages
formed. Those efforts must and will be supported.

Sixthly, Many Libyans call for the increased
involvement of the international community. Today
I would like to recognize the contributions made by
neighbouring States. As elsewhere, it is the neighbours
who first feel the consequences and it is they who are
part of the solution. On 8 May, I attended the 11th
ministerial meeting of Libya's neighbouring States
meeting in Algiers and am encouraged by the efforts
of this forum to find a common position and solution.
Yesterday, the meeting in Algiers of Tunisia, Egypt and
Algeria took place and concluded with a declaration
supporting United Nations efforts and the coherence of
the international community.

With regard to politics, both the regional and
international communities must come together to
support the Libyan peace process - not in the spirit
of interference, but rather in partnership and respect
for the sovereignty of Libyan and international law.
The Quartet's meeting in Brussels on 23 May was
an increasingly important forum for harmonizing
the positions of regional and international
organizations - the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and the United Nations.

The African Union also sent two delegations to
Libya recently, including its High Representative and a
ministerial delegation of the African Union High-Level
Ad Hoc Committee on Libya. A collaborative approach
in which all initiatives work in a complementary manner
to advance the United Nations-facilitated political
process is very much needed. Uncoordinated or parallel
efforts risk undermining progress and complicating
an already complex situation. We must move forward
in supporting Libyan-led efforts to find a durable
solution. Without progress in politics, the symptoms of
the conflict will only worsen.

Migrants continue to die as they seek a better life.
Women and men in detention facilities and prisons
live a nightmare. Basic humanitarian principles and
humanitarian space are under threat. Five hospitals
have been bombed this year and humanitarian supplies
cannot reach many regions of Libya due to insecurity.
The human rights situation remains of deep concern.
Since March, 65 civilians were killed during armed
conflict, some by indiscriminate bombing. We cannot
remain numb to the suffering this conflict is causing;
we cannot compromise the basic principles that unite
us, that make us human; nor can we afford to abandon
our hopes and desires for a better, more united Libya.

Finally, I would like to thank all the men and women
of UNSMIL today, as well as the United Nations family.
I admire the dedication I see in all of them - engineers,
analysts and administrators alike. I know their work
is often unrecognized. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to recognize them and salute their
efforts. My last message, as always, goes to the people
of Libya. I reflect upon the words of Libyan author
Hisham Matar:

"Dreams have consequences. There is no
turning back. A revolution is not a painless march
to the gates of freedom and justice. It is a struggle
between rage and hope, between the temptation to
destroy and the desire to build."

I am sure ofone thing. The women and men ofLibya
will succeed in building a nation that of which they and
their children will be proud. Their sacrifices have been
too deep for anything less, their communities too strong
to collapse and their hearts too full of courage to fail.

