Last month, I told the Council how struck I was by the depth of concern among ordinary Syrians at the current state and future of their beloved country (see S/2020/420). A month on, I have heard those messages even louder, including in continued consultations with Syrians participating in the Civil Society Support Room and with the Syrian Women's Advisory Board. I have heard many of the appeals the Council members are familiar with - a thirst for progress on the political process pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), for an end to all violence and terrorism, for a nationwide ceasefire, for action on detainees, abductees and missing persons and for progress in creating conditions for Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their homes in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner. I heard a new level of alarm at the dramatic collapse in economic conditions throughout the country. It is easy to understand why. In the course of just one week during the reporting period, the Syrian lira's market rate depreciated more than in the entire nine years prior, before rallying somewhat. But currency and price volatility remain acute, and the inflation rate has hit peak levels in the past six months. The economic crisis is hitting every part of Syria, regardless of territorial control: from Damascus and the south-west to Aleppo, the north-west and the north-east. Medicine is scarce and more expensive. Food prices have skyrocketed and supply chains have been disrupted. The purchasing power of ordinary Syrians has seriously diminished as wages - in both the private and public sectors - are vastly inadequate to meet the demands of the day. Before this recent deterioration, over 80 per cent of Syrians were estimated to be living below the poverty line. The situation is undoubtedly more severe today, and the intensity of that poverty is likely more acute. The World Food Programme (WFP) now estimates that some 9.3 million people are food insecure, with over 2 million more at risk, a rise of some 42 per cent in the past year. As WFP Executive Director David Beasley recently warned: if this situation deteriorates, "famine could well be knocking on [the] door". Syrian women - the primary breadwinners in many families - are disproportionately affected, forced to shoulder caretaking responsibilities while financially supporting the household. Many women, including those in refugee communities, are facing higher risks of exploitation and abuse as they struggle to provide for the day-to-day needs of their families. In recent weeks, we have seen many Syrians begin to express new fears, even panic in some quarters. We have heard of shops and pharmacies forced to close, unable to cope with the recent volatility, of jobs being lost, of remittances drying up. In some areas of north-western Syria, reports have emerged of locals increasingly using foreign currencies. The decade-long conflict in Syria has wrought destruction on Syria's people, its environment, its infrastructure and the very fabric of its society - the bonds of trust that underpin any economy. Syria's economic governance has also been characterized by recurrent fiscal and monetary mismanagement and corruption. In recent months, new factors have joined those underlying structural problems, pushing the economy to the brink. The banking crisis in next-door Lebanon has had a significant impact. The repercussions all societies and economies have experienced from measures to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have also played their part. Another factor in this context is significant sanctions by the United States and the European Union. They target individuals and entities affiliated with the Government and restrict activity in the financial, banking, oil and gas, and military sectors, as well as exports and multilateral lending to and investments in Syria. Further secondary sanctions by the United States, which have been foreshadowed since the passage of legislation six months ago, will begin entering into force as early as tomorrow and are aimed at deterring foreign business activity with the Syrian Government. Against that backdrop, we have seen some Syrians take peacefully to the streets in a few areas in recent weeks, such as Al-Suwayda, Dara and Idlib, protesting a range of grievances. Moreover, in Syria's south-west, what was set to be a major violent confrontation, centred around the town of Tafas, has been averted for now with the assistance of Russian mediation. However, we are concerned that there have since been further security incidents and tensions that might result in a renewed escalation of violence. It is an area where there are broader geopolitical tensions that appear to be growing more acute. I further note that this month again saw reports of Israeli air strikes inside Syria. Southern Syria is also an area where Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) cells appear to remain active. Meanwhile, in the north-west, the calm brought about by Russia and Turkey is, by and large, holding. However, we have seen worrying signs: increased mutual shelling, reports of reinforcements on both sides, the first reported pro-Government air strikes in three months and reports of new civilian displacement. Last week, the extremist Wa-Harid Al-Mu'minin Operations Room launched another cross- line attack that resulted in the death of several Syrian soldiers. Two of its leaders were subsequently killed in a drone strike by the United States on 14 June. It and other small extremist factions have now formed a new operations room - a likely harbinger for future attacks. I have been assured by both Russia and Turkey that they are working to contain the situation and sustain the calm and I note there has been further progress in Russian-Turkish cooperation on the work of joint patrols on the ground. I continue to appeal for calm to be sustained in Idlib and elsewhere and for a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). I underscore the importance of addressing the challenge posed by listed terrorist groups through a cooperative, targeted and effective approach that safeguards stability, protects civilians and fully respects international humanitarian law. The same is true regarding efforts to prevent ISIL's resurgence, whose attacks have continued in and around the central desert. I am ready to convene and facilitate a third session of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee. Conscious that global travel restrictions remain in place, I am hopeful that a session in Geneva may be possible towards the end of August. However, the realities facing the Syrian people obviously cannot be addressed solely by discussing the Constitution, and the Syrian parties will face great difficulties in resolving Syria's problems without real diplomacy among the key international players with influence. After all, there are still five international armies operating across the country and active measures by many countries with respect to Syria. There are real and substantive differences among those international players, as there are among the Syrian parties. Indeed, we have seen the depth of these differences in debates regarding sanctions in recent weeks, and we continue to see it in competing assessments regarding the political will of different actors to work to resolve the conflict. These issues are not going to be resolved by positioning. They need to be the subject of real discussion and diplomacy. Unlocking progress will need mutual and reciprocal steps, on the basis of clear understandings, by the Syrian parties and by international partners. I am convinced that there are common interests on which to build such a diplomacy, and there is a common stated commitment to advancing resolution 2254 (2015) and supporting the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated Geneva political process. At this critical time, let me also reiterate the Secretary-General's emphasis on the importance of full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access, using all modalities, including scaled-up cross-line and cross-border access. Humanitarian access remains imperative given not only the increasing suffering of the Syrian people, but also the fact that there is still a risk from the COVID-19 pandemic. Syria has now reported 183 cases in total. Meanwhile, I reiterate my appeal for the Syrian Government and all other Syrian parties to carry out large-scale and unilateral releases of detainees and abductees, especially women, children, the elderly and the sick, and for more meaningful actions on missing persons. The COVID-19 pandemic is still a risk, and it should serve as an extra impetus for such action, as it has in other countries. Syria is going through a time of great flux. Nobody involved in the conflict should presume that time is on their side. Nobody should be sure that there will be better openings down the road. What is required is the readiness of all to deal seriously with the realities of the conflict. Guided by resolution 2254 (2015), I will continue to work with the Syrian parties and all international stakeholders to facilitate a way forward that addresses all aspects and outcomes of the conflict, restores the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria, ends the acute suffering of the Syrian people and enables them to shape their own future.
