Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 9 December 1996 on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The report highlights the fact that the

 

implementation of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is now entering a new
phase of consolidation of the peace process. This
consolidation is illustrated by the Conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in London, following the
Paris Conference on the civilian consolidation plan of the
peace process. This brings to light the many tasks needed
to be accomplished by the parties to rebuild Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the help of the international community.
Given the hostile forces that continue relentlessly to oppose
a unified Bosnia and Herzegovina, and especially any type
of harmonious relations between the different ethnic and
religious groups, it is no small accomplishment that the
peace has held and that progress has been made.

The fact that the international community stepped into
this conflict and laid down the framework for peace has
given the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina an historic
opportunity. The Implementation Force (IFOR), which was
created in accordance with the Dayton Agreement, played
a pivotal role, inter alia, in enforcing the ceasefire and in
separating the warring parties along the demilitarized zones.
Furthermore, the elections held last September have brought
the country nearer to reconciliation and paved the way for
the establishment of common national institutions. These
were the first steps towards creating a unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina and bringing democracy to the country.

However, Bosnia and Herzegovina is still devastated
and traumatized after four years of brutal warfare and its
soil remains fertile for the eruption of tension and violence.
Indeed, the Peace Implementation Conference, held this
month in London, expressed concern and dismay at the
continuing deadlock in the full implementation of all
aspects of the Peace Agreement.

My delegation is of the view that the persistent
attitude of non-compliance with many of the essential
provisions set out by the Peace Accords is a constant threat
to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is especially
complicated by the refusal of the States to turn over
indicted war criminals to the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Furthermore, the right of refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes has been
trampled upon by the Bosnian Serbs. Consequently,
hundreds of thousands of people whose homes are located
in the territories gained as a result of aggression remain
refugees, while countless more remain unaccounted for.
Likewise, freedom of movement is seriously hampered and
human rights abuses continue to be carried out on the basis
of ethnicity. The situation is compounded by the inordinate
delay in the establishment and functioning of the new
common institutions. Adding to the atmosphere of
continued tensions, the non-compliance with the arms-
control provisions of the Dayton Accords and the non-
cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and IFOR cannot but have
ominous implications for regional security and stability.

Hence, at this critical stage, my delegation deems of
utmost importance the respect for the principal provisions
of the peace accord, such as cooperation with the
International Tribunal, leading to the arrest, extradition
and trials of those responsible for atrocities; the
resettlement of refugees to their homes of origin, free
from harassment and discrimination; the rapid
establishment and functioning of the new political
institutions; and respect for the arms-control provisions of
the peace plan.

The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
accepted the reality of one State, two entities and three
peoples. Hence, the international community must render
its full support to the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at this critical and historic moment as it
struggles to establish peace, security and stability on the
basis of full and consistent implementation of the General
Framework Agreement. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina now have an unprecedented opportunity to
work for the consolidation of a sovereign and united
country based on the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the development of viable representative institutions
within the framework of a multi-cultural, multi-ethnic and
multi-religious society. However, this will become a
reality only when priority is accorded to economic
reconstruction, leading to the restoration of the prosperity
of the Bosnian people. This should be bolstered by the
fulfilment of the solemn commitments to the Peace
Agreement undertaken by the parties concerned and their
respect for the internationally recognized borders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My delegation is of the view that a continuing and
credible international presence will be essential to
consolidating the gains achieved so far. In this context,
the continued deployment of international military forces
will be necessary, not only to reflect the commitment of
the global community to facilitating the transition to a
lasting peace, but also to prevent the resumption of
conflict, with its attendant consequences. In this regard,
my delegation is of the view that the creation of the
Stabilization Force to replace IFOR for a planned period
of 18 months is imperative to keeping the momentum of
the peace process going. In addition, my delegation fully

 

supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) until December 1997. UNMIBH,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF), will
make substantive contributions in the coming consolidation
period to bringing lasting peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Based on these considerations, we will vote in favour of
this draft resolution.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its
deep gratitude to the international community for its work
to establish peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the High
Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, for his coordination efforts
and to the numerous United Nations agencies which are
relentlessly endeavouring to help rebuild this country.
Finally, we would like to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Iqbal Riza, and the IPTF Commissioner, Mr. Peter
FitzGerald, as well as their staff, for their commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

