Mr. Lacanilao (Philippines): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month. We would also like to
thank Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo for his able leadership of
the Council last month.

The Philippine delegation deplores the escalating
violence in the Middle East. The recent escalation has
been the bloodiest in the Gaza Strip over the past four
yours. We are deeply concerned with the growing
casualties, particularly of innocent civilians, and
deplore in the strongest terms the ongoing bloodbath
that claims young lives on both sides. We express our
profound sympathies to the victims and their families.

We urge Israel to halt its military raids in Gaza.
Just today, three more civilians were killed by the
Israeli military, including a lS-year-old girl inside her
own house. We call on Israel to stop its military assault

and withdraw its approximately 200 tanks and
armoured vehicles that are currently blanketing
northern Gaza.

At the same time, we also call on the Palestinian
Authority to stop the rocket attacks by militant groups
against Israel. Also today, Palestinian militants fired
another round of Qassam rockets into an Israeli border
town, wounding a man.

We are deeply concerned about the fact that
violence in the Middle East is continuing to be
perpetrated by one side against the other, despite the
clear expression of repugnance at such a state of affairs
by the international community and the Security
Council. The Middle East will not know peace unless
the pattern of attack and reprisal is broken on both
sides. We are gravely concerned that, unless strong will
is exercised on all sides to curtail terrorism and
violence, the peace process will not succeed.

This conflict cannot continue unabated without
seriously imperilling the opportunity of future
generations of Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace
and harmony. Both sides should understand that there
will be no winners in the conflict. We call on both
sides to exercise restraint and refrain from acts of
violence that further escalate the situation. We appeal
to them to follow the path of peaceful negotiation to
achieve the goal of two States living side by side in
peace and security, in accordance with Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).

The conflict in the Middle East will never be
resolved through violent means. Thus, we urge the
parties to restart the peace process, established under
the road map, which the Council endorsed in resolution
1515 (2003). We ask the parties to fulfil their
obligations under the road map to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

