Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): We are here today to take
an important decision concerning further United Nations
support for the peace process in Tajikistan. Five years of
civil war brought enormous human suffering to that
country, but now, after the signature of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord on 27 June of this year, we look at the future of
Tajikistan with more hope and optimism.

There has been certain visible progress on the
difficult road towards peace and stability. The Secretary-
General notes in his report the convening of the
Commission on National Reconciliation, the exchange of
prisoners of war and detainees, the registration of United
Tajik Opposition fighters inside Tajikistan and the
repatriation of refugees from Afghanistan. We share the
Secretary-General's encouragement at the fact that the
refugees have been received without hostility on their
return.

The ceasefire is crucial to the successful conclusion
of the peace process, and that is why we appeal to the
parties to refrain from any violence, which continues to
run high in the central part of the country.
We have no illusions about the seriousness of the
conditions in which the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) will have to carry out
its mandated tasks in the months to come. It is for that
reason that we welcome the decision of President
Rakhmonov and Mr. Nuri to form a joint security unit
with the task of providing security to UNMOT personnel.

We believe that now, more than ever before,
Tajikistan needs the international community and its firm
support. This is why we are in favour of the expansion of
the size of UNMOT and the extension of its mandate.
Our decision should serve the purpose of promoting peace
and national reconciliation in Tajikistan.

I cannot conclude without paying tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Tajikistan,

 

Mr. Gerd Merrem, and all the UNMOT personnel who have
served with devotion in carrying out their tasks in often
difficult and dangerous conditions.

