Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking the
delegation of Ukraine for convening today's debate on
such an important issue.
Among the myriad threats endangering global
security, terrorism has emerged as one of the most
complex and imposing challenges of our times. Our
dependence on critical infrastructure makes this an
attractive target for terrorists of all stripes. Terrorist
attacks on infrastructure aim to disrupt life, cause
widespread fear and chaos, retard socioeconomic
development and impede regional economic
cooperation. Advances in the world of communications
technologies, making the world interdependent as
well as interconnected, and the increasing use of
encrypted communications by terrorist organizations
like Da'esh have amplified the threat of a terrorist
attack on financial and energy hubs. National resolve
and collective endeavour are necessary to protect
the infrastructure that is essential to the welfare and
progress of our peoples.

My country has confronted and combatted terrorism
over several decades with courage and conviction. Our
resilience has been tested time and time again, from
the barbaric attack on the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad
in 2008 to the destruction of military equipment in the
attack on an air force base in Kamra in 2012 and the
attack on Karachi airport in 2014. These attacks were
aimed at destroying and disrupting the lives of my
people, weakening our defence forces and demoralizing
the nation, but they only strengthened the resolve of our
people to continue their efforts to eliminate this scourge.

Over the past four years, Pakistan has adopted
a multipronged strategy. A military-led operation
called Zarb-e-Azb has successfully destroyed terrorist
infrastructure, and a national action plan - undergirded
by a strong national consensus - has effectively sought
to counter the narrative of terrorist and extremist
organizations. That comprehensive approach has
succeeded in expelling terrorist organizations from our
territory and greatly constrained their ability to carry
out lethal attacks, as evident from the dramatic decline
in the number of such attacks, despite this morning's
cowardly terrorist attack in Lahore. What Pakistan
continues to face today are increasingly and externally
supported terrorists. One of their principal targets is
the major infrastructure that we are currently building
in Pakistan. Their aim is to undermine our economic
accomplishments and stability.

State control of infrastructure systems and its role
in determining how to effectively protect infrastructure
are critical. The diversity of the threat requires a
coherent response by all national stakeholders based
on the specific environment of each individual country.
International and regional organizations and regional
cooperation also remain vital in countering the threat
of terrorism. At the regional level, the sharing of
information and threat assessments, as well as effective
border management and the sharing of best practices,
can significantly enhance national capacities to deter
and defeat terrorism.

It was in that spirit that my country joined the
Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC). However, unfortunately, SAARC as an
organization has become a victim of the hostile agenda
of some ofour neighbours, which has severely hampered
the ability of our region to respond to the multiple
challenges it faces, including the challenge of terrorism.
Although we remain committed to strengthening
regional cooperation to combat terrorism, Pakistan
continues to suffer from regional terrorist attacks
that are supported by forces within the region. We are
determined to repel, and are fully capable of repelling,
such State-sponsored terrorism.

The United Nations can, and should, play a role
in enhancing Member States' capacities in their
counter-terrorism efforts. The Working Group on the
Protection of Critical Infrastructure of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force is playing a
positive role in that regard. The United Nations also
provides a platform for assisting Member States in
identifying potential facilities-related threats and risks
and in developing sound strategies and partnerships to
implement those plans.

In addressing the terrorist threat, it is essential for
the global community to analyse and understand the
phenomenon of terrorism in all its complexities. The
global campaign against terrorism cannot be reduced
to a slogan slandering Islam or any other religion or
race. It is also important to examine the reasons that,
despite the global campaign to counter terrorism, the
threat continues to evolve and emerge in new and more
virulent and toxic forms and ideologies and across
ever-extending geographic regions, thereby posing a
pervasive threat to international and national peace
and security.

Pakistan remains convinced that in order to defeat
and eliminate terrorism it is essential to address
the underlying causes that create terrorist recruits:
unresolved internal and inter-State conflicts, the illegal
use of force, external aggression and intervention,
foreign occupation, denial of the right to self-
determination, political and economic injustice and
the marginalization and alienation of communities and
groups. It is only by addressing those underlying causes
that the international community can erode the appeal
of the narratives of hate and hostility that provide the
oxygen for the existence and the growth of terrorism.

