Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the delegation of Senegal, I should like at the
outset to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on the United
Kingdom's assumption to the presidency of the Council
for this month. You may rest assured of our support and
full cooperation.

We also deeply thank the Governments and the
peoples of the four countries that we visited: Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.

I congratulate Ms. Amina Mohammed and wish her
every success in her new functions as Deputy Secretary-
General, which she assumed in March, including
at yesterday's commemoration of International
Women's Day.

I welcome this meeting to discuss the Security
Council's historic visit from 2 to 7 March to the Lake
Chad region, with successive stops in Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria. As you rightly said, Mr. President,
the visit was not only timely but also essential, given the
extent to which the multidimensional crisis affecting
that strategic part of the African continent has been
neglected and even forgotten, as we attempt to redress
today. As you, Sir, addressed the security dimension
and Ambassador Delattre will address the human
dimension, I shall focus on the part of our visit that was
my purview - the deep-rooted causes of the crisis and
long-term solutions.

All with whom we met from the Governments and the
populace - including technical and financial partners,
humanitarian actors and civil society representatives,
pointed to the lack of education, training, sustainable
development and resilience to the combined effects of
climate change and global warming, which lie at the
heart of the crisis we all wish to see resolved. There
has also been a population explosion in the context of
deteriorating environmental conditions and endemic
poverty and unemployment. These factors complicate
efforts to exploit the demographic transition that
would make optimal use of the demographic dividend.
Moreover, the countries of the region are suffering
cruelly from the economic and financial effects of
the fall in commodity prices, including that of oil, on
which those countries' budgets rely heavily. When we
add to that the pernicious effects of cross-border crime;
the traffic in drugs, arms, human beings and cultural
goods; the growing number of clandestine migratory
flows and cybercrime, we can assess the full scope
of the challenges to that key region of the Sahelo-
Saharan region.

What, then, are the region's long-term prospects?
Throughout our visit, we affirmed the need to focus on
everything from humanitarian issues to development.
We need significant coordination at various levels
between United Nations organs, specialized agencies,
financial and technical partners, as well as subregional
coordination within the States members of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and intergovernmental
coordination at the national level, with contributions
from the private sector and civil society. We look
forward with interest to the contributions to be made
by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-
General with respect to coordination in that area.

The Security Council should strengthen its
exchnages with the other organs, in particular the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Our work with the Secretary-General is
proceeding apace, although the available funding is
drying up at the regional and international levels and
remains dramatically insufficient to meet needs in all
sectors. The small amount that has been announced
and included in the budget is being spent effectively,
but Governments, the humanitarian agencies and civil
society organizations often appeal to the same donors.
It is therefore important to identify and mobilize
other sources of international financing, and above all
domestic funding, by increasing contributions from the
private sector, foundations and charitable organizations.

A platform to manage it all must be established,
taking the priorities of Governments into account,
particularly when they have prepared their own
development programmes pursuant to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sustainable
Development Goals, the African Union Agenda
2063, and the economic agendas of the regional
economic communities to which the countries
belong - the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for the Niger and Nigeria, and
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) for Cameroon and Chad.

In the security sector, the Security Council must
strongly encourage and support the countries of
the Lake Chad basin and their neighbours in their
outstanding, high-profile efforts to combat terrorism
in West and Central Africa. The Governments and
the peoples of those countries have moved quickly
to pool their resources to more effectively fight
terrorists and organized crime. The establishment
and operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task
Force are a striking example of such cooperation
and is extremely important to the world mobilization
against that international scourge. These countries
have a right to and fully deserve the decisive support
of the international community, beginning with the
Security Council.

A question was put to us during our visit as to
why the Security Council takes so long to adopt
resolutions that would help those countries. I have
no easy answer to that question, but one banker even
suggested that security, in its broadest understanding,
should henceforth be considered to be a world public
good. Countries, such as those of the Lake Chad basin,
that contribute to the critical stability and security of
the region therefore have the right to enjoy the benefits
in terms of financial, logistical, and technical support,
as well as in equipment and training adapted to highly
asymmetric threats. We must also recall that two
members of the Multinational Joint Task Force, Chad
and the Niger, also belong to the Group of Five Sahel,
which is another important subregional initiative to
fight terrorist organizations operating in North and
East Africa, particularly in Libya and northern Mali.

The Security Council should also fully utilize
the conclusions of the joint visit in February by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to
the four countries of the Lake Chad basin, including
the recommendations on strengthening judicial and
police cooperation capacities, especially mutual legal
instruments on assistance in the areas of prisoner
extradition and transfer. It is also an issue of adopting
a common strategy to properly address the matter of
persons who have repented and turned themselves
into the authorities, one that duly includes norms
of international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law. That
would also contribute to efforts to rehabilitate and
reintegrate women, children and youth, as the President
just mentioned.

At our meeting at the Abuja headquartes of
ECOWAS, which included officials of that organization
and the Secretary-General of ECCAS, we received a
briefing on the draft comprehensive strategy developed
jointly by those two organizations, which is aligned
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel. An interregional ECOWAS/ECCAS summit is
being prepared for the adoption of the draft strategy,
which will include neighbouring countries from the
Lake Chad basin, namely, Nigeria and Cameroon.
As part of the analysis, it is important to include the
maritime aspect of the counter-terrorism fight, as well
as efforts to combat crime.
In conclusion, I should like to underscore that all
of those efforts will be for naught unless Lake Chad
is saved by raising the water level, either through
plentiful rainfall in the long term or, as was explained
to us, by diverting water from elsewhere. That can be
done, as we say in Senegal, by way of hydro-diplomacy,
namely, inter-State cooperation in order to fairly and
jointly manage trans-border water resources, just
as has been done for more than 40 years by Guinea,
Mali, Mauritania and Senegal in the framework of
the Organization for the Development of the Senegal
River, and as done by the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau and Senegal through the Gambia River Basin
Development Organization.

Lastly, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations has carried out a study on joint
efforts with regard to Lake Chad, which I found very
useful, entitled The Future Is An Ancient Lake. The
report points out that many traditional practices in the
Lake Chad basin could be useful in overcoming the
challenges faced by the region owing to natural effects as
well as human activity, including intensive agriculture.
The reports refers to the importance of such practices
as a good foundation upon which to develop a new ways
of undertaking agriculture, grazing and sustainable
fishing, all in the framework of a new ecosystem
approach aimed at the integrated conservation of land,
water and living resources, thereby ensuring equitable
use and preservation. That is precisely what is called for
in the Convention on Biological Diversity. Researchers
have shown us how stakeholders in the Lake Chad
basin - using traditional knowledge, biodiversity and
the genetic resources of their land - could use new
technologies in order to feed themselves, transform
production and create added value; in a word, how to
develop while safeguarding their ecosystem. The great
hope aroused by our visit, both among the populations
and the Governments, can therefore become a reality.

