Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Guatemala
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Jordan, Mr. Nasser Judeh, and to thank him warmly
for being so actively involved at the beginning of this
debate. We also wish to congratulate the delegation of
Jordan for its exemplary leadership and the work that
it has undertaken throughout the month of April in
exercise of the office of the presidency of the Security
Council. The Ambassador of Jordan is a great personal
friend, and we hope to be able to meet up with her again
on Thursday and Friday.

We also have taken due note of the statement made
by the Secretary-General on recent developments in
the Middle East, a region in which various countries
find themselves racked by instability and conflict. The
fallout of the violence in the region has been disastrous
for the civilian population, and, as my delegation noted
in this very Chamber last month, we are particularly
concerned by the plight of the many ethnic and religious
communities that are under serious threat.

The international community has borne witness to
how violence, fundamentalism, intolerance, exclusion
and the tearing apart of the very fabric of society have
come to exemplify the characteristics of a political and
social model that is no longer viable. For that reason,
we must redouble our efforts to encourage leaders in
the region to respect human rights and forge a better
future for their peoples.

Since the suspension of the latest rounds of peace
talks in April 2014, we have seen a rapid deterioration in
the situation between Israel and Palestine, which means
that the desired two-State solution seems increasingly
difficult to achieve. For that reason, it is important that
we put together a political timeline that responds to the
legitimate needs of both peoples and that will lead to a
definitive and just settlement. It is for this reason that
the international community must play an active role in
supporting and promoting the peace process.

We acknowledge the value of the principle of
shared responsibility, and for that reason we believe
that the active participation of both the diplomatic
Quartet on the Middle East and the Security Council
in the peace process could generate new momentum,
so that the parties can take responsible steps towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

In this regard, we encourage a dialogue on the Arab
Peace Initiative, with its vision of a comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, and on the vital
role that could be played by the countries of the region
and the Security Council.

The parties must shy away from adopting measures
that would further hinder prospects for the relaunching
of meaningful talks. We believe that it is the parties to
conflict themselves that must make real and renewed
efforts that would include, inter alia, a complete lifting
of the blockade, a halt to the construction of illegal
settlements, and abstaining from provocative actions
and from the launching of rockets, with the objective
of meeting the legitimate security concerns of Israel.
It is essential that the parties build mutual trust
and commit to dialogue on peace and to the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security, adopting measures aimed at
rebuilding mutual trust and confidence.

We welcome the announcement of an agreement
under which Israel has agreed to release tax revenues
collected on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, as this
is an important step towards the rebuilding of trust
between both parties. The withholding of that income
for more than four months has had a deeply destabilizing
effect on Palestinian institutions, particularly as

concerns their ability to pay salaries in the public sector
and provide essential services to the population.

Additionally, Guatemala strongly supports the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and in that context we deem positive the entry into force
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
for Palestine. We are firm advocates for the universality
of the Court and believe that this step reflects the full
commitment of the State of Palestine to work towards a
system of accountability and respect for human rights,
elements that can only serve to help pave the path to
peace for both parties.

The crisis in Syria, which is entering its fifth year,
continues in a spiral of violence and destruction. We
categorically condemn the human rights violations
committed by all parties. We are aware of the
tremendous efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
particularly through the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to respond
to the devastating impact of this conflict, but the
international community also has a role to play. We
reiterate the urgent need to rekindle the political process,
and we believe, therefore, that any effort towards a
peaceful settlement between the parties is valuable
and should enjoy our support. We also commend the
efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to deal with the Syrian conflict.

The international community, in particular the
members of the Security Council, must overcome their
differences and seek new ways of reducing violence,
alleviating the suffering of the population and creating
the necessary conditions conducive to the resumption
of negotiations.

We are particularly concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Essential services
such as health care, education and sanitation are at
a breaking point, and the current assistance being
provided to support these systems is not sufficient.
Any humanitarian aid that can be provided is vital for
restoring political stability in the region.

Against that backdrop, we would like to note the
invaluable support lent by the Governments and peoples
of those countries that have given refuge to thousands
of Syrian refugees, thus shouldering an undue and
heavy burden. Here we pay particular tribute to the role
of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt in that regard.

We condemn all attacks on refugee camps. It
is vital that all parties to the conflict protect the
civilian population and permit regular and ongoing
humanitarian access to affected populations. We are
firmly convinced that it is the State that bears the
primary responsibility to protect the civilian population
and that in no circumstances can it violate the rights
of said population, in particular through recourse
to violent means. It is necessary to ensure that any
serious crimes that have been committed from the very
beginning of this conflict do not go unpunished. The
Syrian people deserve accountability.

We are aware of the tremendous challenges that
the quest for a political solution poses to the parties
to the conflict, both nationally and internationally,
but this is the only option open to us. It is our political
and historical responsibility, as States members of the
international community, to support all of the steps that
might help us to achieve the goal of peace.

