Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
Resolution 986 (1995), which we have just adopted, is an
important text. It took a long time to draft because several
partially contradictory approaches had to be reconciled.
The Council wisely gave itself the time to overcome these
difficulties. My delegation was able to join in approving
this text for the three following reasons: it responds to a
serious humanitarian situation; it respects Iraq's
sovereignty and territorial integrity; and it does not
prejudice decisions the Council will take towards reducing
or lifting the sanctions once the necessary conditions have
been met.

France believes that sanctions are not a punishment
but, rather, are designed to induce a State to behave in a
certain way. The effects of sanctions on the peoples must
therefore be attenuated as much as possible. This
consideration led my delegation as early as 1991 to
initiate texts that would become resolutions 706 (1991)
and 712 (1991). The negotiations for their implementation
never came to fruition. The lessons from this experience
had to be drawn to ensure that the new provisions could
serve effectively to bring relief to the Iraqi people.

We are all aware that the humanitarian situation in
Iraq has worsened over the past few years. Nevertheless,
we do not possess an exhaustive analysis enabling us to
determine precisely the extent of the needs. There is no
doubt, however, that they are great. The testimony of
non-governmental organizations and the reports of the
United Nations institutions that are now working in that
country have amply shown this.

Without going into the details of the resolution, I
note with particular interest that the Council has chosen
to revise the general conditions for its implementation
three months after the start of its entry into force. It will
do so on the basis of a report from the Secretary-General,
which should inform it whether the sums which Iraq is
authorized to use are large enough to cover the needs of
the people and whether the mechanisms that have been
provided for suffice to enable Iraq to make use of these
sums. The Council will thereby be assured that the text
meets the objectives it has set for itself.

 

Unflagging attention has been paid to the matter of
respect for Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
current unrest in the north of the country lends this question
particular importance. Everyone knows that peace and
security in the region would be seriously and permanently
affected if Iraq's territorial integrity were threatened. It was
therefore essential that no provision of this resolution seem
to encourage in any way the country's dismemberment.

Resolution 986 (1995) affirms the Council's dedication
to Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Its penultimate
paragraph, moreover, specifies that none of its provisions
should be construed as infringing this sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In addition, the Council has taken care
to ensure that the constraints surrounding the derogations of
the trade embargo should be implemented with respect for
the prerogatives and legitimate interests of the Iraqi State.

Finally, my delegation stresses that the provisions of
this resolution do not affect the implementation, when the
time comes, of paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991), or of
the other texts relating to the reduction or lifting of the
sanctions.

On this subject, I would like to point out that the
derogations introduced in resolution 986 (1995) are
regarded as a temporary measure, intended to disappear
when the conditions have been met that would authorize the
Council to take new decisions regarding the prohibitions to
which Iraq is now subjected. It is important, moreover, that
several paragraphs specify that the regime established is
valid solely within the framework of the arrangements of
this resolution.

My delegation invites the Secretary-General to begin
the necessary consultations and negotiations as soon as
possible, and first of all with the Iraqi Government, so that
this resolution may begin to produce its effects without
delay, and so that the Iraqi peoples may begin to feel its
benefits in the coming weeks.

We share the very sound opinion that the decisions
taken by the Council for humanitarian reasons will serve no
purpose without the cooperation of the Government of Iraq.
I welcome the constructive attitude of the Iraqi delegation,
which has shown wisdom and realism in its dialogue with
the initiators of this text. I also thank the co-sponsors, and
above all Argentina, for having heeded the appeals
addressed to them and for having been receptive to the
comments that were made. I express the hope that the
Government of Iraq will continue to take this attitude, so
that the suffering of its people can begin to decrease, until
the Council is in a position to consider a radical
modification of the sanctions regime.

