Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting of the Security Council to celebrate the
independence of East Timor. I also wish to say how
honoured we are at your presence here today.

The European Union Presidency has already
made a statement, to which I fully subscribe. But I
think that members will understand that my country has
something of its own to say, especially on this
occasion.

I cannot fail to start by remembering that today
my country closes an important chapter of its history.
The last territory of what was once called the
Portuguese colonial empire today exerted the right of
self-determination and affirmed its independence. The
decolonization process, which this Portuguese
generation started and concluded, could not have ended
better than with the creation of the democratic nation
of East Timor. We are known to be a country that is
very proud of its history; indeed we are, and I must say
that we feel proud that we were able, to a certain
extent, to contribute to the event we are celebrating
today.

For more than 40 years, the United Nations paid
special attention to the overseas territories under
Portuguese administration. Five of those territories
acquired sovereign status in 1975. For reasons history
already has taken note of, East Timor did not have the
chance to accede to independence in the same year.
Only through immense suffering were the East
Timorese people, who for many years were forgotten
by a great part of the international community, able to
keep alive the hope of building their own country. They
are the real heroes of our time: those who died for the
freedom of their country, those who fought under
appalling conditions and in almost complete isolation.
They also need to be remembered here today.

Today is a day ofjoy - a day to congratulate the
East Timorese on their courage, on their stubbornness
and on their fabulous capacity to live for the future,
after all they went through in the past. I want to
mention that past - not to exploit any political
argument, but to call attention to the fact that the
international community still owes a special debt to the
East Timorese. That debt has been incurred because of
what the international community did not do to support
them in their time of need and because of the terrible
silence which contributed to their missed chances in
those long years when realpolitik prevailed.

The work done by the United Nations more
recently in favour of East Timor, under the very able
guidance of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
must be highly praised on this day. The United Nations
was able to reconcile the East Timorese with the
international community, and this must be stated here
loudly. For that reason, the United Nations also must
be very proud of this moment.

At the last meeting of the Council on this issue, I
took the opportunity to thank United Nations officials
who contributed to the United Nations presence and
activities in the territory. We also owe them a lot, and I
want to stress this today in front of Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno, of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), whose work and
whose department's work played a vital role in this
entire process; they deserve praise from us all.

Today is only the first day of the rest of East
Timor's history. The international community needs to
understand that the United Nations helped to give birth
to a country that, for the time being, will be one of the
poorest nations in the world. The world needs to know
that East Timor is far from being a stable nation with
all the necessary means to face the future.

Last Friday, the Council approved the mandate
for a new mission to East Timor, the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), which
will try to provide assistance and security to the new
country in the first months of its life. We very much
hope that future decisions related to the level of
assistance to be given to East Timor will continue to be
based on realistic assessments of the concrete needs of
the new country. I am sure that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, will not fail to provide to this
Council accurate information in this regard.

It should be noted that East Timor today has
constitutional law in which human rights, gender rights
and the internal division of power are formally
protected. It is our common duty to provide the means
for the East Timorese leadership - for Xanana
Gusmao, for Mari Alkatiri, for Francisco Guterres, for
Jose Ramos-Horta - to put that constitutional law
fully into practice. They need to rebuild a country
where young generations may feel they have the
necessary means, where refugees may find a place to
live and reintegrate, and where former guerrilla
members may receive collective recognition for what
they did to restore their national project. It is also our
duty to be attentive to their need to protect the full
sovereignty of the country and its capacity to affirm it
at every moment without any ambiguity or limitation,
to support the establishment and consolidation of the
republic's new network of external relations and to
facilitate its complete integration into regional and
international structures.

The creation of the eighth nation with Portuguese
as its official language is a moment of pride for my
country and, I am sure, for the other Portuguese-
speaking countries. All of them, without hesitation,
have always sided with East Timor in its long fight for
freedom. Just a few hours ago, a Portuguese
ambassador presented his credentials to President
Xanana Gusmao. A bilateral programme of cooperation
has already been signed between our two Governments.
For our part, we are prepared to give the new East
Timor authorities all possible support in their difficult
tasks ahead. And we will be looking forward to the
date we will be receiving East Timor, in this House, as
the first nation of the twenty-first century. Viva Timor
Leste.

