Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
are concerned about the recent extrajudicial
assassination of Mr. Al-Rantisi, following the murder
of Mr. Yassin. In less than one month, that sort of
action has taken place to do away with the latest
leaders of Hamas. As the new Foreign Minister of
Spain said yesterday, extrajudicial executions do not in
any way contribute to creating a climate of peace-
building, and they obstruct the implementation of the
road map, which is the only way to establish peace
between Israelis and Palestinians. Indiscriminate
violence cannot promote coexistence but rather can
only exacerbate the hatreds that prolong the conflict.

The fight against terrorism must take place in the
framework of legality and the rule of law. Otherwise,
the very security of Israel is jeopardized. The appeal
for vengeance that we heard after the killing of
Mr. Al-Rantisi foretells an escalation of terror and
violence that can leave no one indifferent. My country
condemns with utmost firmness all terrorist actions that
take innocent lives, make the peace process difficult
and damage the Palestinian cause itself. Therefore we
want to appeal for restraint in the present
circumstances.

We also wish to recall that the only solution to the
conflict is based on the coexistence of two States in the
framework of a global peace, which is set forth in the
road map and supported by the Security Council in its
resolution 1515 (2003). The road map establishes
obligations for both parties. The Palestinian Authority,
on the one hand, must endeavour to strengthen the
security apparatus that makes it possible to struggle
against terrorism effectively. The Israeli authorities, for
their part, must avoid disproportionate actions,
including extrajudicial executions, which are a grave
violation of international law and of common law.

For all these reasons, we believe that the
attainment of peace involves the road map and the
work of the Quartet and that any solution regarding
permanent status needs to be negotiated by the
parties - all of this in the framework of the provisions
of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

With regard to the announced unilateral
withdrawal from Gaza, we believe that it must have the
support of the international community for a peaceful
and orderly transition.

