The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

Since the adoption of the Security Council resolutions
which followed the end of the Gulf war in 1991, the United
Kingdom has regarded it as one of the most important
responsibilities of the international community, and in
particular of the Security Council, to hold Iraq to its
obligations under those resolutions and to contain the
threat to the peace and security of the region. That
includes the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction.
For the Security Council to remain a successful global
manager of peace and security, we must ensure that its
decisions are not diluted by defiance.

The Council's work on Iraq throughout this year has
been dedicated to finding a new approach for the
international community's business with Iraq, one firmly
set in the framework of a collective responsibility
exercised within the United Nations. The Amorim panels
gave us an excellent start. It is in that spirit that the
United Kingdom has participated in these negotiations,
and that is why we have worked tirelessly to find an
outcome which, while meeting our concerns that Iraq
should meet its international obligations, allowed adoption
by the whole Council.

We now have that way forward. We have a
resolution which preserves the original disarmament
standards for Iraq; establishes a new monitoring and
inspection arrangement for Iraq, in the shape of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC); and meets our humanitarian
concerns by making the oil-for-food programme bigger
and better resourced, in particular through the lifting of
the oil ceiling, and by setting out ways to make sure that
the funds can be spent as quickly and efficiently as
possible to the benefit of the Iraqi people. It also belated
recognizes just how dire Iraq's response has been to its
obligations with regard to missing Kuwaiti citizens and
property. Most significantly of all, it sets out a series of
clear, logical steps, using the new concept of suspension,
to bring Iraq out of sanctions and back into the
international community and to allow the suffering Iraqi
people once again to hope for a normal existence. If
Baghdad chooses to turn down the opportunity of this
resolution, then the Iraqi people are the real losers.

The Council has embraced the idea of suspension,
because it both maintains the integrity of the previous
resolutions and marks out the way forward. The United
Kingdom strongly endorses the concept, and sees it as a
valuable step towards the full lifting of sanctions.

The criteria for suspension are clear, and are rooted
in Iraq's obligations under existing resolutions. They give
the international community the necessary reassurance
that suspension can occur only if Iraq at last begins to act
according to the rules of international law. If we have
needed to establish a process for that purpose which

 

involves calling for the responsible judgement of the
Council at steps along the way, that too is sensible; it can
only help to produce greater confidence in Iraq's good faith
and stronger agreement within the Council on how to deal
with Iraq.
Some have argued that the resolution should have been
designed to ensure Iraq's acceptance of it. On the basis of
Iraq's known current positions, that would have meant
abandoning all the previous resolutions. It was clearly not
a credible approach for the Council. A more serious point
is whether Iraq will cooperate in its implementation. Iraq's
track record and its recent rhetoric are hardly encouraging:
witness its refusal this week to grant visas to the
International Atomic Energy Agency. That makes it all the
more important that we in the Council do everything we
can to turn this resolution into a reality. It means action
across the board, starting now. On weapons of mass
destruction, we need to select someone able and
experienced as Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC to carry
on the excellent and professional work of the United
Nations Special Commission. On the humanitarian side, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990)
has urgent work to do to make the humanitarian programme
bigger and better. And we look forward to the appointment
of an active coordinator on the Kuwait-related issues.

The adoption of this resolution was an exceptional
achievement for the Security Council. As the representative
of the Russian Federation stated this morning, it was
possible to avoid a split in the Council. The result is fully
in the interests of the Iraqi people and of the international
community. The resolution has been adopted, explicitly, by
the Council as a whole, in the recognition that relief of
sanctions and performance on disarmament have to go hand
in hand. We regret that, on this point, some have been more
inclined to listen to the voice of the Iraqi leadership than to
the needs of the Iraqi people. The Council now has the
policy which it needs, and this resolution is now the law of
the globe.

It is time to look forward. The Security Council needs,
and the United Nations system as a whole needs, the weight
of the full Council and the full membership in
implementing this mandatory resolution. We have a great
deal of work to do to bring its provisions into effect, and
we must do it together. If we succeed in that, it will be to
the advantage of the peoples of Iraq and of the region, in
the interests of the future authority of the United Nations,
and to the great credit of the Council.

Finally, as the sponsor of this resolution, I pay
tribute to my colleagues - all of them - for their
patience, their perseverance and their diplomacy in
bringing this comprehensive piece of work on Iraq to a
result.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

