Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2393 (2017), and should like to
thank the three penholders, Egypt, Japan and Sweden,
for the tireless efforts that made it possible for us to
adopt this important resolution today.

Italy voted in favour of resolution 2393 (2017)
because it authorizes the continuation of life-saving
cross-border assistance in Syria. Such activities continue
to be complemented by other modalities of assistance
and are indispensable for the survival of civilians living
in areas serviced by them. Significantly, the resolution
we have just adopted renews the authorization for these
operations for a period of 12 months, thereby giving
both beneficial humanitarian actors a predictable and
sustainable time horizon going forward. Given the
volatility of the situation in Syria and the continued
high level of humanitarian needs, such a time frame
represents the necessary minimum extension for the
meaningful renewal of the measures authorized by
this resolution.

As we have repeatedly heard in this Chamber, the
true limit of humanitarian access in Syria lies in the
persistent low level of cross-line delivery to rebel-held
areas within the county, which are not being reached by
cross-border assistance. Sadly, several previous Council
resolutions regarding the obligation to provide timely,
unhindered and unfettered access for humanitarian aid
have not been implemented. That is due notably to the
obstacles set up by the Syrian regime, which have led to
the humanitarian tragedy we have heard of month after
month in this Chamber.

Eastern Ghouta is where this humanitarian tragedy
is currently being played out. It is there that the civilian
population, despite the de-escalation agreement, is
being besieged and bombarded by the regime. It is there
that while humanitarian convoys are prevented from
reaching those in need, the staples that are entering
Ghouta through commercial flows have seen their prices
increase by up to tenfold, and the profits thereofline the
pockets of those who control such flows. It is there that
children and women die due to the lack of medications
and the regime's denial of emergency evacuation to
hospitals just a few kilometres away. We would have
therefore liked to have seen in this resolution a clear
commitment to reviewing not only the cross-border
operation but also the cross-line operation, due to the

repeated failure to deliver.

We welcome the renewal of this resolution and the
continuation of the cross-border assistance that is so
greatly needed on the ground. We reiterate the call to
lift all sieges so as to ensure that cross-line assistance is
promptly delivered, to allow urgent medical evacuation
and to ensure that nationwide humanitarian access is
rapid, safe and unhindered.

