Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first of all to thank Ambassador
Inocencio Arias, the Permanent Representative of
Spain, for his excellent work as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), and for the
briefing he just gave us on the report concerning the
revitalization of the Committee (S/2004/l24, annex).
My delegation also associates itself with the comments
made by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Rio Group.

The fight against terrorism is one of the major
challenges facing the international community. That
crime victimizes the innocent civilian population and
endangers the political stability of all nations. We
therefore flatly condemn terrorism in all it forms and
manifestations, no matter where or by whom it is
committed. At the same time, we affirm that there can
be no political, philosophical, racial, ethnic or religious
justification for the crime of terrorism. In that context,
we welcome the efforts of the Security Council to
revitalize the work of the CTC in preventing acts of
terrorism.

Over the past three years, the CTC has collected a
great quantity of information on the legislative and
administrative measures that States are implementing
in the fight against terrorism, and in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee, acting as an intermediary, has
facilitated the provision of technical assistance to
countries that require it, and has cooperated with
various international organizations in disseminating
information on its assistance programmes. However,
the CTC must take some proposals into account in
order to make its work more effective.

My delegation, as an interlocutor and as a
beneficiary of the CTC's services, would like to note a
few of those proposals. First, the establishment of
stages in verifying implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) seems to have made it difficult to obtain
assistance. The fight against terrorism requires the
simultaneous development of legislative,
administrative and operational measures against that
crime. The Committee's primary emphasis on
legislative aspects and on technical assistance in the
drafting of laws, although very necessary, should also
be accompanied by the provision of materials in an
operational framework, which is now also required. In
the future, the CTC should focus on providing
technical and material assistance in an operational
framework.

Secondly, the system of reports and additional
requests for information can also have contradictory
effects. States that have presented exhaustive and
timely reports and have adopted additional measures
against terrorism have been overwhelmed by new
increasingly detailed questions which penetrate ever
further into the framework of the exclusive jurisdiction
of States. Regrettably, some requests for information
seem to reflect a lack of sensitivity to the unique
conditions and specificities of the judicial,
administrative and legislative processes in the most
open and democratic of societies.

In particular, it would be desirable for the
Committee to take into account the standards and
principles in force in each State in the area of due
process and judicial guarantees, since those would limit
what measures can be imposed by a given State in the
fight against terrorism.

Furthermore, the CTC should focus primarily on
those States whose reports have been deficient, or for
which there is evidence that the measures implemented
have clearly been inadequate.

Thirdly, the CTC should respond to the appeal of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to make human rights the cornerstone of the
international strategy in the fight against terrorism. The
Committee should ensure that measures adopted by
States in the fight against terrorism are in full
conformity with applicable international law, especially
with human rights and refugee law, international
humanitarian law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Even though it is true that resolution 1373 (2001) does
not dwell on these aspects, it should be interpreted
within the framework of international law as a whole.

We should point out that the 12 international
conventions on terrorism contain carefully balanced
norms, which guarantee respect for fundamental rights,
international refugee law and due process. The CTC
should not only verify the implementation of the
punitive or preventive provisions of those conventions,
but should also verify the implementation of standards
that protect the human rights of the Victims and of the
accused. Furthermore, the Committee must promote
respect for fundamental rights and guarantees as a way
of preventing terrorist acts.

My delegation welcomes the proposals to
reorganize and revitalize the CTC, contained in the
annex to document S/2004/ 124. Those proposals point
in the right direction. However, there are other aspects
that should be considered.

With respect to the revitalization objectives, we
believe that in the future, the CTC should place more
emphasis on cooperation on operative aspects, should
focus its attention on States that have not complied
with their obligations in conformity with resolution
1373 (2001) and, above all, give respect for and
promotion of human rights priority as an essential part
in the fight against terrorism.

With respect to the establishment of a CTC
Executive Directorate, we believe that, this should be a
temporary measure, while a permanent body is
established within the United Nations to fight
terrorism. Indeed, the fight against terrorism should
become an ongoing activity of the United Nations.
Terrorism has adverse effects not only on international
peace and security, but also in the areas of human
rights, governance and economic and social
development. From that point of View, the coordination
of the international fight against terrorism must be
assigned to an independent and permanent body
located within the organic structure of the United
Nations. We believe that the time has come to seriously
study the possibility of establishing the office of a
United Nations high commissioner against terrorism,
which could also assist not only the Security Council
but also the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. Only in that way can we properly
respond to the challenge of international terrorism.

