Ms. King (Australia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing.

Alongside other members of the international
community, Australia is deeply concerned about the
escalation in hostilities between Israel and the militant
groups in Gaza. It is a tragedy that the recent events
have led us to that point. It is important that steps are
taken to reduce tensions and to restore peace. The
decision by Hamas to reject the Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire proposals and the continued firing of rockets
indiscriminately into Israel are inexcusable. We
appreciate all the efforts of a range of actors that have
gone into negotiating a ceasefire during the course of
the past week.

We welcome the news that the Secretary-General
will be travelling to the region tomorrow and we
strongly support his diplomatic efforts. We strongly
urge all parties to find a peaceful resolution and bring
an end to the current violence.

Australia condemns the events that led to the current
escalation in the region. The murders of the three Israeli
teenagers in the West Bank and the apparent revenge
murder ofthe Palestinian teenager on 2 July were tragic
events that should never have taken place. We extend
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims
and call for the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to
be held to account.

Australia calls on all parties to exercise restraint
and consider the welfare of the people they represent
when taking decisions on next steps. We also call upon
the parties to bring the escalation of violence to an end
by restoring the November 2012 ceasefire, a call which
has been repeated consistently by many members
of the international community over recent days and
which must be heeded as a matter of urgency. Australia
continues to urge both Israel and the Palestinians to
resume negotiations toward ajust and lasting two-State
solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State existing
side by side in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders. As we all are aware, a just and
lasting two-State solution is the only basis for a durable
peace between the parties.

