Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The "Fifteenth progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia" (S/ 1996/47) affords us an
opportunity to consider such a report in a formal meeting
of the Security Council. This is a positive response to the
wishes of the Member States to bring about transparency
in the work and decision-making process of the United
Nations. It is a matter of particular significance to my

 

delegation that it is the situation in Liberia, one of the
oldest conflicts in Africa, that is being discussed under this
arrangement. It is our hope that today's meeting will focus
the attention of the international community on the Liberian
tragedy and the need to find an urgent solution to it.

The efforts of the Chairman of the Council of State,
Mr. Wilton Sankawulo, and the Vice-Chairmen of the
Council in explaining the peace process to the combatants,
with a View to preparing them for disarmament and
demobilization, are commendable. There is no doubt that
the peace process will endure and remain sustainable only
if the people who actually have control over the instruments
of war at their command understand the need to disarm and
demobilize. All the members of the Liberian National
Transitional Government (LNTG) should make concerted
efforts to contribute to this noble task by ensuring that
those loyal to them receive the same message. The
provision of assistance to ex-combatants should be
improved and make attractive their reintegration into
civilian life. The Liberian political leaders and parties
should do all in their power to create a climate conducive
to the delivery of such assistance. The international
community needs to be assured that this assistance will be
used for the purpose for which it is intended. The creation
of conditions of security and stability in the country is
indispensable to inspiring confidence in this regard.

The report (S/l995/1042) of the Secretary-General
dated 18 December 1995 informed the Council that the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) had decided to deploy
troops in the most critical areas of Liberia in an effort to
maintain the momentum of the peace process. This is a
commendable task by ECOMOG, given the risks involved
in such an endeavour. The tragic events of 28 December
1995, regrettable as they are, highlighted the difficulties and
realities with which ECOMOG has to contend. We
condemn the senseless attack on ECOMOG and deeply
regret the loss of human life. The Security Council should
call upon all factions to respect the cease-fire and direct
their energies to the restoration of peace and stability in
Liberia. It is true that ECOMOG took a risk

"in deploying its troops without the strength and
resources necessary to carry out its mandate".
(S/1996/47, para. 5)

But is it not equally true that the situation could have
deteriorated further had ECOMOG done nothing?

In paragraph 17, the report of the Secretary-General
speaks of a most disturbing development in the
implementation of the Abuja Peace Agreement. The
report indicates not only that the implementation of the
Agreement is behind schedule, but that the whole peace
process is in serious danger of being completely derailed.
The international community should not allow this
situation to continue irreversibly. The solution to this
dangerous development is known to the international
community: ECOMOG urgently needs financial and
logistic support. A lot has already been said about
ECOMOG's lack of financial and logistic resources. It is
most regrettable, therefore, that five months after the
signing of the Abuja Peace Agreement ECOMOG has not
yet been provided with the necessary resources.

It is time the international community lived up to its
responsibilities in the maintenance of peace and security.
It should demonstrate its resolve and determination to
search for solutions to all conflict situations in the world
in equal measure and on the basis that peace restored
anywhere is peace maintained everywhere. Otherwise, our
common humanity and the common destiny of mankind
would be in doubt. In other words, conflict situations in
Africa should be treated like conflict situations elsewhere,
and Liberia is a test-case. Equally, the relationship
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
arrangements in peace-keeping operations should be
reviewed so that the former could assist in the peace-
keeping missions of regional organizations.
The international community should not lose sight of
the crucial role that the holding of legislative and
presidential elections could play in establishing a
legitimate and representative Government which could
contribute to the sustenance of peace and stability in that
country. In this respect, we welcome the Secretary-
General's intention, stated in paragraph 10 of his report,
to send a technical mission to Liberia to consult with the
LNTG, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
ECOWAS on matters related to the electoral process. We
look forward to his report and recommendations.

There is general consensus that the people involved
in any given conflict situation bear the ultimate
responsibility for the restoration of peace and national
reconciliation. The Security Council cannot, however,
ignore attempts by a few armed men to frustrate the will
of the majority. It is important that the international
community should assist the people of Liberia in
whatever way possible to liberate themselves from the

 

clutches of these few armed men and not blame them for,
or abandon them in, their captivity.

Botswana supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNOMIL for a
period of four months, until 31 May 1996. It is our hope
that during this period substantial progress will be made in
the implementation of the peace process and that elections
will be held as scheduled. And it is also our hope that the
international community will be generous in rendering
assistance to ECOMOG, which shoulders the greater
responsibility in the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement.

