The delegation of Guatemala thanks the Indonesian presidency for convening today's open debate, which is of particular relevance because terrorism is a criminal scourge that continues to affect the international community and peace and security in the world and reflects the Security Council's interest in addressing the links between transnational organized crime and terrorism, a relationship that must be treated comprehensively if we are to prevent and suppress the indiscriminate violence that the phenomenon entails. Due to its geographical location, the Central American region, and my country in particular, have been besieged by transnational networks that promote crime in all its forms, especially drug trafficking, money- or other asset-laundering, assassination, human trafficking and indiscriminate and illegal use and trafficking of weapons, in order to commit acts of excessive violence. Despite the enormous efforts that my Government is undertaking to strengthen and modernize justice- sector institutions, allocating greater resources and reinforcing the prosecution of organized crime organizations and the operational capacities of the Office of the Prosecutor, we continue to be victimized by international networks that overwhelm the operational capacities of that Office. We continue to be victims of international networks that overwhelm our capacities, given that these networks possess high- calibre firearms and other war materials and that they dispose of inexhaustible financial power, both of which enhance their ability to engage in criminal conduct. We recognize that, despite current legislation, when weapons fall into the hands of criminal organizations, the threat against our civilian populations is imminent. The deplorable conduct of terrorists threatens the most important thing in the human person: a person's life and dignity. When we see how innocent civilians are attacked by extremist radicals who, in an atrocious and cowardly manner, indeed in acts of perversity taken to the extreme, take innocent lives, we must urgently reflect on joint actions that prevent or counteract this scourge. Guatemala therefore reiterates that terrorism is a global phenomenon that, apart from triggering anxiety, trauma and desolation, must be addressed at its very origins. International terrorism and transnational organized crime have similarities, despite being two different phenomena: while terrorism is a form of violent struggle that indiscriminately victimizes the civilian population in order to confuse, frighten and capture the attention of public opinion for political, ideological or sectarian purposes, organized crime is a way of committing planned crimes in order to profit economically. Both benefit from illicit and surreptitious trafficking in arms and drugs, mainly by weakening democratic institutions, undermining the rule of law and subverting social life. Further, both have capacities, which, when they enter into a symbiotic relationship, causes extreme anxiety in our peoples. The pernicious link between the two phenomena is the question that we must examine to legislate against it, and we must take concrete actions to suppress all sources of financing and acquisition of materials that can be used for criminal acts. For this reason, Guatemala, through the Presidential Commission for the Coordination of Efforts against Money-Laundering or other Assets, Terrorist Financing and Financing of Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, works hard to create inter-institutional policies and counteract these acts, monitoring the international conventions ratified by the State of Guatemala that regulate these matters, as well as the recommendations issued by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In the last five years we have noted progress, but also vulnerabilities, related to strengthening multilateral mechanisms that promote better coordination in the fight against terrorism and organized crime. A milestone in this progress, which, in turn, constituted an achievement for the region, was the adoption of the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials, which was ratified by the vast majority of States in our hemisphere. The objective of the Convention is for the countries that produce, export and import weapons to adopt measures to eradicate their manufacture and illicit trafficking. Although the international community has valuable legal instruments for combating terrorism and organized crime, the general perception of our population is that such regulations are insufficient in the face of the devastating onslaught of terrorism and transnational crime. Accordingly, the United Nations and the Security Council must harmonize efforts to implement the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and consider shared actions to fight this scourge. Those efforts will be insufficient if the international community does not adopt more rigorous controls over the illegal small arms and light weapons market, and the related ammunitions market, since the illicit trade in these weapons and their indiscriminate use make it easier for terrorist networks and organized crime actors to acquire them for nefarious uses. In this context, the Arms Trade Treaty in particular sets forth specific regulations to prevent and eliminate the illicit trafficking of conventional weapons and impede their diversion to the illicit market or to unauthorized uses and end users. That impact of markets in small arms and light weapons would be even more devastating if illicit groups, mainly terrorists, were to have access to markets in weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Strict compliance with international instruments that regulate the use of chemical, bacteriological and nuclear weapons is therefore necessary, so that WMDs are kept out of the reach of extremist groups seeking to disrupt international peace and security. Accordingly, our countries additionally commit to ensuring the correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and urging States to adopt and apply effective laws that proscribe the provision of supplies or any other type of support to non-State agents. These measures will help to monitor the development, acquisition, manufacture, possession, transport, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their vector systems. Next year States will have the opportunity to carry out a comprehensive review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will be necessary to assess the progress made on these issues and meet the challenges that States still face in this matter. In this context, we express our congratulations to Indonesia for its hard work as the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Finally, we urge the international community to renew efforts aimed at cooperating and collectively combating transnational terrorism and organized crime. We believe that the Security Council, in accordance with its responsibility to maintain international peace and security, must consider the main links between the two scourges, in such a way that the root causes are addressed in a comprehensive manner.
