Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Along with the international community and every
world capital, Egypt has expressed its rejection,
denunciation and condemnation of the Israeli decision
that reflects Israel's contravention of every
international norm and law and its defiance of the will
of the international community. The same goes for its
continued policy of provocation and aggression aimed
at aborting the serious and sincere efforts made to
achieve a settlement that guarantees peace and security
for the peoples of Palestine and Israel. Those who have
made the decision to expel President Arafat from his
homeland, who is the legitimate and democratically
elected President, are making a huge mistake vis-a-vis
peace and the right of their people to live in their own
State alongside the Palestinian State.

Relations between the Israeli and Palestinian
parties are at a critical juncture. All interested parties
and those who called for the establishment of peace
and stability on the basis of justice and legitimacy,
foremost among which is Egypt, have all attempted to
establish the necessary atmosphere conducive to the
faithful and full implementation of the road map so as
to bring about the desired settlement. Most regrettably,
we have come up against Israel's clear determination to
continue its policy of assassinating Palestinian
activists. We have also seen a defiance of the will of
the international community with the continued
construction of the expansionist wall, usurping
Palestinian land and preventing Palestinians from
living a normal life. That has led to a cycle of violence
and counter-violence: the violence of occupation and
aggression and the violence of resistance. There is a
huge difference between the two, and Egypt has
strongly condemned any actions affecting civilians.
Unfortunately, there are some people in Israel - even
in positions of responsibility - who continue to
believe that a settlement can only take place subject to
their conditions alone and under their diktat. That
cannot be acceptable to the international community.

The Security Council is today called upon to face
that new Israeli threat. The Council is also called upon
to reiterate its adherence to the road map in order to
achieve the objective of two States and two peoples,
Palestinian and Israeli, living in peace and good-
neighbourliness on the basis of mutual respect, rather
than arrogance and attempted humiliation, and of
understanding rather than the resort to force.

In conclusion, these are critical moments in the
history of this longstanding conflict. Years of
experience have shown that it can be settled, first, only
through Israel's conviction and recognition of the full
right of the Palestinians to establish their independent
State on their national soil, occupied since 4 June 1967.
We do not believe that Israel acts in the full conviction
of that necessity. Secondly, the Palestinians must
recognize the right of the Israeli and Palestinian States
to live in peace and security within secure and
recognized borders. We do not believe that there is any
quarrel within Palestinian society on this issue. The
international community and the major Powers must
today work vigorously and resolutely to establish the
atmosphere necessary to a return to negotiations in
order to achieve these objectives and to stand up firmly
to such behaviour that will have catastrophic
consequences for all of us.

