Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the protection of civilians. We commend
Austria for its commitment in regard to today's
resolution 1894 (2009), of which Switzerland was a
sponsor. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Under-Secretary-General John Holmes and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their statements.

The past 10 years have been marked by a
significant increase in the work of the Security Council
on the protection of civilians. Encouraging progress
has been made, particularly in establishing a general
normative framework and in considering the specific
protection needs of women and children. These
positive developments, however, will have little value
if they do not translate into tangible improvements in
the protection of civilians on the ground. I would like
to direct my remarks to four central aspects: respect for
international humanitarian law, including the fight
against impunity; humanitarian access; the importance
of reporting the reality on the ground; and
peacekeeping missions.

First, the concept of protecting civilians is based
on respect for the rules of international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law. The fight against
impunity plays a fundamental part in improving respect
for the law. The Security Council must ensure that
investigations are carried out in all situations where
there are allegations of serious violations of
international law. This can be done through ad hoc
machinery or by mandates from the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions.

It is also of fundamental importance that the
Security Council evaluate and follow up such
investigations, and that appropriate measures be taken
to ensure that the alleged perpetrators of violations of
international law are brought to justice. We also expect
the Council to make sure that disregard for the law has
consequences and that targeted measures be imposed
on individuals or parties who do not respect its
resolutions. We are in full agreement with the
Secretary-General's views with regard to the
importance of respect for international norms on the
part of non-State players. We also support his proposal
to convene a meeting under the Arias formula aimed at
identifying new measures to improve armed groups'
compliance with existing standards.

Secondly, humanitarian access is central to
protecting and assisting those affected by armed
conflict. We consider the annex to the Secretary-
General's most recent report (S/2009/277) an important
contribution to this area that should be developed
further in the Secretary-General's reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Information
obtained in this way could become an important basis
for the Council's decisions. The Council should also
support the efforts by the Secretary-General's
representatives to negotiate access with all parties to a
conflict. Where humanitarian access is denied, targeted
sanctions should be more systematically imposed.
Thirdly, we encourage the Secretary-General to
include the subject of the protection of civilians more
systematically in his country-specific reports. It would
be equally desirable for the Council's informal group
of experts to be kept informed systematically by those
Secretariat entities dealing with areas relevant to
protection of civilians. Such information would give
the Council a better understanding of the situation of
civilians and enable it to verify whether its decisions
have been respected and its mandates implemented.
The informal Expert Group could also be used as an
early warning mechanism to draw the Council's
attention to conflict situations that are not on its
agenda.

Fourthly, over the past 10 years, the debate within
the Security Council on peacekeeping missions and the
protection of civilians has become increasingly
intensive. Many complex questions have arisen
concerning the mandates, roles and capacities of
peacekeeping missions with respect to the protection of
civilians.

The independent study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
supported by, inter alia, my own country, has provided
the Council and other stakeholders with food for
thought and useful recommendations. Switzerland
hopes that this study will facilitate the development of
clearer guidelines for the protection of military and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations.

