The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Portugal.

First, I would like to thank Ambassadors Sangqu,
Wittig and Puri for their comprehensive briefings, and
also to commend them for their work, leadership and
commitment in chairing the three Security Council
Committees focused on the fight against terrorism.

I would also like to say that Portugal aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered later by the
representative of the European Union.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), we are pleased to note that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), assisted by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), continues to pursue its very
productive work. We note with particular appreciation
the recent special meetings of the Committee, with
wide participation by States and international
organizations, including a separate event for members
of civil society. The issuing of the 2011 edition of the
global survey on universal implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) (S/2011/463, annex) also
represents a very welcome and useful achievement.

I would like to focus in particular on the
following elements contained in the report, to which
we attach special importance. First is the preventive
aspects of the fight against terrorism. We are pleased to
note their relevance to the CTC's current framework of
activities, and we encourage the Committee to pursue
this direction. Secondly, on human rights and the rules
of law, we strongly believe that by promoting and
protecting human rights while fighting terrorism, States
and other international actors contribute solidly to
preventing terrorism by addressing the conditions
conducive to its development and spread. Thirdly,
regional approaches, cooperation with international
organizations and capacity-building programmes are
key tools already well incorporated into the guidelines
and practice of the CTC and CTED's actions, which we
strongly encourage and support.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we very
much support the positive reported achievements,
particularly as regards, on one side, the publication on
the website of narrative summaries of the reasons for
all listings, and on the other, the important
developments concerning the activities of the Office of
the Ombudsperson. These achievements are good news
and significantly enhance due process and the
transparency of the sanctions regime.

Taking into account the new framework for action
established by resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989
(2011), we also congratulate the Committee and its
Monitoring Team for the action taken in re-evaluating
the links between Al-Qaida and the Afghan Taliban. It
represents an important element in updating the
assessment of the terrorist threat and provides a useful
contribution to more focused action by the 1267 and
1989 Committee, together with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

As for the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I welcome all the work done
since resolution 1977 (2011) was adopted in April. I
welcome in particular the ongoing efforts to better
outline the annual review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), with a forward-looking
perspective that will provide useful information to the
Council on matters that might need further attention, as

well as on practical guidelines to facilitate the
matchmaking between requests for and offers of
assistance. I also share the sense of urgency in
achieving agreed recommendations, in accordance with
paragraph 5 (b) of resolution 1977 (2011), on expertise
requirements, broad geographic representation,
working methods, modalities and structure, including
consideration of the feasibility of a coordination and
leadership position of the group of experts.

Lastly, I wish to underline the importance of the
joint European Union-United States declaration in
October regarding resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011), reaffirming our strong commitment to full and
comprehensive implementation of their provisions, as
well as to strengthening of the role and capacity of the
1540 Committee.

In a final word, I would like to welcome the
cooperation among the three Committees, which we
strongly support and encourage. Sharing information,
joint visits and assessments, enhanced coordination of
efforts and initiatives and further interaction in matters
of common interest, including within the framework of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, are
indeed very important tools for maximizing the
effectiveness of the action developed by each of the
three Committees mandated to fight terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

