Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): On behalf of the
Government of Angola, I congratulate the Security Council
on the quality of the draft resolution it is considering at this
meeting. We cannot fail to express our satisfaction. The
draft resolution largely reflects the interests of both the
Government of Angola and the international community,
which we are convinced seeks to adopt measures that will
lead to a definitive resolution of the situation in Angola
in order to put an end once and for all to the conflict
there.

My Government wishes to emphasize that, in recent
weeks, good progress has been made in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. In spite of this,
we also want to stress that there is more to be done,
particularly concerning the extension of State
administration into all areas of Angola, the cessation of
violent acts by UNITA against the personnel of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
and Angolan civilians, and the more active participation
of UN ITA in promoting peace and national reconciliation
in Angola.

The Government of Angola is pleased to note that
the draft resolution before the Council calls on all
members of the international community, particularly
Angola's neighbours, to implement fully the measures
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997). I
mention this because it remains critical to keep the
pressure on UNITA to meet fully and quickly its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

My delegation wants to stress the importance that
my Government attaches to the successful implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol in the very near future. To that
end, the Government of the Republic of Angola reassures
the international community of its full support for
maintaining peace, promoting national reconciliation and
rebuilding the country. Furthermore, I want to stress that
my Government expects to be consulted by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye, in order to ensure the full implementation of
paragraphs 8 to 12 of the draft resolution, which concern
specifically the structure and tasks to be assigned to
MONUA after 30 June 1998.

We want to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the peace process and, more importantly,
to move into the post-Lusaka Protocol era. At the same
time, Angola hopes that the United Nations and the
international community will continue to support peace
and reconciliation and to help us rebuild those institutions
that are vital to ensuring a stable and prosperous future
for the country.

We would like to thank everyone for their support
during the discussions on this draft resolution. We also

 

want to thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Maitre Beye, the troika of observers to the peace process
and the MONUA personnel for their continuing and
valuable assistance.

