Mr. Bull (Liberia): A little over six years ago, this
Council issued its first statement on the situation in Liberia.
At that time, the Liberian delegation regretted that the
Security Council had waited over a year to take action on
an earlier request for United Nations intervention. That
delay was due, in part, to the Charter's provision which
bars involvement in the internal affairs of Member States.
My delegation called for a review of that Charter
provision so that the Organization could effectively
respond to conflict situations which entailed the Violation
of fundamental human rights or required United Nations
intervention on humanitarian grounds.

Today, thanks to the proactive role of the United
Nations in conflict resolution, the Liberian conflict, and
others like it, are receiving the deserved attention of this
Organization.

The delegation of Liberia would like to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, for
his twenty-second progress report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia, contained in document
S/1997/237 of 19 March 1997. The Liberian Government
and the Liberian people commend him for the dynamism
he has brought to his new assignment and for his personal
initiatives in support of the Liberian peace process. His
convening, at United Nations Headquarters, on 20
February 1997, of the second Ministerial Meeting of the
ad hoc Special Conference to Support the Peace Process
in Liberia attests to his continuing commitment to peace
in Liberia, for which we are profoundly grateful.

The report, one of the most important to come
before this Council since the commencement of the civil
crisis over seven years ago, offers hope for a new
beginning - a rebirth of the Liberian nation. According
to the report, in approximately 64 days from now, free
and fair democratic elections are scheduled to be held in
Liberia, to be followed 15 days later by the inauguration
of a new Government. This significant achievement will
bring to an end a very sad and painful chapter in the
country's history.

On 26 July - approximately 120 days from now -
Liberia will be observing its sesquicentenary as a free,
sovereign and independent State. This is therefore a time
of great promise for Liberia. It can truly be said that
while Liberia is an old country - nearly 150 years
old- the seed that will be sown on 30 May will
hopefully lead to the building of a new nation after many
decades of struggle to redress past injustices and to
develop a national identity and universal recognition
among Liberians of their common destiny.

This encouraging state of affairs is directly
attributable to the States members of the Economic

 

Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Not only
did their nationals shed their blood, but those States
expended vast financial resources to help make peace in
Liberia. It is due also to the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and the widespread
international support which now exists for the ECOWAS
peace initiative. This pioneering effort by a subregion has
made manifest Chapter VIII of the Charter and has
demonstrated that, with the requisite political will, countries
can act decisively in bringing some of the noble objectives
of the Charter to fruition. To each of these States and
organizations, we say thank you.

The Secretary-General's report outlines the assistance
required from the international community in order to make
the 30 May date for the holding of democratic elections a
reality. First, resources must be provided for the
deployment of three additional battalions to the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). This would allow
ECOMOG to be deployed throughout the country, which is
a prerequisite to ensure freedom of movement, freedom of
expression and voter participation free of intimidation.
Secondly, the substantial number of eligible voters who are
currently residing as refugees in neighbouring countries
must be assisted to return home prior to the elections.
Resources are required for their voluntary repatriation.
Thirdly, ECOMOG requires additional technical support,
especially medical supplies, spare parts and anti-riot
equipment. Fourthly, assistance is required for the
restructuring of the Liberian armed forces and paramilitary
units in view of the intention of ECOWAS to withdraw its
Monitoring Group from Liberia six months after the
elections.

The Liberian delegation urgently appeals for these
requirements to be met so that the peace process is not
prevented from achieving its desired end: the restoration of
democratic governance in Liberia.

The Council of State and its Chairperson, Mrs. Ruth
Sando Perry, along with civil society, are fully committed
to the restoration of peace and the rule of law in Liberia.
Even though some outstanding issues, such as a
reconstituted Elections Commission and Supreme Court,
have not been fully resolved, they must not be viewed as
insurmountable problems. The long-suffering Liberian
people have sacrificed much to ensure the irreversibility of
the peace process, and will not permit anything or anyone
to perpetuate their suffering. However, they are also
mindful that, in the final analysis, durable peace can be
guaranteed only if the electoral process is credible and
acceptable to the vast majority.

In this connection, the Secretary-General's basic
framework for the holding of elections in Liberia -
agreed to by the Liberian parties and the Economic
Community of West African States - is the fundamental
requirement for sustainable peace in Liberia. Its full
implementation will allow the Liberian people to select
their own leaders under conditions which must be
declared by all, including the international community, as
being free and fair. This is why the Liberian delegation
fully supports the adoption of the draft resolution now
before the Council and joins in the appeal to the
international community to lend its unqualified support to
the implementation of the electoral framework.

By the grace of the Almighty, when the Security
Council reconvenes again, on or before 30 June 1997, to
consider the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), it will be under happier
circumstances, since a duly elected Government will have
been installed in Liberia. All Liberians have this
expectation, and the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States, under the leadership
of President Sani Abacha of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, as well as States Members of the United Nations,
should also take particular pride, for their contributions
and unflinching support will have ensured its realization.

At this time of great opportunity for peace and the
rebirth of the Liberian nation, my delegation hopes that it
can continue to count on the goodwill and support of all
Members States of this Organization.

