Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other members of the Security Council,
we are pleased to see you in the Chair, Mr. President.
We join in the words of gratitude addressed to
Ambassador Durrant and the entire delegation of
Jamaica for the work they did last month. We are also
pleased to welcome the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we are grateful to Mr. Hedi Annabi
for his briefing.

Russia has a positive opinion of the activities of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and of its Head, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein,
which are described in detail in the report of the
Secretary-General. In spite of the narrow mandate of
the Mission, which includes promoting the
establishment of an effective system of law
enforcement bodies in the country, its activities are of
significant importance in completing one of the key
tasks of the settlement, namely, ensuring public safety
and internal stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
note with satisfaction that there has been some success
in this regard. We support the activities of the Head of
the Mission aimed at fulfilling its core mandate by the
end of the year 2002.

In view of the fragility of the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we believe that the main goal
of the international community in that country is to
ensure genuine stability, the basis for which is the
Peace Agreement. We are convinced that we can carry
out this task through coordination of the efforts of all
participants in the settlement process and by carrying
out serious structural changes in the work of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The main areas for such a restructuring should be in
enhancing effectiveness and eliminating discrepancies
and duplications in the work of international bodies in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in reducing expenditures
and the number of staff.

As we see it, one of the priority tasks in that
process is to define the criteria for compliance by the
international organs in Bosnia and Herzegovina with
their mandates and to establish clear-cut stages for
transfer of their responsibilities for the situation in the
country to Bosnians themselves. However, we believe
that we should not act hastily with regard to the
introduction of drastic changes in the work of the
international structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
our view, the existing proposals must be well worked
out, and it is extremely necessary that they be in full
compliance with Dayton. In fact, the implementation of
reforms must on the whole be proportionate to the
development of the situation in the region.

We are also not in favour of hasty action with
regard to the ultimate fate of the international police
operation. We have no doubt that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is the best
prepared organization for conducting the police
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina after the
conclusion of the core mandate of the United Nations
Mission, in December 2002. However, the transfer of
operations to OSCE will involve a substantial
additional expenditure that will hardly be covered
through voluntary contributions. We need to weigh
carefully all of the factors, including the views of the
Bosnian sides themselves, and jointly take the most
rational decision. Any haste in assigning to the OSCE
mission the function of monitoring the activities of the
police contingent would be unjustifiable, especially
bearing in mind the fact that the mandate of the
Mission will be in effect for at least another year. A
final decision on the successor to the United Nations
Mission should be taken by the Council in compliance
with the Peace Agreement, and should be approved by
the Security Council.

