Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting for the
second time today to consider events in the Middle East.

This morning the Council met to consider Israeli
practices in the occupied territories, practices that, as is
well known, have reached a level of harshness that may
destroy the dreams of peace of the most ardent optimists.
None the less, the Security Council merely heard the
statements of a number of countries without taking any
measures. We all know the reasons.

The Council is meeting this evening to consider the
crimes perpetrated by the Israelis against the brother
people of Lebanon, crimes perpetrated using military
machinery of all kinds to bombard towns and villages in
Lebanon with the pretext of attacking Hezbollah bases.
The media have shown us columns upon columns of
women and children. Are those children the fighters and
combatants of Hezbollah? Those other children, torn to
pieces, in an ambulance - are they also combatants? Do
they deserve to be bombed in order to be an example to
others ?

What is the reason for all this Israeli madness, for
such muscle-flexing and violence? It is that the Lebanese
resistance has hit the forces of an occupation rejected by
the entire world, an occupation on which the Security
Council adopted resolution 425 (1978), demanding
Israel's withdrawal from all Lebanese territory.

Although 18 years have passed, Israel has not
implemented that resolution. Israel continues to occupy a

 

part of southern Lebanon, on the pretext that Lebanese
resistance continues to fight for its land. What logic is this
that calls on the victim to put an end to resisting the
aggressor? The Israelis, by this air, land and sea blitz on
Lebanon, want to impose the unthinkable on the Lebanese
authorities: they want the Lebanese authorities to put an end
to the Lebanese resistance, and then to stand guard for the
occupying army until it is sated by its occupation.
Ultimately, they want to terrorize the Arab and Islamic
nations. They want them to kneel, to accept the fair
accompli and, finally, hoist the white flag.

We call upon the Security Council today to intervene
forcefully: not merely to condemn Israeli aggression but to
order the Israelis to withdraw immediately from southern
Lebanon, in accordance with resolution 425 (1978), and to
compensate Lebanon for all the human and material losses
it has suffered as a result of this occupation and this
aggression.

We call upon the international community to remind
Israel - and the United States of America, which has
given its blessing to these acts of aggression - that this
barbaric aggression against Lebanon and the humiliating
manner in which Palestinians are being treated in the
occupied territories do not serve security and do not make
peace. Rather, they merely push every Arab to the very
brink of despair. If the Security Council does not act to put
an end forthwith to this blatant aggression, the negative
repercussions will be graver than what Israel imagines. The
river has turned into a roiling torrent. As the Arabic poem
says,

"If death is inevitable, shame on you if you die a
coward".

