Portugal aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (EU) (see annex 30) and would, in its national capacity, like to add the following points. The global health crisis we are facing today is unprecedented in living memory. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we should continue to expand our approaches to international security to respond to new and emerging challenges. Given the transnational reach of pandemics and the increasing interdependence of States, the greater part of the solution lies in international cooperation. The United Nations system has an important role to play in this regard, and the World Health Organization (WHO) remains key in enhancing solidarity and reinforcing health-care systems worldwide. We therefore welcome the inclusion of the relationship between global health and security in the agenda of the Security Council. We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), thank Germany for convening today's open debate and look forward to its practical outcomes. Past pandemics, such as the Ebola and HIV/AIDS crises, have showcased how public-health crises and security crises exacerbate one other. Portugal would like to draw attention to the specific impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in countries previously facing humanitarian emergencies. These countries are in particularly vulnerable situations - owing to armed conflicts, environmental crises, outbreaks of other diseases, migration, starvation, lack of access to adequate housing nor sanitation - to which the spread of COVID-19 poses amplifying risks. These countries also lack conditions to fully implement the recommendations put forward by the WHO. Existing inequalities can be a trigger that turn health crises into security crises, particularly in countries or communities that are less resilient. The exacerbation of already precarious situations, in which Governments may not be able to provide basic needs and services, may further erode the trust in local institutions, worsening the potential for increased instability and unrest. Moreover, in conflict situations, both warring parties and affected civilian populations are particularly exposed to pandemics. Militias, parastatal groups, and other non-State actors may also seize the context created by health crises to advance their own insidious goals. Only a ceasefire, as called for by the Secretary-General and stressed in resolution 2532 (2020), can fully ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid and the adoption of protective measures. Past pandemics have shown how important it is to ensure the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and to provide adequate training. In these challenging times, good examples of how United Nations operations have been supporting local Governments and communities abound. Be it through the support of local authorities in disinfection activities in the Central African Republic, awareness campaigns in detention centres in Mali, or the distribution of radios in South Sudan, peace operations have shown their capacity to adapt. Peacekeeping operations also must continue to promote dialogue, mediation and peace processes, as the global ceasefire may play a catalytic role in building trust between communities, providing a much-needed opportunity for silencing the guns. Concurrently, we need to maintain a steadfast commitment to peacebuilding efforts. In that context, amidst a pandemic, the forthcoming elections in some countries remain a challenge. We should also advocate the pursuit of global health security. Previous health crises have highlighted how cooperation among actors across the development- humanitarian-peace nexus and a whole-of-United Nations approach - both at Headquarters and in the field - are key to ensuring a coordinated and effective response. We therefore call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort to cooperate and deal decisively with the challenges of this pandemic. It is important to pool resources efficiently, collaborating through pre-existing mechanisms for emergency humanitarian action and adapting these mechanisms to the COVID-19 pandemic. Development cooperation will also be key to help ensure that countries and communities, especially those most in need, are able to recover better. Under the EU's Team Europe approach, we will continue to support health and sanitation capacity-building and efforts aimed at mitigating the social economic impacts of COVID-19. We have also contributed to the multilateral global response through several United Nations agencies, as well as the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator initiative and the Global Vaccine Summit. Furthermore, under the EU Humanitarian Air Bridge Mechanism, Portugal co-organized a flight to Sao Tome and Principe. At the heart of this pandemic, older people, women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, children, refugees and persons living in poverty and deprived of liberty are in a particularly vulnerable situation, and their needs must be addressed. Moreover, mental health and sexual and reproductive health and rights need to be addressed as well. Women represent 70 per cent of the workforce in health services and, in some communities, women are the main caregivers and sources of livelihood for their families. We must ensure their well-being as fundamental drivers of change, particularly in conflict and emergency situations. This commitment also includes fighting domestic and sexual and gender-based violence. Portugal welcomes the Secretary-General's policy briefs, which have focused on these and other contexts of vulnerability and provided action-oriented inputs. Since the start of the pandemic, Portugal has implemented cross-sectional response measures, which we would like to highlight. We decided to temporarily grant migrants and asylum seekers with pending applications a right to stay and access to rights and services. Our health-care services have been tailored to specifically addressing the needs of older persons and persons with disabilities related to COVID-19 or other conditions or illnesses. To address the increasing risk of domestic violence during confinement, services and helplines have been made broadly available, and victims' support services have been strengthened. This COVID-19 threat knows no borders, which means that individualized answers will inevitably fall short of addressing the challenges with which we are faced. We therefore reiterate the call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort.
