Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
are pleased that the Security Council has adopted by
consensus this important resolution regarding the
protection of humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.
The importance of the work done by humanitarian
workers and the need to protect them has never been
more evident.

I wish to commend Ambassador Aguilar Zinser
and our other Mexican colleagues for their tireless
efforts to reach consensus. The efforts of the other
sponsors are also appreciated.

We live in a world where failed States, conflict,
poverty, hunger and privation are all too common.
Humanitarian personnel, United Nations personnel and
associated personnel play a vital and indispensable role
in easing suffering during times of conflict and
hardship and in helping countries that are emerging
from conflict to return to health. In Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi or Iraq,
humanitarian workers willingly and courageously serve
wherever need exists. As the Security Council, we
count on them to carry out this body's mandates. They
cannot carry out those mandates if they cannot operate
in safety and it is right that we call for their protection
in this resolution.

This resolution moves beyond previous measures
in focusing the Security Council's attention on both the
prevention of attacks on humanitarian, United Nations
and associated personnel and on the accountability of
those who commit such acts. I would like to make a
few observations about the consensus text.

We note that the fourth preambular paragraph
reaffirms the general rule that humanitarian and United
Nations personnel should observe and respect the laws
of the country in which they are operating. This
paragraph makes clear that this general rule must be
applied in accordance with international law, which
may provide for special rules that govern the
relationship between such personnel and the laws of
the host State.

We also note that operative paragraph 3 creates
no new international legal obligations, but rather
reaffirms the existing obligation of all parties involved
in an armed conflict to comply fully with the rules and
principles of international law applicable to them
during armed conflict.

Finally, we would note that operative paragraph 4
does not in itself create any new international legal
obligations, but rather urges concerned parties to
implement their existing international legal obligations
relating to access, the provision of facilities and the
promotion of safety, security and freedom of
movement. In this connection, we recall that both the
Hague Regulations and the Geneva Conventions
recognize that, during a period of armed conflict, the
extent to which a concerned party is able to allow such
access, make available such facilities or promote the
security of such personnel may be limited to those
steps that are practicable and consistent with the
security and operating environment.

We are all deeply saddened by the tragic events
that took place last week in Baghdad. Twenty-three
dedicated individuals who were engaged in helping the
people of Iraq lost their lives. This was an attack on the
entire civilized world and an immeasurable loss to the
international community. This resolution recognizes
and values the dedication and even heroism of those
humanitarian workers serving worldwide who, day
after day, knowingly risk their lives to reduce human
suffering and further the cause of peace. We welcome
its adoption.

