Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Let me begin by
thanking the Foreign Minister of Denmark for taking
part in and presiding over the open debate this morning
on post-conflict peacebuilding. I would also like to
thank the Danish presidency for the useful discussion
paper on this important subject.

A year ago, when James Wolfensohn, President of
the World Bank, addressed the Security Council, he
reminded us that the first question of conflict
prevention is to have a growing economy in which
people share. He also referred to the remarkable World
Bank study, Voices of the Poor, which made it clear
that people in poor and conflict-ridden countries want
to live in peace. They want opportunity and
empowerment, not charity.

The complex links between conflict, peace,
development and security call for a multidimensional
and multisectoral approach to peacebuilding. By
addressing the root causes of conflict through
reconciliation, institution-building and both political
and economic transformation, durable peace can be
established and the recurrence of conflict prevented.

Local ownership, coordination of international
efforts and harmonization of procedures are all essential
for results. Additionally, regional organizations can play
an instrumental role in bringing about long-term peace.

The discussion paper provides an excellent
overview of the key elements of peacebuilding efforts.
I would like to focus my comments on one issue: the
importance of the rapid and targeted deployment of
civilian experts for a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and subsequently
building the foundations for long-term development.

For a number of years, the Government of
Iceland has operated a programme for the rapid
deployment of civilian personnel to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. The programme, called the
Icelandic Crisis Response Unit, maintains a roster of
civilian experts who can join international missions on
short notice.

Our experience shows that there are many well-
qualified civilian experts who are willing to be
deployed on short notice to areas in which conditions
are extremely challenging and for which, in the past,
the international community has deemed military
missions to be the only feasible option.

We therefore believe that there is significant
potential for further developing that approach, and we
are pleased to see the idea of developing such a
mechanism for the United Nations raised in the
discussion paper. We are also aware that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
exploring that approach, and we strongly encourage the
United Nations to continue that work actively.

Experience in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Kosovo and Sri Lanka has taught the
Icelandic authorities the importance of finding a niche
where we have a comparative advantage. As a smaller
Member State, we seek out projects where we can
bring special expertise to bear.

In addition, allow me to mention five basic
principles that we have drawn from our experience in
the field. First, a mission must be well defined, with a
clear strategy and clear objectives. Secondly, the
involvement of the local population in both the
planning and the implementation phases is highly
desirable and in most cases is a prerequisite for a
successful outcome. Thirdly, the prospects of
sustainability must be emphasized at all stages, and
civilian experts must demonstrate a strong will,
motivation and the ability to transfer their technical
expertise and practical know-how to their counterparts.
Fourthly, partners must coordinate and cooperate at all
levels to avoid the inherent failures of approaches that
are insufficiently coordinated. Finally, a long-term
perspective is important, because efforts should always
be made to outline an exit strategy from the very
beginning of a peacebuilding operation.

The termination of a conflict does not guarantee
sustainable peace. A comprehensive and long-term
peacebuilding operation is a necessary continuation of
a successful peacekeeping process. I am certain that the
discussion here today will cast valuable light on how
the United Nations can continue to improve its
approach to peacebuilding.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming what we
have already said in the General Assembly: Iceland
fully supports the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission.

