Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
add my voice to those of others in the Chamber today
welcoming the recently appointed United Nations
Special Representative, Mr. Rficker. We are very lucky
to have someone of his experience and knowledge in
Kosovo appointed by the Secretary-General. We look
forward to working very closely with him, as we did
with his predecessor. I would like to associate the
United Kingdom with all the tributes that have been
paid today to Mr. Jessen-Petersen. I would also like to
welcome back to the Council Prime Minister Agim
Ceku and Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic.

The United Kingdom also associates itself with
the statement to be made later by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

The United Kingdom is pleased to see from the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2006/707) that,
under the leadership of Prime Minister Ceku, standards
implementation in Kosovo continues across the board.
I have listened very carefully to what people have said
in the Council today, and I think we all agree that
substantial progress has been made on a number of key
issues important to Kosovo's minority communities. In
that connection, I would like to commend to colleagues
the note circulated to the Council today by Prime
Minister Ceku, which gives some more detail about
what has been achieved.

I think we are also all agreed that the progress
that has been achieved needs to continue and to be
accelerated. Neither the international community nor
the Provisional Institutions can be complacent or take
continued implementation of standards for granted.
Progress must continue, and sustained outreach to
Kosovo's communities is required to explain the
importance of, and obtain support for, the meaningful
implementation of standards in Kosovo. That, above

all, is something that must fall to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government themselves; it is not
something that the international community can do for
them.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
systematic attention is required across the board if the
momentum reported today is to be maintained. Part of
the role of the Council is to encourage all the parties to
work towards that goal. The Contact Group sought to
complement the effort by putting forward, in
coordination with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), 13 clear
and achievable priority areas for early implementation.
The United Kingdom is encouraged that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government have fully
completed six of these and that most of the others are
on schedule. But partial implementation is not
enough. We hope that no effort will be spared to
implement the remaining priorities in the coming
weeks. In particular, we look to the Kosovo Assembly
to finalize the adoption of laws on languages and
cultural heritage as soon as possible.

A number of challenges lie ahead for the people
of Kosovo. We heard today from Ms. Raskovic-Ivic
and from the Russian Permanent Representative about
acts of violence against Kosovo Serbs. I would like to
make it clear that the United Kingdom condemns such
acts of violence. They are totally unacceptable, and we
look to the Pristina authorities to find and try the
perpetrators and to help create conditions that prevent
such attacks from occurring. But I would also like to
make it clear that the attacks, however deplorable, do
not in themselves alter the direction of travel in which
Kosovo is going.

I note from what Mr. Rucker said that UNMIK
and KFOR have expanded their presence north of the
Ibar. That is important, and we welcome that
contribution from both organizations. But it is
disappointing that there is a need for them to do so. We
call on all sides, including the Kosovo Serbs, to refrain
from causing or exacerbating tensions. We are
disappointed that events there were used as an excuse
to break off dialogue. I would like to associate the
United Kingdom very firmly with what Mr. Rucker
said about integration, not isolation, being the way
forward for the Kosovo Serb community.

In that connection, I once again appeal to
Belgrade to encourage cooperation between the
Kosovo Serbs and the Pristina authorities. When the
Council last met to address the issue of Kosovo, a
number of us issued that appeal. It is disappointing that
we have to reiterate it today. I am thinking, in
particular, of the edict issued by the Serbian
Coordination Centre to encourage Kosovo Serb
communities to withdraw from health and educational
institutions. It is hard to see how that is in the interests
of those communities. It is certainly not in the interests
of Kosovo's future.

This meeting was supposed to be focused on
standards, but a number of other speakers have touched
on status. I would therefore like to do so. The standards
process in Kosovo needs to be seen in the context of
support for the status process, currently led by Martti
Ahtisaari. I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom's fullest support the United Nations Special
Envoy and for his approach to the status process. I
think that it is disappointing again that in all of
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic's statement today there was no
mention of Mr. Ahtisaari, no mention of his work and
no mention of the duty of all of us to cooperate with
him to the best of our ability and the extent possible.

I would like to state that the United Kingdom
remains firmly committed to the principles set out in
the 31 January ministerial Contact Group statement,
including the target of agreement by the end of 2006,
and to the Contact Group guiding principles.

Independence is an option for Kosovo - some
would say that it is the only option that will bring
lasting peace and security to the region. At the same
time, it is for those who seek that outcome to give
practical reassurance to the minority that the
multi-ethnic Kosovo to which many speakers have
referred today will become a reality and can take its
proper place in Europe. We will spare no effort, as the
United Kingdom, to work towards a settlement that
provides long-term security and stability for the
Balkans region as it moves along this path. The nature
of the Kosovo situation makes this a unique and
distinct political process. Its outcome will necessarily
require unique and distinct solutions.

