Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I also extend to you and to
the other members of the Council the deep appreciation
of my President, the Government and the people of
Liberia for the steadfast support that the Council has
given to Liberia over the years and for its continued
engagement with Liberia.

I thank the previous speakers, Mr. Ladsous and the
representative of Ambassador Grunditz, for sharing
their perspectives with us.

The last couple of months have been critical for
Liberia. The outbreak of the Ebola disease and its rapid
spread presented multiple challenges to the country.
The devastating effects of the disease are very present.
The World Bank recently gave a gloomy depiction of
the economic effects of the disease on the three most
affected countries - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
With budget shortfalls and a projected negative domestic
revenue generating capacity, the Government's ability
to meet its responsibility to the Liberian people remains
greatly hampered.

Agricultural activities continue to suffer. In many
locations, marketplaces remain closed and access to
basic food items especially for rural communities
is constrained. Schools remain closed, greatly
undermining efforts to rebuild and strengthen the
educational system. Needless to say, peacebuilding
activities have also been disrupted.

The state of emergency declared by President Sirleaf
three months ago has expired. During the emergency,
certain rights enjoyed by the Liberian people under
the Constitution were suspended. Consequently, the
Government could not conduct the senatorial election
in October, intended to replace 15 Senators whose
tenure will expire early next year. The new date for
the elections, 16 December, was set by the legislature
yesterday. It is hoped that conditions in the country
will have improved significantly to permit the smooth
conduct of elections next month.

Reports are now emerging that the spread of the
disease may be declining in Liberia. This is, of course,
a welcome development for the Government and
people of Liberia, indeed for the global community.
But caution must be exercised so as not to induce
complacency in the fight against the disease. The
disease is unpredictable and one infection can have a
cascading effect. The expiry of the state of emergency
means the restoration of certain freedoms, including the
freedom of movement and assembly. As people move
and interact, the likelihood of the virus resurfacing in
areas thought to be under control remains high. The
Government of Liberia is committed to continuing
its vigilance, including collaboration with the other
affected countries. At the same time, the Government
is already reflecting on the initial steps that must be
taken to begin early recovery. The continued robust and
coordinated support of the international community
at the regional and global levels is also essential for
the success of this fight. This effort embodies the
imperative for commitments and pledges to be fulfilled.

Without underestimating the resilience of the
Liberian people in the face of this pandemic, we must
acknowledge that the scaled-up international assistance
has been indispensable to the progress made so far in
containing the disease in Liberia. Iwish, therefore, again
to thank the Secretary-General, the Security Council,
the President of the General Assembly and the entire
membership of the United Nations for the support which
Liberia is receiving. I also commend the leadership of
our continental and regional organizations, the Africa
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States for their strong support in mitigating the effects
of the disease.

Almost three months ago, the Security Council
convened (see S/PV.7263) to consider the twenty-
eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(S/2014/598). Appreciating the magnitude of the Ebola
crisis, the Council, in its wisdom, decided to suspend
consideration of the recommendation contained in the
report and approved a three-month technical rollover
of the mandate of United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). That was a significant decision, and another
demonstration of the Council's commitment to its
Charter obligation to maintain international peace
and security. The decision implicitly recognized that
the disease had the potential to undermine the gains
made by UNMIL in stabilizing the security situation
in Liberia. The withdrawal of peacekeepers from the
country at that critical juncture would have had a serious
psychological consequence on our people. It would have
sent an unintended message that the country was being
isolated and not the disease. A strong international
presence in the country was important then and it
remains a critical stabilizing factor in a situation where
the social, political and economic environment is fluid
and delicate.

As difficult as it has been for members ofthe Mission
to remain in Liberia with the disease causing havoc
around them, police- and troop-contributing countries
have shown their commitment, not only to the Mission
but also to the core values ofpeacekeeping, by assisting
Liberia in preserving national stability. They deserve
special commendation. We appeal to them to stay the
course in Liberia. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin Landgren, for her
personal support and engagement, and pay tribute to
the peacekeepers and police units for their courage and
strong sense of duty. In a sombre reflection, I again
extend, on behalf of the Government and the people of
Liberia, and in my own name, profound condolences
to the families of two UNMIL staff members who lost
their lives due to Ebola.

My Government believes that the situation has not
ameliorated sufficiently to withstand drastic changes
that could affect the prevailing equilibrium in regard
to peace, security and social cohesion. From a cursory
assessment of the impact it is evident that the disease
has accentuated fragilities and vulnerabilities, which
have the potential to trigger violence if not adequately
addressed. Unemployment, especially among the youth,
is being exacerbated by the suspension of business
operations in the private sector. Public confidence will
continue to erode in the coming months if financial
constraints further impede service delivery. A major
problem revolving around the means of livelihood can
already be foreseen, underscoring the need for social
safety nets to assist acutely vulnerable groups, such as
orphaned children and widows.

The success achieved in the fight against the
disease needs to be monitored both in the short and
long term, as the political and social environments in
Liberia remain vulnerable to shocks. It is our hope that,
in its deliberations, the Council will bear in mind the
incessant and unremitting threat posed by the virus,
including the threat to the peace and security of the
country and to social cohesion.

As we are all aware, peacekeeping missions, such as
UNMIL, have valuable assets - human and material.
We believe that the UNMIL assets would make a
difference if deployed to complement the efforts of
the Government, the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response and partners to strengthen the
response to the virus.

In this light, my Government appeals to the Council
to extend the mandate of UNMIL for the full one-year
period and to defer further any consideration of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's twenty-
eighth progress report pertaining to the reconfiguration
of the Mission. We humbly suggest that a declaration
by the World Health Organization that Liberia is Ebola-
free should provide an opportunity for the Council to
authorize a comprehensive assessment of the conditions
on the ground. As was the case in the past, the outcome
of such an assessment would guide further action by
the Council.

