Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to thank Ms. Viotti, Chef de
Cabinet, Executive Office ofthe Secretary-General, for
her informative briefing on this difficult subject that
concerns us.

Building peace and security for all in the Middle
East and the Gulf region is indeed a major objective
of the efforts of the United Nations and its Security
Council. We are therefore pleased to be able to address
this issue in a cross-cutting manner today, under
your leadership, Mr. Minister, and in the presence of
Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Michaelis. Belgium fully endorses
the statement to be made by the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union.

The Middle East and the Gulf region are currently
plagued by many tensions and conflicts that are
periodically on the Security Council's agenda. The
conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Libya, the deadlock in the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the risk of instability
in Lebanon, tensions in the Strait of Hormuz, the
Iranian nuclear issue and the fight against Da'esh and
Al-Qaida: all these elements threaten regional security
but also, through their internationalization, endanger
international peace and security, of which the Council
is the guarantor.

However, these agenda items are all too often
addressed in isolation. As demonstrated by the
informal interactive dialogue on the Middle East and
North Africa held in the Council last 21 March and the
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on 13 June (see S/PV.8548),
it is crucial to develop a regional and multidimensional
approach. Such a regional approach makes it possible
to take into account the root causes of tensions and
conflicts as well as regional dynamics and the common
security challenges underlying them, and can be
divided into three essential and interdependent areas
that remain relevant: political and security aspects,
with a View to defining and building a common space
of peace and security; economic and financial aspects,
with a view to building an area of shared prosperity;
and social, cultural and human aspects, with a view
to promoting new, inclusive social contracts based on
education, economic opportunities for young people,
equality for women, respect for human rights and the
equitable sharing of national wealth.

With regard to the first point - security
aspects - weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical and nuclear weapons, remain a central focus.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, is
unacceptable and contravenes international standards.
For my country, disarmament, non-proliferation and
the fight against impunity for the use of chemical
weapons are priorities. It is essential that responsibility
for chemical attacks in Syria be established.

In the same spirit, resolution 2231 (2015) remains
the best available multilateral basis for engaging Iran
on nuclear non-proliferation issues and their impact on
regional stability and international security. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action must be preserved, and
the challenges it currently faces must be overcome.
Through the verification mechanisms agreed with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, it allows for
much-needed confidence-building.

Belgium intends to build peace and consensus
and therefore will continue to give its full support to
strengthening the role of the United Nations and its
Security Council with a view to taking a regional,
horizontal and multidimensional approach to tensions
and conflicts in the Middle East and the Gulf. Only a
concerted approach that includes all actors in the region
and addresses all issues can ensure stability and peace
in the region in a sustainable manner, with full respect
for multilateralism and a global order based on the rule
of law.

Finally, let us recall that during the Arab Spring of
2011, people mobilized to demand more rights, freedom,
equality, democracy and economic opportunities.
Some of those expectations have remained unfulfilled.
Any sustainable solution in the region must be based
on ownership of those expectations by societies
and populations.

