Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing on the results ofthe elections.

Russia, as one of the guarantors of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, attaches great
significance to further progress in the peace process in
that country. We are convinced that the basic objective
of the Bosnian settlement must be assistance in the
establishment of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united,
fully fledged and viable democratic State, comprising
two units which are on an equal footing.

We believe that an encouraging signal in terms of
development ofthe situation in Bosnia has been seen in
the most recent changes in Yugoslavia.

We share the concept of moving responsibility for
advancing the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and for the situation in that country, to
the Bosnian sides.

We believe that relying on "pushing through"
Dayton, which often destroys the compromise variants
achieved by the Bosnians themselves, is
counter-productive. The way out, obviously, should be
found through drawing up approaches acceptable, first
and foremost, to the Bosnian sides and not by putting
pressure on them. Such a policy cannot, as practice has
demonstrated, lead to a real breakthrough in a Bosnian
settlement.

International structures cannot, and must not,
replace the legitimately elected organs of power in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in both entities. Basic
efforts must be channelled towards focused work with
Bosnian political forces, encouraging their cooperation
between each other and with the international
community. That approach seems particularly relevant
after the general elections held on 11 November. We
believe that their results will be of decisive
significance for the fate of the peace settlement. We
believe that a guarantee of success and the
irreversibility of a Bosnian settlement is full and
consistent implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The time has come, apparently, to ask the
question: What is more important strategically i to
ensure stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina or to push
for progress towards its unitarization, despite the
provisions of the Peace Agreement, which might lead
to the loss of all those gains accumulated with such
great difficulty over the last four years? We believe
that there is no alternative. Of the many factors which
determine the solid basis of Dayton, the most important
is the balance of these two entities on an equal footing.
We cannot allow a situation in which, because of
ignoring the interest of one, the whole structure
collapses. The most important thing now, in our View,
is to ensure real stability in the country and in each of
its entities. Today this is the most important basis for
moving the peace process forward. We hope that it will
also be promoted by the results of the recently
concluded elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

