Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this declaration.

First of all, let me thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. I would also like to thank the Director and
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for her presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General.

In the interests of time, the European Union will
shorten its statement. The full version is being
distributed and constitutes our official statement.

The European Union sees the proliferation,
widespread availability and illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition as
among the most dangerous challenges and threats to
global stability and security, as well as to economic
and social development and prosperity. The easy
availability of small arms and light weapons, their
associated ammunition and explosives is a fuelling
factor for the vast majority of conflicts.

In December 2005, the European Union
developed its fully-fledged strategy to combat the
illicit accumulation and trafficking of small arms and
light weapons and their ammunition. The EU small
arms and light weapons strategy places under a single
heading all the instruments, political and financial, at
the disposal of the Union to fight the scourge that the
illicit traffic of those weapons represents. The EU
remains a major contributor to the fight against the
dissemination of illicit small arms and light weapons
and ammunition. In Africa, for example, the EU is
financially supporting many actions in the field of
small arms and light weapons, including stockpile
destruction.

The EU will continue to provide support,
financial and technical, to Governments,
non-governmental organizations and regional
organizations and arrangements engaged in the fight
against small arms and light weapons trafficking and
misuse, and the elimination of dangerous small arms
and ammunition stockpiles.

We are committed to curbing the uncontrolled
spread and misuse of small arms and light weapons and
their ammunition, which cause hundreds of thousands
of human deaths every year. We have committed
ourselves to addressing that problem through the 2001
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We will need to
assess together our achievements and shortcomings in
implementing the Programme of Action, which plays a
vital role in stemming small arms and light weapons
proliferation.

In July this year, States will convene for the third
Biennial Meeting to consider the national, regional and
global implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We strongly support the
approach of focused and results-oriented consideration
of a few issues with a view to enhancing the
implementation of the Programme of Action. We call
upon all Member States to participate in this important
event and stress the need for a continued process at the
global level on small arms and light weapons.

In this regard, the EU also welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on small arms
(S/2008/258). We strongly believe that the General
Assembly's mandate to the Secretary-General to
submit a report on implementation of the Programme
of Action will greatly facilitate further consideration of
implementation by all Member States as well as
preparations for Biennial Meetings of States.

The EU welcomes the Security Council's
continuing engagement on the issue of small arms. We
share the view that, in order to make real progress in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, States should focus
on the strengthening, in particular, of physical security
and stockpile management; destruction of surpluses;
marking and tracing; strengthening export and border
controls; and controlling brokering activities. States
need to curb opportunities for the diversion of licit
weapons and ammunition to illicit markets.

We are confident that the Security Council will
continue to pay particular attention to small arms and
light weapons, and we call on all States to do their
utmost to contribute to the fight against this scourge,
which kills thousands of people every day. The EU will
continue to play its part in this common endeavour.

