Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I would like, first of all,
to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his comprehensive
briefing. Pakistan appreciates the facilitating role the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) has played over the past few years. We also
commend the efforts of all the parties that have sought
to implement a peaceful solution to the conflict in that
territory. We appreciate in particular the Government of
Papua New Guinea's courageous decisions and a strong
commitment to peace. This has been crucial to the
success of the peace process.
We are happy to note that UNPOB has largely
been able to complete the tasks assigned to it. This has
facilitated the constitutional process, clearing the way
for elections for an autonomous Government in
Bougainville in 2004. This will in turn lead to the
eventual holding of a referendum in which the people
of Bougainville will exercise their right to self-
determination in accordance with the provisions of the
Lincoln and Arawa Agreements. Pakistan strongly
supports this path, which the parties have courageously
agreed to follow. Peace is the only solution, and this
process, painstaking though it is, still remains its best
guarantor.

However, to sustain peace, it is crucial to promote
and sustain socio-economic development. The two are
indivisible. Therefore, we urge the donor community to
contribute generously, not only to the financing of the
peace process, but also to promoting long-term socio-
economic development in an area that so badly needs
it.

Pakistan has always argued against the premature
withdrawal of the United Nations involvement in any
peace process. We understand that UNPOB's mandate,
which has played a crucial role in building peace as
well as trust in Bougainville, will expire at the end of
this month. However, there is much follow-up work
that remains to sustain the peace process. This
includes, among other things, tasks related to the
destruction of weapons, the facilitation of contacts
between the parties and the preparations for elections
next year. We therefore hope that the United Nations
political engagement in Bougainville will not end with
the expiry of UNPOB's mandate. We support the
possible creation of interim measures, which will allow
the United Nations to continue its work there and to
stay the course in facilitating the full implementation
of the peace process.

