Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me first of

all to join previous speakers in welcoming once again

Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for

Humanitarian Affairs, to the Security Council, and in

thanking him for his comprehensive briefing. We also

appreciate very much the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Chad.

We share the view that the humanitarian situation
in the regions that the Under-Secretary-General visited
remains difficult in both the context of unresolved
conflicts and in the immense size of the humanitarian
needs. We value the work being done by the
humanitarian community in Chad, in the Darfur region
of the Sudan and in southern Sudan. This work needs
to take place in an uninterrupted manner while the
search for a political settlement continues or, in the
case of southern Sudan, the peace is maintained.

The protection of civilians is a priority for the
international community. It was the threat posed to
civilians by the outbreak of conflicts that brought about
the international community's involvement in these
regions. Towards that end, the rapid deployment of
peacekeeping missions in Chad and Darfur becomes a
matter of utmost urgency. Equally important is support
for the efforts of regional countries and the African
Union.

In Darfur, we look forward to the resumption of
the political process under the leadership of Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassole. We welcome the Sudan's
declaration of a ceasefire. Pending the establishment of
a more structured ceasefire mechanism, we believe that
all parties in Darfur should unilaterally cease
hostilities. The international community should
continue to encourage this outcome. A rapid political
settlement of the conflict in Darfur offers the potential
to improve the humanitarian situation in the region.
There is also the hope that an improvement in Chad-
Sudan relations would contribute to the forging of
peace on both sides of the border.

We deplore all attacks against humanitarian
workers. We are appalled that the number of those
attacks in Darfur this year has doubled from last year.
Incidences of carjackings are also worrisome; not only
are humanitarian organizations losing their assets, but
worse, these vehicles usually end up being used for
military purposes. We underscore that most of these
attacks are reported to have been perpetrated by the
rebel movements. We therefore join the call for them to
stop these acts and remind them that these acts could
constitute war crimes.

Close cooperation between the Government of
the Sudan and the humanitarian community could
contribute greatly to improving the humanitarian
situation. Above all, it is the Government of the Sudan
that has a responsibility to protect humanitarian
workers in its country, and we look to it to take every
measure to do so. For humanitarian efforts to be
successful, the well-established international principles
of humanitarian assistance should always be observed.

Finally, we must not lose sight of the
development perspective. In almost every case of
conflict, poverty and underdevelopment are typically
present - and, indeed, are frequently the root cause of
the conflict. The parties to a conflict need to be assured
that the dividends of peace will be real and that the
international community will assist them in
establishing sustainable peace.

