Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I take this
opportunity to warmly welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda
among us and to thank her for her briefing on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya.

I wish to encourage the member and non-member
States of the ICC to cooperate with the Court in the
cases involving crimes committed in Libya in 2011.
We also thank and encourage the Libyan Government,
and more specifically the Prosecutor General of Libya,
for their cooperation with th ICC in the framework of
the memorandum of understanding signed between
the parties on the conduct of investigations and
prosecutions.

The report of the ICC Prosecutor notes the
commission ofserious crimes that have gone unpunished
and whose perpetrators have yet to be prosecuted. More
than 7,000 individuals have been detained without due
process, and the Tawergha community, which seems to
have been forcibly displaced, has not yet been able to
return home. In those circumstances, the involvement
of international and domestic justice is an absolute
necessity. We also encourage the ICC to continue its
investigations within and outside Libya, both with
regard to the Government and militias alike. With
regard to current cases, we take note of the Abdullah
Al-Senussi case and hope that the ICC will pursue its
efforts in a fully transparent and objective manner.
As in all wars, the conflict in Libya has caused
thousands of deaths and entailed very serious violations
of international humanitarian law and humans rights
law. Those responsible for the crimes must answer for
their actions. As we know, however, the political and
social situation in Libya remains precarious and quite
volatile. The ICC and the Government of Libya must
bear in mind the need for justice and security. The
Council will have to provide the necessary assurances
and support for the Libyan Government in resolving the
issue surrounding Saif Al-Islam. His country's courts
should provide a fair trial, if the conditions allow.
Otherwise, the ICC should provide such a trial.

The international community must help Libya to
put in place the rule of law, which is a prerequisite for
the return of peace and stability.

