Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate Coninsx, and the Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, Ambassador Umarov,
for their briefings today on foreign terrorist fighters.

We have come a long way since 2014 when foreign
fighters were traveling en masse to join Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). At that time, ISIL was
spreading like a pandemic across the region. That fall,
the Council took urgent action to stem the flow of those
fighters. Meeting at the Heads of State level, the Council
adopted resolution 2178 (2014) to establish a new legal
and policy framework to counter the threat posed by
those fighters. Since then, international partners and
the coalition to defeat ISIL have made extraordinary
progress in rolling back the gains made by ISIL, which
has now lost approximately 95 per cent of the territory
it once controlled in Iraq and Syria. Raqqa, the self-
proclaimed capital of ISIL, has fallen to coalition
forces. Men, women and children who have suffered for
years under the brutality of ISIL have been liberated.

As part of the campaign, resolution 2178 (2014)
has facilitated unprecedented international cooperation
aimed at identifying, stopping and prosecuting foreign
terrorist fighters. That resolution obligates countries
to take concrete and tangible steps to stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones. It has also
spurred new efforts to address the underlying factors
that are conducive for the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism and allow them to take root in our societies
in the first place.

Regrettably, many Member States have yet to fully
implement resolution 2178 (2014), including adopting
the necessary domestic laws to provide the ability
to criminalize the travel, financing and recruitment
of foreign terrorist fighters. That gap leaves us all
vulnerable, and we must therefore recommit ourselves
to the full and complete implementation of that
critical resolution.

Yet three years later, despite progress against ISIL,
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters persists
and has evolved to now include the need to address
the challenge of returning foreign terrorist fighters.
As the territory of ISIL shrinks, some of its supporters
are on the move, with some returning home and others
going to other countries. We will see more and more
battle-hardened terrorists travelling around the world
to carry out deadly attacks in the name ofISIL.

Additionally, ISIL has even called on its supporters,
who may have never been to the conflict zone, to launch
attacks wherever they are present. One such supporter
carried out an attack in New York City just last month.
We should not fool ourselves into thinking that as we
defeat ISIL on the battlefield, the terrorist ideology
and narratives that underpin the group will just fade
away. That is why the Council and the international
community must address the evolving challenge now.
We must shatter the ISIL narrative of invincibility.
We must help demonstrate to the world, especially
to individuals who are vulnerable to radicalization,
violence and terrorism, that there is more to live for
than supporting ISIL.

The United States therefore proposes that the
Council adopt a new resolution to confront that evolving
threat. We must now grapple with an increasingly
decentralized ISIL threat, with new flows of fighters
and their accompanying families. We propose that the
Council's action stress three priorities.

First, we need to continue to improve border and
aviation security. To do so, we must do more to create
and implement standards aimed at developing and
sharing biographic data and biometric data, advanced
passenger information and passenger name records,
which are three essential tools needed to detect foreign
terrorist fighter travel. It is essential that all countries
collect and use passenger name record data to spot
potential terrorists crossing their borders. The Security
Council should recognize passenger name records
as a foundation of our efforts to secure our borders
and aviation.

Secondly, we need to strengthen efforts to address
and improve the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters. Since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), we have applauded
countries' efforts to implement legislation that allows
authorities to prosecute various acts committed by
foreign terrorist fighters. However, because of the
way some laws are written and because it is hard to
collect evidence in a conflict zone, it can sometimes
be difficult to obtain convictions. We must do a better
job of bringing those fighters to justice, including by
sharing, whenever possible, the evidence needed to do
so. However, we cannot ignore that the family members
of foreign terrorist fighters are also returning home,
some of whom have committed crimes and others who
have themselves been victims of ISIL. The Security
Council should therefore recognize the need to approach
their prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration in a
tailored and nuanced way. That will also require the
involvement of civil society, including faith leaders and
youth - a true whole-of-society approach.

We should not rely too heavily on fighting terrorism
through security measures alone. History shows that
the false narratives and justifications of terrorism can
live on no matter how many terrorists we put in jail
or kill on the battlefield. That is why we also need to
commit ourselves to the prevention of terrorism.

Thirdly and finally, we need the United Nations to
be more coordinated in its efforts to address the foreign
terrorist fighter threat. Various bodies of the United
Nations have vital roles to play. We look to the Office
of Counter-Terrorism to support capacity-building, and
we look to the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
to monitor gaps in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. The Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the various sanctions
committees established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) must also contribute. Those entities will
need to harmonize efforts, with each focusing on its
comparative advantages.

If there is one thing that we should all take away
from this meeting, it is the need to do more than simply
remain vigilant against an ever-adaptive ISIL and
an Al-Qaida on the rebound. We must also take the
necessary steps to update our toolkit so as to be able to
confront an increasingly decentralized enemy. We look
forward to working with Security Council members on
an upcoming resolution to adapt to new challenges.

