Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to convey to the Government and the
people of Russia the sorrow and condolences of the
Chinese delegation at the two unfortunate aeroplane
crashes that took place in Russia yesterday.

I thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
briefing, and I thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2004/634).

Four months ago, the Security Council held a
public meeting (see S/PV.4941) to welcome the
important results of the Berlin Conference. The Afghan
Government has made unremitting efforts, with the
help of the international community, to promote the
Bonn process and to implement the Berlin consensus; a
great deal of progress has been achieved. We
appreciate the important role played by the United
Nations, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The holding of free and fair elections and the
establishment of a fully representative Government are
priority tasks for Afghanistan. The elections will be an
important milestone in the peace process there. We
welcome the fact that the timing of presidential and
parliamentary elections has been established. The
Afghan people place high hopes on the elections for the
security and development of their country. Although
the voter registration process has seen Violent attacks,
much encouraging progress has been achieved. This
demonstrates that the Afghan people have great
confidence and determination with respect to
promoting the peace process. Indeed, the successful
conduct of the elections and the continued promotion
of the process of peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan constitute a daunting task for the Afghan
Government and for the international community.

As the report of the Secretary-General states, the
increasingly tenuous security situation in Afghanistan
threatens the Bonn process. Therefore, firm measures
must be taken to tackle terrorism, factionalism and
problems related to narcotics. With the presidential
elections drawing near, it is even more necessary and
urgent to improve the security situation.

Here, let me make a number of observations.
First, we support the Afghan Government as it
continues with security-sector reform, steps up its work
on building the National Army and the National Police,
and promotes disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). It is our sincere hope that all of
Afghanistan's ethnic groups will focus on the national
interest and will seek common ground, putting aside
their differences and seeking unity, all with a View to
maintaining national peace and unity and making a
common effort towards economic reconstruction and
development.

Secondly, counter-narcotics efforts must be made.
The cultivation of and trafficking in narcotics have put
Afghanistan's political, economic and social
development in grave danger, along with regional
stability. We appreciate the Afghan Government's
counter-narcotics measures and call upon the
international community to devote greater attention to
Afghanistan and to lend it assistance in this regard.
China will continue to work with regional countries to
implement the Declaration on Counter-Narcotics
within the Framework of the Kabul Declaration on
Good-Neighbourly Relations.

Thirdly, we call on the international community
to take action in response to the appeal of the
Secretary-General and to provide adequate security
assistance to Afghanistan, especially to meet security
needs during the presidential and parliamentary
elections. We welcome the decision of Spain and Italy
to send additional peacekeeping troops to Afghanistan.
At the same time, the international community should
honour its financial commitments to Afghanistan so as
to meet the country's financial needs with respect to
the elections, security-sector reform and the restoration
of the rule of law.

China attaches great importance to the process of
peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan and supports
it. This year we shall provide $15 million in assistance.
China's $1 million in assistance for the elections in
Afghanistan will be on the ground by the end of
September. On 10 June 2004, Chinese engineers
working in Afghanistan were the Victims of a terrorist
attack; 11 innocent Chinese engineers sacrificed their
lives for the process of peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan. We strongly condemn that Violent atrocity
and demand that the perpetrators be brought to justice.
I wish also to reaffirm that China will not yield to
terrorism of any kind and, as it always has, will
participate actively in the process of peace and
reconstruction in Afghanistan.

