Mr. Sautter (Germany): This week, many of us here brought our kids back to school after the summer break. Teachers here in New York have made every effort to ensure a safe space in which they can feel protected. It is a scandal and a tragedy that many children in conflict-ridden parts of the world are going through very different experiences. Today's briefers bear witness to one of the most serious violations of children's rights - _ attacks on schools. I thank Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Henrietta Fore, Marika Tsolakis and, in particular, our young briefers Rimana and Hadiza for their bravery in standing before the Council and recounting their stories of perseverance and courage. In 2011, Germany put forward resolution 1998 (2011), which set in place important standards and provisions for the protection of schools and hospitals. In spite of progress that has been made since then, we see that attacks and threats of attacks against schools are on the rise. The initiative of the Niger and Belgium is therefore key. It is also important to update resolution 1998 (2011) with today's presidential statementS/PRST/2020/8. It is important that we recognize the ongoing threat for children - especially girls, as many have mentioned today - arising from attacks on schools and that we prescribe relevant additional operative measures. Let me say a few words on the role of schools. They are far more than places of education; they are safe spaces in which children can learn and play, places for friendships and social encounters and places of critical thinking and creativity. They are the places that are key to creative inclusive societies. It is therefore all the more deplorable that for many children around the world, schools have become places of horror and grief, like in Syria, as German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas said in the Council in February (see S/PV.8734), where the regime and Russia have been bombing civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals. That must end now. The Niger is another worrisome example. There too, attacks on schools have created a lot of harm and human tragedy. Germany is also concerned about attacks on other educational facilities, such as universities.. Some attacks deliberately target girls' schools and result in the most heinous crimes: human trafficking, sexual and gender-based violence and abuse. Also, girls suffer disproportionately, even in instances where attacks on education do not target them specifically. The Safe Schools Declaration is crucial. We encourage all those who have not yet done so to endorse the Declaration and, more importantly, to implement it. Because of the threat of the coronavirus disease, millions of children worldwide remain out of school. In situations of conflict, that is of particular concern; children are deprived of their basic education. They are also often stripped of any access to health services and regular food supply, as those functions and services are frequently provided through schools. We note with grave concern that children with disabilities might encounter heightened obstacles to returning to school once they are out. The Secretary-General has called on all Member States to adopt what he called "aggressive back to school strategies" and to prioritize the reopening of schools. Germany fully supports that call, which is of particular importance in situations of conflict. Let me say a word on the annual report and listings. Attacks on schools and hospitals are a trigger for listing parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. The presidential statement that we have adopted today contains several concrete measures to enhance monitoring and reporting, for example, on the regional and subregional dynamics of armed conflict on children. The attacks and abductions carried out by Boko Haram are a visible example of violations of children's rights that have to be monitored, prevented and prosecuted cross-regionally. We are also concerned about other violations, such as sexual and gender-based violence, some conducted by State actors, such as in Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Germany's view, it is imperative that the findings of the Secretary-General's report consistently reflect the listing in the annexes. It is a question of credibility. My last point is that, in our view, it is more important than ever that the Working Group, now in its fifteenth year, continues to closely monitor the situation of children in the conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council. Belgium has led the way. We welcome the new interactive dialogues with peace operations and UNICEF and hope that such formats are being continued. In conclusion, let me reiterate that schools must be safe spaces - zones of peace - and parties to conflict need to understand that killing children, raping children and destroying schools and hospitals will never be a winning military strategy. It is a crime against humanity and a crime against our future, and it needs to stop.
