Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, Sir, allow
me to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. Knowing you
personally, and knowing your vast diplomatic experience
and skills, we are fully confident that we are in good hands
and that your presidency will yield successful results.

I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Martinez Blanco of
Honduras, for the exemplary manner in which he
conducted the Council's affairs last month.

Today once again my delegation would like to
extend a warm welcome to the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom. We assure him and his hard-
working delegation of our full cooperation at all times.

With regard to the question under consideration, my
delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). We find its detailed
analysis of the current state of affairs in Angola very
informative and indicative of the course of action which
this Council should be pursuing at this moment in time.
Of particular importance are the Secretary-General's
recommendations in paragraph 40 of the report.

We note with satisfaction that the Angolan peace
process has continued to make steady progress. We
welcome the recent positive developments reflected in the
Secretary-General' s report. We welcome, in particular, the
successful meeting in Lusaka on 6 May 1995 between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi. We are pleased to
note that the meeting has given further impetus to the
Angolan peace process. It has already led to an
improvement of the atmosphere of trust between the two
parties and to the intensification of the high-level contact
between them.

However, there are a few shortcomings to which the
Angolan parties should pay due attention and which they
should address in an effective and timely manner if the
peace process in their country is to reach a successful
conclusion. These include the slow pace of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, particularly in the
area of troop-disengagement, demining and the
establishment of the quartering areas. It is also Vital that
the parties continue to demonstrate the political will and
commitment necessary for the achievement of peace and
national reconciliation through strict and timely
compliance with the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka
Protocol and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
with a View to achieving durable peace, security, and
economic and social development in their country.

The draft resolution before us, extending the
mandate of the UNAVEM. III for another six months, sets
out a fully justified course of action given the situation on
the ground and the progress achieved so far in the

 

implementation of the Angolan peace process. It
demonstrates the international community's commitment to
continuing its support to the Angolan people in their search
for peace and national reconciliation. It represents a vote of
confidence in their willingness and ability to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in their country.

In conclusion, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, to his Special Representative in Angola, to the three
observer States of the Angolan peace process, to all the
States of the Organization of African Unity, and to the
personnel of UNAVEM. III under the able command of
Major-General Garuba for their invaluable and effective
contribution to finding a just and lasting solution to the
conflict in Angola. We are pleased to note that their
concerted efforts have borne fruit.

