Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): Upon requests by the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Security Council,
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission last June selected Sierra Leone to be one
of the first countries to be considered by the
Peacebuilding Commission. I very much welcome this
opportunity to inform the Council about the
discussions undertaken in the two country-specific
meetings on Sierra Leone which took place in the
framework of the Peacebuilding Commission on
12 October and 13 December 2006. The Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's Organizational
Committee, Ambassador Gaspar Martins of the
Republic of Angola, who chaired the first country-
specific meeting, has shared with the Council the
Chairman's summary of the most recent meeting.

Allow me to highlight some key outcomes of our
discussions both last week and during the first country-
specific meeting on Sierra Leone. In Sierra Leone,
important achievements have been made to date in
restoring peace and stability and promoting post-
conflict recovery. This was highlighted during both
country-specific meetings. The Commission welcomed
the efforts of the international community in
supporting the Government in developing and
implementing the various strategies: the poverty
reduction strategy, the medium-term expenditure
framework and the peace consolidation strategy.
Members stressed that all peacebuilding efforts should
be linked to the existing strategies under the leadership
and ownership of the Government of Sierra Leone.
Members and the Government of Sierra Leone agreed
that specific challenges under four critical areas need
to be addressed: social and youth empowerment and
employment; consolidating democracy and good
governance; justice and security-sector reform; and
capacity-building.

Sierra Leone was declared eligible to benefit
from the Peacebuilding Fund. It is expected that a
country envelope of approximately $25 million can be
made available as an initial contribution. Members
urged the international community to ensure an
adequate level of external assistance and to lend
support to the Government of Sierra Leone to broaden
its donor base and secure assistance, including further
debt relief. Members called on the international
community to provide adequate resources and support
for the upcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections, including capacity-building to ensure the
equal participation of women in the electoral process.

In order to bring the discussions and the activities
within the country-specific meetings on Siena Leone
forward in months to come, the following was decided.
First, the Peacebuilding Support Office is to present a
calendar of ongoing and planned peacebuilding-related
activities in Sierra Leone.

Secondly, the Chair of the country-specific
meeting for Sierra Leone is to develop, in consultation
with members, a work plan with a clear timeline and
division of responsibilities for actions to be undertaken
by the Government, the United Nations system and
other stakeholders in preparation for the next country-
specific meetings of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Thirdly, a follow-up meeting of the Commission
on Siena Leone will be held in March 2007. It will
review actions and progress in the realization of
peacebuilding goals and priorities, the effectiveness of
international assistance and ways to enhance that
assistance.

Finally, upon the invitation of the Government of
Siena Leone, members will consider the possibility of a
visit to that country before the review.

In conclusion, I wish to underline three points.
First, the discussions within the framework of the
country-specific meetings on Sierra Leone have clearly
demonstrated members' intention to use the
Peacebuilding Commission to the benefit of the
countries under consideration, in this case Sierra
Leone.

Secondly, our most recent meeting built on the
first country-specific meeting in narrowing our focus
on the areas that require additional investment -
financial and otherwise - to allow Sierra Leone to
build a sustainable peace that can prevent it from
relapsing into conflict. In this process, the Government
of Sierra Leone has made a commendable effort to
highlight the gaps that need to be addressed.

Thirdly, in spite of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific formats being a
novelty without thoroughly tested working methods
and procedures, it has become clear that all members,
and the Government of Sierra Leone itself, engage
actively in its discussions. There is an acute awareness
of the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission for
the countries under its consideration and of our
responsibility to exploit it to the fullest. In that context,
I wish to thank the members of the Security Council
for their continued support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, including through the
resolution the Council has just adopted.

It is my conviction that with the fruitful meetings
that have taken place, we have laid the foundation for a
comprehensive approach to post-conflict reconstruction
and development in Sierra Leone. We have also laid the
basis for a strong partnership between the Government
of Sierra Leone and the international community. It is
the deepening of that partnership in a spirit of
transparency and dialogue that will help to define the
Peacebuilding Commission as a useful body that can
make a difference to the process of consolidating peace
and development in Sierra Leone.

