Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to organize
today's very important debate on the protection of
civilians, presided over by Poland's Minister for
Foreign Affairs. I would also like to thank the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their inspiring briefings. Lastly, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
uncompromising briefing. From Afghanistan to Yemen,
in Iraq, Somalia, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, he painted a very
dire picture of threats to mandates for the protection
of civilians. International humanitarian law, which is
designed to save civilians from the effects ofhostilities,
is being defied. It is the duty of all States to respect and
enforce respect for international humanitarian law.

I would like to underscore the Council's
achievements before addressing the progress that
we still need to make in response to the Secretary-
General's recommendations. First, I would like to
highlight the commitment and achievements of the
Security Council with regard to the protection of
civilians. We are not starting with a blank slate. The
Council has improved the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations mandates. In addition, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, analysis of threats
considers both the military and civilian components of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in order to determine what their integrated response
should be, including by deploying uniformed personnel,
if necessary. The protection of civilians is essential
during elections and the demonstrations that go on
around them.

In the Central African Republic, we have
strengthened the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Efforts are under way to provide it with
increased resources and flexibility for protecting
civilians, as the Amoussou report has requested. The
attacks on peacekeeping operations related to protection
are especially intense. Whether the components are
military or civilian, they must have sufficient resources
to meet their objectives, and that goes especially for
human rights personnel, whose early-warning role is
vital to the protection of civilians. But peacekeeping
operations' operational performance is also essential.
If they are to be able to protect civilians properly, they
must be able to protect themselves with proper training,
preparation and equipment. As the Secretary-General
said, both aspects are inextricably linked.

We have also continued and stepped up our efforts
to protect women and children. Thanks to the efforts
of special representatives, force commanders and
dedicated advisers in the various missions, genuine
progress has been made. Child protection advisers, as is
the case with MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, play a decisive role every day in liberating
children. Their functions must be maintained.

The Security Council has been innovative through
its establishment under resolution 2391 (2017) of the
human rights compliance framework for the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
whose implementation has been one a factor in the
Joint Force's success. We commend the commitment
in that regard of the G-5 Sahel countries, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the relevant civil-
society stakeholders. Tools such as these, which enable
us to prevent civilian casualties and ascertain how they
have been harmed can serve as an example and be used
in other situations.

Beyond these, what are the efforts that must be
made to improve the protection of civilians? First,
the Council must continue to work to ensure that all
parties in all zones of armed conflict respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
is key. The Council could also strengthen its efforts
to protect civilians in three specific areas. The first is
the protection of medical missions and humanitarian
personnel. In the light of ongoing attacks on medical
personnel, on 31 October 2017 France put forward a
declaration aimed at committing its signatories to taking
concrete steps to implement resolution 2286 (2016).
We welcome Germany, which has just endorsed the
declaration, and urge all States to join our initiative. We
must strengthen our action to protect all humanitarian
workers, especially local actors, who are often on the
front lines of violence.

The second area is the protection of journalists.
Attacks on media personnel continue and should not
be tolerated. Protecting them is a priority for France
and deeply ingrained in our DNA. We welcome the
designation ofa focal-point network for United Nations
agencies to enable them to ensure the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict, in line with
resolutions 1786 (2007) and 2222 (2015). The Security
Council must continue to monitor the issue with special
vigilance. France, in line with President Macron's
statement to the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.4),
calls for giving the Secretary-General a specific
mandate in that regard.

With regard to the third area, the Security Council
should take the situation of detainees and missing
persons into account. The International Committee
of the Red Cross must be able to exercise its mission
to protect such vulnerable people. France would
like to recall its commitment concerning enforced
disappearances and urges Member States to ratify
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

Ultimately, the effective protection of civilians
depends on exemplary efforts by those doing the
protecting and on effective support for the fight against
impunity. It is essential that the people who implement
protection set an example. Sexual violence, like human
rights violations, cannot be tolerated. The credibility
of military and civilian personnel, humanitarian actors
and United Nations staffis at stake. We must ensure that
they too are protected, and it is the Security Council's
job to ensure that attacks on them are investigated
and prosecuted.

The Council's contribution to the fight against
impunity must also be effective. We have a responsibility
to support national and international efforts in that
regard. The Council must call for cooperation with
fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
international criminal justice instruments, first among
which, where the most serious crimes are concerned, is
the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, the Security Council must make every
effort to put an end to violations, without hesitating to
resort to sanctions. It is in that spirit that we and our
partners have proposed sanctions on those responsible
for trafficking in human beings within the framework
of the sanctions regime in Libya. We hope to arrive at
a speedy consensus that will enable us to deal with acts
that as disgusting as they are destabilizing.

The protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. But owing to States'
shortcomings, it is the Council's responsibility to
work tirelessly on this issue. This is not just a moral
imperative; it is also about enabling peoples to survive,
preventing the escalation ofviolence, opening up spaces
for political dialogue, and recreating the conditions
for lasting peace. I urge the Security Council to come
together around this shared objective and translate it
into action.

