The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council commends the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) for its invaluable contribution over
the last six years to Sierra Leone's recovery from
conflict and its progress towards peace,
democracy and prosperity. The Council is
grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representatives, and all the individuals from the
United Nations and from troop- and police-
contributing countries who have made UNAMSIL
a success, especially those who helped
UNAMSIL recover from the crisis it faced in
May 2000. The Council also deeply appreciates
the cooperation extended by the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone to UNAMSIL and to
the members of the United Nations family
operating in the country.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction the innovations in UNAMSIL's
methods of operation that may prove useful best
practice in making other United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective and
efficient, including an exit strategy based on
specific benchmarks for drawdown; an integrated
mission with a Deputy Special Representative
managing governance, developmental and
humanitarian elements; and substantial, regular
cooperation and coordination with other United
Nations peacekeeping operations and offices in
the region.

"At the request of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General has established the new United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone in order
to provide continued support to the Government
as it tackles the many challenges ahead, including
good governance, sustainable economic
development, job creation and delivery of public
services. The Government will need the sustained
help of donors and development partners,
particularly in addressing difficult but essential
issues like security sector reform, fighting
corruption, the reinforcement of governance
mechanisms including the judiciary, and equal
rights for women and girls. The Council therefore
encourages Sierra Leone's development partners
to continue their support in all these areas, and
notes with satisfaction the outcome of the recent
Donors' Consultative Group meeting on Sierra
Leone in London.

"With Sierra Leone now stable and at peace,
the Security Council sees a great opportunity for
the development of a mature and vibrant political
culture. Achieving this will require tolerance,
cooperation from all sides and a shared
commitment to act responsibly and avoid
inflammatory rhetoric. To that end, Government
and political leaders should reaffirm their
commitment to the basic principles of democratic
governance. This will pave the way for fair,
transparent and peaceful elections in 2007.

"The Security Council reiterates its
appreciation for the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and its vital contribution to
reconciliation and the rule of law in the country
and the subregion, and encourages all States,
particularly States in the subregion, to cooperate
fully with the Court and to provide it with the
necessary financial resources.

"The Security Council continues to
emphasize the importance of a regional approach
to the countries of West Africa. The Council
hopes that Sierra Leone's neighbours will
intensify their cooperation, not least through the
Mano River Union and the Economic Community
of West African States, especially in the area of
peace and security, and with the continued
support of the United Nations and development
partners."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/63.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 pm.
