Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Members of
the Council will recall that on 23 August, the
Secretariat provided a briefing on the preparations for
the elections in Timor. I am pleased to report today that
the elections for the Constituent Assembly of East
Timor were held on 30 August in an orderly and
peaceful manner. This historic event, in which 91 per
cent of the electorate participated, occurred exactly two
years to the day after the East Timorese voted
overwhelmingly for independence on 30 August 1999.

Today, in Dili, the Independent Electoral
Commission announced the final certified results and
declared that the criteria for a free and fair election had
been met. In their statement, the Commissioners went
on to add that

"all the evidence available to the Board suggests
that the campaign was the most peaceful at any
election organized, supervised and controlled or
verified by the United Nations, and in general,
more resembled an election campaign in a stable
established democracy than a campaign in a
country hosting a peacekeeping operation."

Of the 16 parties that contested the elections, 12
won seats in the 88-seat Constituent Assembly. The
East Timor National Liberation Front (Fretilin), led by
Francisco Guterres and Mari Alkatiri, received the
strongest support: 57.4 per cent of the valid votes cast
and 12 of the 13 district seats, giving it a total of 55
seats, which is five short of the majority needed to pass
the constitution.

The determination of the East Timorese to
embrace democracy was evident throughout the
electoral process. During the campaign period, they
demanded of the political parties their full adherence to
the principles of the 8 July Pact of National Unity.
Under the Pact, 14 of the 16 registered parties
committed themselves to respecting the outcome of the
election, to conducting themselves in a peaceful and
mutually respectful fashion and to defending multi-
party democracy. Campaigning centred largely on
personalities, past records and symbols. Few formal
complaints relating to campaigning offences were
lodged and not one alleged breach of the Electoral
Offences Regulation was upheld. At the conclusion of
the campaign on 28 August, a "day of silence", during
which all activities related to campaigning were
prohibited, was observed.

On election day, 30 August, the 248 polling
centres were run almost entirely by some 5,000 East
Timorese. Many voters in rural districts travelled in
family groups by foot throughout the night in order to
arrive at polling stations by 7 a.m., while others slept
outside them so as to be at the head of the queue.
Crowds formed very early at the polling centres.
Despite a delay in opening some of the locations and
the need for electors to wait in line for several hours in
the open sun, very few disturbances took place. Those
that did happen were minor, resulting from the
impatience of those waiting in line or the enthusiasm of
voters casting their ballots for the second time in the
recent history of East Timor. None of these incidents
cast the least doubt on the integrity of the electoral
process.

A number of polling sites remained open beyond
the scheduled closing time of 4 pm. to enable those
still waiting on line to vote. In accordance with pre-
established procedures, 11,999 voters whose names did
not appear on the electoral role, but who had a proof of
registration dated on or before 23 June, were allowed
to vote. In total, some 382,968 East Timorese cast their
ballot, approximately 91 per cent of the 421,018
eligible voters. By district, the lowest turnout was in
Dili - "lowest" being a relative term, since
participation there ran at over 88 per cent - while the
highest was in Ermera, at 94 per cent.

No last-minute incidents of intimidation or other
illegal activity were reported. Concerns that party
"security groups" might turn out at polling stations on
voting day to intimidate voters were not realized. In
advance of 30 August, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Transitional Administrator, issued a public warning
that their presence would not be tolerated. Throughout
the day, the border with Indonesia remained open and
normal crossings in both directions took place. Only
six refugees, who had previously registered in East
Timor then returned to West Timor, are known to have
crossed back again in order to vote in Oecussi district.

Over 1,700 observers monitored the election,
some 500 international monitors and 1,200 East
Timorese belonging to local non-governmental
organizations. Their reports have uniformly praised the
conduct of the election and the manner in which the
Timorese participated. Criticism, such as it has been,
has focused on the inexperience of some of those
responsible for polling stations, on the occasionally
slow processing of voters and the crowds that formed
as a result, and on some delays, such as at Dili, where
polling booths remained open after the official closing
hour

Altogether, over 4,000 political party
representatives and independent candidates were
accredited and observed the electoral process,
including the voting itself, the transportation of ballot
boxes and the counting procedures, all of which was
closely followed. Ballot boxes were transported to the
counting centres that evening with one exception, due
to poor road conditions. The boxes remained overnight
under the guard of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) civilian
police and were flown out the next morning to the
central counting station. On 31 August, the ballot
boxes were opened at the district counting centres and
their contents reconciled with the polling records. After
this verification, the ballots from the various polling
centres were mixed to ensure that it would be
impossible to determine the voting patterns of any
village. Voting patterns can be identified only at the
district level. Counting was closely followed by the
observers.

The parties contesting the election raised a
number of questions about spoiled and blank ballots. In
the Aileu district, where over 40 per cent of the ballots
cast were blank, a party which had failed to nominate a
district candidate had actively encouraged the
population to leave their ballots blank. However, the
Independent Electoral Commission concluded that the
overall percentage of invalid votes - approximately
5.4 per cent in the national ballot and 8.71 per cent in
the district ballots - was well within acceptable
parameters.

(spoke in English)

Provisional results were declared progressively
during the course of last week and, on 6 September, the
Independent Electoral Commission's Chief Officer,
Mr. Carlos Valenzuela, released the uncertified overall
results of the elections.

Those who wished to lodge complaints with the
Independent Electoral Commission over the voting or
counting process had a right to do so by 8 September.
Three parties lodged formal complaints with the
Independent Electoral Commission, alleging systemic
problems with the conduct of the poll. None of their
complaints were upheld or considered serious enough
to justify remedial action.

As I mentioned previously, the final certified
result was announced today. Fretilin secured 55 of the
88 seats in the Constituent Assembly. Second- and
third-placed in the results were two newly established
parties, the Democratic Party and the Social
Democratic Party winning seven and six seats
respectively, or 8.7 per cent and 8.2 per cent of the
national vote. Together, the two parties broadly
represent the activists of the former National Council
of Timorese Resistance.

The Timorese Social Democratic Association
(ASDT) led by Francisco Xavier do Amaral - briefly
the self-declared President of East Timor in 1975 -
came in fourth with 7.8 per cent of the vote and six
seats. It did particularly well in its central mountain
strongholds, securing a higher vote than Fretilin in the
district of Aileu.

Four other parties, all drawing their strength from
social conservatives with traditionalist leanings - the
Timor People's Party, KOTA, the Timorese National
Party and the Christian Democratic Party - each
gained two seats in the Assembly.

Independent national candidates did not fare well,
none of them succeeding in gaining a seat. One district
independent, however, did win in Oecussi. Twenty-
three women members will be present in the 88-seat
Assembly, a percentage of 27 per cent.

Altogether 12 parties will be represented in the
Assembly, while four failed to gain entry. In an
interesting development, the leader of the ASDT,
Francisco Xavier do Amaral, has announced his
willingness to form a coalition with Fretilin. Should
this coalition materialize, Fretilin and ASDT would
have a controlling majority in the Assembly.

The people of East Timor deserve to be
congratulated on the manner in which the election was
conducted. In a positive sign of future good relations,
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia, Mr. Hassan Wirayuda, called Mr. Vieira de
Mello on behalf of the Indonesian Government to
congratulate the East Timorese for the orderly and
peaceful conduct of the electoral process. At the same
time, he extended an invitation from President
Megawati Suekaronoputri to meet with Messrs. Vieira
de Mello, Gusmao, Alkatiri and Ramos-Horta on 12
September. This will be the first meeting between the
President and the leadership of East Timor.

In the next few days, Mr. Vieira de Mello hopes
to announce the formation of a new Cabinet, which is
expected to be composed entirely of East Timorese and
to reflect broadly the election outcome. The inaugural
session of the Constituent Assembly will be held on 15
September.

In the past, UNTAET had indications that some
refugees in West Timor wished to return to East Timor,
but did not do so out of fear of the past association of
elections with violence. UNTAET and the Indonesian
authorities are currently finalizing arrangements for
what is hoped will be the return of an estimated 2,000
refugees from West Timor to East Timor's Ainaro
district later this week.

As regards the return of an international presence
to West Timor, members of the Council may recall that
an inter-agency security assessment mission was
dispatched to West Timor from 8 to 14 July. The
mission recommended the conclusion of a
memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Indonesia and the United Nations
specifying the exact security arrangements to be
provided to United Nations personnel before United
Nations agencies resume operations in West Timor.
Once this memorandum of understanding is concluded,
the security phase could be lowered from Five to Four
in all districts in West Timor, except Belu district. A
draft agreement is now being finalized.

In conclusion, the successful and peaceful
conduct of the election and the commitment of the
parties to the Pact of National Unity bode well for East
Timor's future as an independent, democratic nation.

The next few months will indeed bring with them
complex and difficult challenges. The members of the
Constituent Assembly will soon begin drafting a
constitution. Their challenge will be to live up to the
expectations of the East Timorese who have entrusted
them with the weighty responsibility of organizing a
sustainable, democratic State. Concurrent with this
process, UNTAET, together with the East Timorese
Cabinet, will continue to lay the necessary foundations
for effective and lean administrative structures. In this
regard, Mr. Vieira de Mello intends to continue the
process of delegating authority to the East Timorese
within the parameters of resolutions 1272 (1999) and
1338 (2001).

The continued commitment and patience of the
East Timorese and the confirmed strong support of the
international community will be essential during this
complex period and beyond independence if East
Timor is to have a sustainable and democratic future.

The Secretary-General's report in October will
present the planning for UNTAET's follow-on mission,
which will be designed in cooperation with the East
Timorese, to ensure that the tasks entrusted to the
United Nations are completed in an effective manner.

