Mr. Akahori (Japan) (spoke in French): I also
would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Jenca and
Mr. Opeloyeru for their briefings, and especially to
Mr. Diagne for his informative intervention.

The international community today faces a wide
range of challenges, such as terrorism, social unrest,
political turmoil and prolonged conflict. The Muslim
world in particular faces serious issues, including the
spread of Violent extremism. It is therefore encouraging
that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
is dedicated to preventing and countering extremist
ideology through its strategic partnership with the
United Nations and other efforts.

Japan believes that conflict and violent extremism
are rooted in, and exacerbated by, weak governance. In
our View, the key factors necessary for stable societies
in the Muslim world, a region of remarkable diversity,
are inclusiveness and coexistence. Efforts towards
national reconciliation, administrative reform and
fiscal consolidation are fundamentally important in
creating well-governed and inclusive societies.

It is very encouraging that OIC shares that view
and is undertaking an inclusive and comprehensive
approach in tackling extremism. OIC's efforts towards
fostering global dialogue and cooperation by addressing
the root causes of terrorism can lead to enhanced social
stability and human capital, thereby alleviating the risk
of marginalization.

We believe that OIC can play a more prominent
role in dealing with the imminent challenges facing
the Muslim world today. Actions aimed at meeting
urgent humanitarian needs on the ground and at
supporting the return and reintegration of refugees
and internally displaced persons are in line with OIC's
stated objectives.

OIC's contributions to humanitarian efforts in
Yemen are commendable. It can do more on Syria, both
in the humanitarian and in the political domains. Efforts
aimed at supporting the Israel-Palestine peace process
and improving relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia
also offer opportunities for OIC to achieve its long-
standing goals, which would, in turn, be of benefit to
the entire international community.

The presidential statement of 28 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/16) on cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC includes many insights that remain
useful and relevant today. We welcome the reference
made by the representative of New Zealand to
that document.

Japan is confident that OIC will play an active
role in overcoming challenges and resolving conflict,
thereby enhancing its confidence-building role.

I thank the President of the Council for convening
today's meeting, which offers an excellent opportunity
for encouraging OIC in its endeavours and for enhancing
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and OIC.

