Mr. Fulci (Italy): The draft resolution before us was
prepared and introduced by the three African countries
sitting on the Security Council. The Italian delegation has
great respect for the positions of the African members of
the Council, and from the very beginning their
Governments have worked on the case we are examining
within the framework of the Organization of African Unity.

This draft resolution meets, in our opinion, the
Security Council's purpose: to make known to the
Government of Khartoum the further measures the Security
Council is prepared to take. It is our hope that Sudan will
be able to comply with the pertinent resolution, thereby
avoiding a dangerous isolation of its country from the
international community.

The letter sent by the Sudanese Government to the
Secretary-General and the clear condemnation of terrorism
and the commitment to cooperate in the investigation that
we have just heard from the Permanent Representative of
Sudan indicate that that Government is aware of the need
to do something about the international community's
perception of Sudan as a provider of support and shelter to
international terrorist organizations.

However, the initiatives undertaken so far by the
Government of Khartoum appear to fall short of full
compliance with the demands of the Security Council, in
particular, with the ones concerning the finding and
extradition to Ethiopia of the suspects wanted in connection
with the assassination attempt on the life of President
Mubarak of Egypt, which took place in Addis Ababa on 26
June 1995.

My country's relations with this region of Africa are
very old and, traditionally, intense. Italy therefore wishes
that genuine peace may soon return to the region, and that
is why we have always been at the forefront of providing
and coordinating humanitarian assistance to the people of
Sudan. At the same time, I think that we must reaffirm
strongly that an end to acts of international terrorism is
essential for the maintenance of international peace and
security. That is the reason why Italy will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

