Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the Japanese presidency of the Council for having
convened this discussion. In my intervention, I will
focus on three aspects that I believe to be particularly
important to peacebuilding: national ownership;
coherence among international, regional and national
actors; and the role of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

In its peacebuilding engagement in Africa,
Switzerland attaches great importance to the principle
of inclusive national ownership by closely cooperating
with national and local authorities and communities.
However, as much as conflict-affected countries
need international assistance, peacebuilding cannot
succeed if it is designed or perceived as an external
intervention. Without a corresponding commitment
from the Government and national key actors, a society
cannot build sustainable peace or launch an inclusive
dialogue. Mitigating the risk that State institutions may
weaken and become less inclusive and representative
in a post-conflict environment is a key challenge for
peacebuilding. The will and capacities of political
decisionmakers to shoulder the responsibility of their
office, as well as the existence of accountable and
inclusive institutions, are crucial to the success of
peacebuilding. In that regard, I underline that there are
many peacebuilding success stories in Africa. Let us
learn from and build on these examples .

This brings me to my second point. Another reason
for the failure of peacebuilding processes is a lack of
coordination among international, regional and national
actors. All too often, the different peacebuilding efforts
turn into unconstructive competitions and contradict
each other. The need for more coherence between the
United Nations and regional and even subregional actors
is highlighted in the recent peacebuilding resolution
2282 (2016). Particularly in Africa, the United Nations
can rely on regional and subregional partners with
extended networks and a sound knowledge of the
continent, its challenges and opportunities. These
partnerships must be driven by synergies in terms
both of substance and of institutional structures. I
am therefore pleased to note that the Peacebuilding
Fund recently signed an innovative agreement with
the African Union, covering the financing of African
Union observers in Burundi. Let us try to learn from
this experience in terms not only of substance, but also
of administrative cooperation.

Thirdly, I note the role of the peacebuilding
architecture. On numerous occasions, States Members
of the United Nations have recognized that development,
peace and security, and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. The willingness to act on
this acknowledgment will be decisive for success in
implementing the new peacebuilding resolution, in
particular with regard to prevention. A multitude of
measures will be necessary to make progress on the
following two tracks.

First, the link between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission must be strengthened, of
course in full respect of their respective mandates. As
noted by the Permanent Representative of New Zealand,
the Peacebuilding Commission has not yet reached its
full potential for supporting the Security Council in
long-term, structural and inclusive conflict prevention.
We need more regular and substantial exchanges
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, including the configuration Chairs. That
would allow the Council to embed its measures into
more comprehensive long-term peace perspectives in
the sense of sustaining peace.

Secondly, we encourage all Member States to pay
greater attention to the link between human rights and
peace. In that regard, at the tenth anniversary of the
establishment of the Human Rights Council on 13 June,
Switzerland and 63 other Member States launched a
public appeal to put human rights at the heart of conflict
prevention. This public appeal stresses that human
rights must play a more prominent role at every stage
of the prevention continuum and that the cooperation
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council should therefore be intensified.

