Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to start by congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We express our
pleasure at seeing you once again at the helm of the
Permanent Mission of Ukraine, a very friendly country.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Tunisia and to the
Tunisian delegation for the work they carried out last
month. They represent a sisterly Arab country, which
hosted the Palestine Liberation Organization and
Palestinian military cadres for quite some time.

Before I begin reading my official statement to
the Council today, perhaps it would be appropriate that
I inform the Council of the latest developments in the
situation in our occupied territories. Allow me to read
out in English this article from Reuters.

(spoke in English)

"At least six Palestinian children were burned
when Israeli border police threw a stun grenade
into the courtyard of a school in the West Bank
city of Hebron on Thursday. Witnesses said some
of the children, aged about 10 to 13, screamed as
they were carried out of the school into
ambulances. At least one child's head was
wrapped in a bandage. But doctors described the
casualties' burns as moderate to light. The army,
which was looking into the report, gave no
immediate explanation of the incident."

(spoke in Arabic)
I will now go back to my official statement.

The Council is meeting today at the request of
Palestine and of the Arab Group. It is the fourth time
that the Council has held a public and official meeting
to discuss the very dangerous situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, since the
visit by Mr. Ariel Sharon, who was elected Prime
Minister of Israel, to Al-Haram Al-Sharif last
September and the ensuing bloodletting campaign by
the Israeli military against the Palestinian people.

During that period, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000) on 7 October last. The
international community and all of us fervently hoped
that it would stop Israel, the occupying force, from
continuing its campaign against our people and its
excessive use of force, that it would restore the
situation to what it was before 28 September and that it
bring a continuation of the peace process and
negotiations between the two parties on the final
settlement. Very regrettably, this has not happened.

Israel has escalated its campaign against our
people, in complete violation of the provisions of the
resolution. In View of this, there was an urgent need for
the international community to provide protection to
Palestinian civilians who live under Israeli occupation.
And the idea crystallized that the United Nations would
send an observer force into the territories occupied by
Israel since 1967.

The countries of the Non-Aligned Movement in
the Council prepared a draft resolution in this context.
They used all the ideas put forth by other members to
reach acceptable formulas in this respect. They
submitted the draft resolution for a vote on 18
December. Regrettably, that draft resolution was not
adopted because it could not command the necessary
nine votes, in spite of statements by some abstaining
members that they had no substantive differences with
the draft. This was very a regrettable failure by the
Security Council, from our point of view. It may have
sent the wrong message to Israel, the occupying force.
Since that day, 18 December, the occupation forces
have killed more than 80 Palestinian martyrs and have
wounded several thousand.

We believe that it would have been possible to
save at least some of those people had the Council sent
a different message. We say this so that we can make
perfectly clear the context in which we are calling on
the Council to move in the implementation of its duties
under the Charter. Of course, this is in addition to the
risks that the current situation in the Palestinian
territories might pose for the peace process and for the
Middle East as a whole.

During the same period, our Observer Mission
sent 30 letters to the President of the Security Council
and identical letters to the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly, in which we
explained developments in the Israeli practices and the
Israeli campaign. Our Mission gave several specific
examples, as well as the names of Palestinian martyrs,
including children under 18 years of age. We sent 30
letters in which we documented everything that was
done by Israel. Our file that could be described as the
"file of crimes", including measures that represent a
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
1949 and that clearly constitute war crimes in the terms
of that Convention.

In these letters we described the Israeli actions
under the military bloodletting campaign as follows:
deliberate killing, even in circumstances where the
safety of the occupation forces were not jeopardized;
the wounding of many victims - shooting at the upper
limbs and upper parts of the body; the targeting of
people by sharpshooters and by other means, using
types of ammunition unknown to us; the use of tanks,
helicopters and other heavy weapons to shell the
Palestinian Authority headquarters and other civilian
targets; restrictions on the movement of individuals and
goods in Palestinian territory and between the
Palestinian territory and the outside world; collective
punishment, such as an almost continual curfew on the
population of Hebron and the destruction of
agriculture, land and other economic installations; and
the non-transfer of taxes collected for the Palestinian
Authority.

This tragic situation was also described by other
international organizations and human rights
organizations, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs.
Mary Robinson, and the committee delegated by the
Commission on Human Rights to investigate the
situation. In spite of the clarity of this bleak picture,
Israel has not stopped making claims of Palestinian
violence. The cause of this situation is the Israeli
occupation and the measures taken by the occupying
forces, which continued even after the start of the
peace process, such as the confiscation of territory and
the building of settlements. Since 28 September, other
measures have included the presence of the Israeli
occupation army and the use of its huge military
machinery; the presence of the illegal occupiers and
settlers and their use of weapons against our people;
the deliberate destruction of the Palestinian economy;
and the transforming of the lives of the Palestinian
people into a veritable hell.
Of course, there is a complete popular Palestinian
rejection of all of this. Here we have to say that in the
face of all these Israeli policies and measures, some
limited elements have accepted the use of reciprocal
violence. However, this cannot at all change the clear
and definitive nature of the situation.

Let us take another look at the numbers: the huge
number of Palestinian casualties and the limited Israeli
casualties, for which we also express our regret. But
the difference is huge and beyond comparison. In
addition, there is no Israeli civilian presence within the
occupied Palestinian territory; there are the members of
the occupation army and settlers who reside there
illegally, in violation of international law. The question
here is how can any party, at least in view of these
facts, talk about Palestinian violence, except those who
believe that the Israeli human casualties are different
qualitatively from the Palestinian human casualties?
But this would represent such a racist situation that we
would not even be able to begin to deal with it.

Why does Israel, the occupation force, do all of
this? We are not really sure, after all this time and all
this suffering. Perhaps the Israeli army or some of its
elements are completely out of control - some refer in
particular to the Chief of Staff, Mr. Mofaz, as one
example of this. Perhaps the Israeli political leadership
would like to break Palestinian political will and
impose certain solutions on the Palestinian side.
Perhaps it is even worse - perhaps the political
leadership has concluded that it could not implement
the agreements undertaken in the peace process,
including the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). It may wish to exit the peace
process and to throw the blame on the Palestinian side.
Perhaps it is a combination of all these factors.

The important thing here, regardless of reasons
and motives, is that we stop this tragedy as soon as
possible. In this respect, we must refer to the
responsibility of the international community,
particularly that of the Security Council. Stopping the
serious and dangerous deterioration is the necessary
prelude to restoring the situation to the way it was
before 28 September, saving the peace process and
resuming the negotiations between the two sides.

This brings me to the situation of the peace
process, both before and after the installation of the
new Israeli cabinet. The Israeli party claims that the
previous Government made unprecedented
concessions, which the Palestinian side rejected. This
tells only half the story and in a very evasive and
deceptive way paints a different picture. The previous
Israeli Government may have adopted positions that
were unprecedented by any adopted by earlier Israeli
Governments, but that is not the question. The question is
the Israeli positions of the past, particularly if they were
unreasonable and contrary to international law and
legitimacy. The standard that should be used is consonance
with the peace process, which includes implementation of
Security Council 242 (1967) and the principle of land for
peace. That is the yardstick.

Here, I say very clearly that the previous
Government did not adopt positions consonant with the
peace process or with the implementation of
agreements, although these positions were progressive
relative to those of previous Governments. That is what
prevented us from reaching an agreement at the Camp
David summit.

Let me say here that the Palestinian side has
accepted, with some reservations, the principles that
were later declared by former United States President
Clinton. This indicates our commitment to the bases of
the peace process and that we are ready to negotiate on
the basis of those principles. In the wake of the
summit, the two parties achieved reasonable progress
in the Taba talks. It would have been possible to
achieve further progress had it not been for the known
and constant of Mr. Barak up to the very last moment.

As for the current Israeli Government, its
positions completely contradict the bases of the peace
process and the agreements concluded between the two
parties. This Government, through the head of its
cabinet in particular, claims that it cannot negotiate
while the violence continues, as if the Palestinian side
were responsible for the occupation and the practices
of the Israeli army, the settlers and the campaign
against our people. It acts as if we can isolate the
situation on the ground from the political situation and
the future of an entire people.

The Israeli Government also refuses to negotiate
from the point that was reached by the two sides in
Taba. In other words, it would want to take us back a
very long way. Much more serious than that,
however - and here we are talking about the essence
of that Government's position - is its reluctance to
negotiate a final settlement in favour of new interim
arrangements and solutions. This clearly indicates its
desire to dissociate itself from the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967). It would like to impose an
eternal interim stage on the Palestinian people
following the five interim years and their extension.
This, of course, destroys the basis of the peace process
and the agreements concluded between the two sides.
Yesterday, Mr. Shimon Peres, the Israeli Minister
of Foreign Affairs, met here with the Security Council.
That was good. Mr. Peres is a veteran politician known
to be reasonably moderate. The problem is that he
represents a Government that does not reflect that
reasonable moderation. The question is whether Mr.
Peres and his colleagues can influence the policies of
that Government or whether the Government will use
them as a cover for its extremist policies. So far, the
omens are bad. Mr. Peres laid out the position of Mr.
Sharon as we already know it with respect to the
current situation, his refusal to accept a United Nations
observer mission and even the future of the peace
process, not to mention the other news and indications
to be inferred from the escalating measures adopted by
the Government in imposing a suffocating blockade
against the Palestinian people.

These positions impose clear responsibilities on
the international community, in particular the two
sponsors of the peace process and, specifically, the
United States, which was a party to the current
agreements.

We all bear the responsibility to maintain and
support the peace process by preserving its agreed
bases and by insisting on a commitment to concluded
agreements. On our part, we reaffirm our commitment
to all of this, to our strategic choice of peace and to our
readiness immediately to resume negotiations on a final
settlement.

We call on the Israeli side immediately to halt the
bloody military campaign against our people and to
resume negotiations on a final settlement, taking into
account the progress made to date in the negotiations.
We call on the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to take the necessary
steps to help the two sides to surmount the current
situation, to put an end to the current tragedy and to
restore control as a prelude to the resuscitation of the
peace process, as I have mentioned before, through
practical measures, including the establishment of an
observer force.

We dearly hope that the Security Council will
play that role this time and will contribute to improving
the situation so as to achieve lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East as a whole.

