Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Patriota and Skoog for their
briefings.

Establishing a peacebuilding architecture has
been extremely important to the ability of the United
Nations to effectively fulfil its obligations under its
Charter. As the primary entity of that architecture,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has actively
coordinated the international community's support
to countries emerging from conflict, intensified its
contributions to peacekeeping, supported the countries
of West Africa in responding appropriately to the Ebola
epidemic, promoted a comprehensive review of the
peacebuilding architecture and generally done a great
deal of productive work.

A couple of days ago the PBC successfully held
its annual session, during which there were in-depth
discussions onsuchtopics as financingforpeacebuilding,
and significant consensus was reached. Today we are
seeing traditional and non-traditional security threats
intertwined, with conflicts in some countries spilling
over to others in a major way, while some post-conflict
countries are dealing with the risk of relapse back into
conflict. Consolidating the peace that has already been
achieved in such countries and attaining comprehensive
economic and social development - these are the
issues that the international community must reflect on
in depth.

At the beginning of this year, the Security Council
and General Assembly jointly launched a comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations, aimed at further improving our peacebuilding
efforts and promoting the PBC's comprehensive
implementation of the mandates of the Council and
the Assembly. In that regard, I would like to make the
following points about our peacebuilding work.

First, it is essential that we insist on ownership
by the countries concerned, since that represents
the foundation of peacebuilding efforts and the best
way to ensure results. The international community
should respect the sovereignty and ownership of the
host countries, intervening only at their request and
supporting them in accordance with the priorities and
road maps formulated by them. It is important to focus
on strengthening communication with host countries
and to make timely adjustments that accord with their
Views.

Secondly, it is important to tailor interventions
so they can adapt to changing circumstances. Post-
conflict countries can find themselves in many different
situations, and peacebuilding efforts should therefore
come up with strategies that are country-specific, based
on the circumstances and needs prevailing in individual
host countries. Social reconciliation and economic and
social development are key to ensuring lasting peace,
and should be a natural focus for peacebuilding. While
work can also be done in other areas, it should accord
with host countries' needs and does not have to be all-
embracing, thus avoiding the mistakes of efforts that
are penny-wise and pound-foolish.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the PBC's
coordinating role. The Commission's work covers arange
of areas, including peace, security, development and
society, in which there are many important participants,
such as host country Governments, the various social
sectors, United Nations agencies - particularly the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council - international and regional
organizations and international financial institutions.
There is a need for a division of labour as well as
coordination among the various participants. It is to
be hoped that the PBC will strengthen its coordination
among the parties in the field of peacebuilding so that
they can play to their respective strengths, in accordance
with their mandates, and form synergies.

Fourthly, it is important to ensure that the
Commission's advisory function is fully realized.
The PBC has a great amount of information at its
disposal, as well as a deep understanding of such
subjects as how to consolidate peace and strengthen
host countries' capacities and institution-building. The
Commission should therefore continue to strengthen its
relations with the Council and provide it with active
advice. The Council, for its part, should also improve
its coordination with the Commission and its various
country configurations so as to arrive at the kind of
comprehensive understanding that will enable it to
provide guidance on its peacebuilding efforts.

