I would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing and for her inspiring concluding words. The Security Council has met now on innumerable occasions - before and after the unanimous adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) - to discuss the Al- Assad regime's repeated use of chemical weapons, its contempt for the resulting international response and its failure to cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The regime's conduct is not in question. Repeated investigations by the United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism and the recent report of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team have established the facts. Al-Assad's forces are responsible for horrific atrocities and immeasurable human suffering. As we just heard, the barbaric use of chemical weapons is an unacceptable security threat to all States, and when weapons of this nature are used, all members of the Council must take decisive action to hold the perpetrators accountable. Al-Assad's enablers, including the Russian Federation, the People's Republic of China and the Islamic Republic of Iran, share that responsibility with all of us. How can those Governments defend the grotesque reality that Syria's air force has repeatedly dropped sarin and chlorine bombs on civilians and, in the same breath, claim that they support international norms against the use of chemical weapons? It just does not add up. Tragically, the politically divided place that we all find ourselves in today gives little reason to believe that accountability for this wretched conduct is within reach. The Council is blocked from fulfilling its mission by permanent members who are intent upon protecting a client at all costs, including the lives of many innocent Syrian women, men and children. And, unless and until those members alter their behaviour, Al-Assad has little reason to alter his. So it is hardly surprising that the Al-Assad regime has been unresponsive, as we have heard, to the OPCW Executive Council's demands that it declare facilities where chemical weapons were developed, produced and stockpiled; that it reveal its remaining chemical-weapons stockpile and production facilities; and that it cooperate with the OPCW to account fully for its chemical-weapons programme. This charade has gone on since 2013, when Syria joined the OPCW. As if the use of chemical weapons were not bad enough, the Syrian people are starving and their communities have been destroyed. Humanitarian relief is constrained and neighbour countries struggle to accommodate swelling refugee populations. Responsible Governments behave responsibly. They promote and protect the human rights and the well-being of their citizens. They cooperate with their neighbours to pursue peace, security and prosperity. They comply with their international obligations, such as the Chemical Weapons Convention. The Syrian regime has failed on all of those basic obligations. Responsible nations must stand united against the conduct of the Al-Assad regime and its gallery of supporters. While the Council is impeded by Russia and China, the effort elsewhere to pursue accountability must be sustained. We must take all available action at the upcoming OPCW Conference of the States Parties. We must document the Syrian regime's atrocities with precision. We must give voice to those displaced and preserve their histories. And we must spotlight the conduct of the regime's enablers wherever possible and demand that they answer for their behaviour. The victims of Al-Assad's chemical-weapons attacks deserve nothing less from us.
