Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, we wish to thank you for convening this
thematic debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also wish to thank Mr. Holmes for his very
important and comprehensive briefing. The last report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in cases of armed conflict (S/2007/643) analyzed some
of the challenges that the Council should face. We
agree, in principle, that it is indeed important that the
international community should implement the
principle of protection in accordance with the final
document of the 2005 World Summit, which should
take place through joint multilateral action in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. We also
support the continuation of efforts in the General
Assembly to define the nature and scope of protection

08-3528]
and human security within the limits of strict and
unequivocal respect for the sovereignty of States, and
to treat each case on its own merit.

The subject of today's debate is an issue that
should be considered in depth and defined by the
international community. The region to which I belong
has suffered its wars, especially in the occupied Arab
territories in the Middle East, and in Somalia, Iraq,
Afghanistan and south Lebanon, whose population are
suffering from the landmines and cluster bombs that
were planted and dropped by the occupation. Similarly,
the civilians in the areas of rebel activities in Sudan are
suffering the consequences of the activities of armed
groups.

It is, indeed, easy to call for establishing
mechanisms for protection within the multidimensional
United Nations missions. Yet, the real challenge
remains in how to implement the principle of
protection in cases where the suffering of millions of
civilians and their right to protection and security is
being ignored, for political reasons, as with the
civilians in Palestine, Somalia, Iraq or Afghanistan,
who under the yoke of occupation are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance and protection from killing
and murder. This is an issue that demands genuine,
sincere and noble intentions, and we ask ourselves
when there will be the necessary political will to
enable the United Nations organs, especially
the Council, to fulfil their role in the protection of
civilians - so that humanitarian assistance will,
obligatorily, reach the areas under occupation and
those responsible for the violation will be held
accountable - while pressure is being put on several
States in the name of protection and human security.
We believe that crimes against humanity should be
dealt with without discrimination or selectivity. The
deliberate targeting of civilians, extrajudicial killings
and the indiscriminate bombardment by the occupying
Power are crimes that violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention on the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War. No less a crime is the killing of
journalists and the bombardment of information and
media premises - all these are crimes that should be
condemned and not be ignored - they are no less
dangerous than crimes taking place in south Lebanon
and in Sudan last year. No doubt some groups of
civilians deserve special protection, such as children,
women, and vulnerable groups of society in accordance
with international law, international humanitarian law

08-3528]

and the laws on refugees as well as the relevant
international conventions, such as the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its additional protocols, which
international jurisprudence considers binding on all
Member States.

The State of Qatar has assumed responsibility to
make use of these instruments, to accede to them and
to implement them through national legislation, and to
conduct mass information campaigns and to train
national officials and cadres. The State of Qatar
supports the United Nations promoting these
instruments and supports providing the Secretariat with
objective information regarding the status of their
implementation in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions. We must be far-sighted and
comprehensive in the options to limit the dangers
feared by civilians, which means we should take
measures to prevent conflicts and settle conflicts
through diplomatic and peaceful means whenever
possible. We should promote friendly and sincere
bilateral efforts on the part of regional organizations
and support them through the United Nations. The best
example of this is what happened a few days ago in
Doha, the capital of my country, where there was
agreement among the Lebanese factions to put an end
to the crisis afflicting their country. That event was
supported by the Council as soon as it was announced,
since promoting genuine dialogue through impartial
mediators is the best way to put an end to violence and
to stop subjecting individual civilians to danger.

