Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank our four briefers today for their
statements, which I believe provide a very clear view
of the complexity of the Sahel. I would also like to
thank those who will speak following the members of
the Council.

The Sahel has on many occasions been defined,
and the phrase is very familiar to us in New York, as
the ground zero of global warming. In recent years, far
from an improving situation, the region has continued
to face a consistent increase in temperature, persistent
droughts and other extreme climate phenomena such as
torrential rains. Every month, the United States National
Aeronautics and Space Administration announces that
the temperature of the Earth has hit a new historic
record * a record that always seems to exceed those of
previous months. The existing projections for the Sahel
region are truly alarming. At the same time, every
year, thousands of hectares of arable land are lost and
an ever-growing population has less and less land to
farm. That formula will clearly lead to instability. Such
instability has a number of root causes, ranging from
extreme poverty to the fragility of State infrastructures
and including violent extremism and the proliferation
of illicit trafficking and terrorist groups.

The day-to-day lives of those who inhabit the Sahel
region was clearly described to us by a very young - still
young - lady, Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim. We
know that the final solution to the challenge of climate
change is not in the hands of the Security Council,
nor do we claim it to be. However, that cannot be used
as an excuse for the Council to ignore that reality in
exercising its primary responsibility for peacekeeping
and international security. Climate change is already
changing the rules of the game, and to ignore the truth
will just lead us to failure. That is the exact purpose of
this meeting, which I increasingly value. This initiative
was undertaken by us together with the Egyptian
presidency, to whom we express our full gratitude for
its support and for bringing this issue to safe harbour.

We proposed this meeting with three objectives in
mind: first, to ensure that the commitments undertaken
by the Council would not remain dead letter; secondly,
to provide necessary information so that the Council
can efficiently fulfil its preventative function; and,
thirdly, to address the crisis in the Sahel from a holistic
point of view, as the Ambassador of Senegal pointed
out so well. I would like to refer briefly to each of
these objectives.

With regard to fulfilling the commitments
undertaken by the Council, it is important to point out
that this meeting of the Council is a continuation of
the path already undertaken by the United Kingdom a
decade ago, which was too long ago, and it also fulfils
the commitments undertaken by presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15 in 2011, under the initiative of
Germany. More recently, in 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/24 reaffirmed the Council's commitment
to addressing the challenges for security in the
Sahel, which are intrinsically related to the adverse
consequences of climate change in the region. Those
commitments, which we agreed to in this very Chamber,
cannot simply remain declarations of intentions.

With regard to the Council's preventative function,
the intention is to provide the Security Council with
relevant information so it can have an overview of
the situation that would make it possible to accurately
diagnosis and define solutions that are more effective.
In other words, the idea is to better prepare it to carry out
its prevention role. Therefore, the presentations made
by a number of different speakers today, who I would
like to thank again for their brilliant briefings, have
shown us the interrelationship between the exacerbation
of desertification, as a maximum expression of the
effects of climate change in this region, and security
in the Sahel.
Finally, we want to ensure that an integrated and
coordinated approach, which we so often clamour for in
addressing a complex crisis, such as that in the Sahel, is
adopted. The region resides between three great threats
to security: the situation Libya; the insecurity in Mali,
where the peace process is progressing too slowly; and
the terrorist actions of Boko Haram in the north-east of
Nigeria and in the Lake Chad Basin. These crises are
fuelled by a number of factors, but there is not a single
one that alone would result in a future of violence
and instability in the region. It is the sum of many
circumstances that is leading the Sahel from the path of
peace, stability and growth. Therefore, I want to make
a series of three proposals for action.

First, the Security Council needs to continue
to receive information and fulfil the commitment it
undertook in 2011 to analyse the different factors
that, like climate change, impact peace and security in
fragile regions. Having appropriate information on how
these issues pose a challenge to stability in the Sahel
will strengthen the Council's preventative function. In
that regard, I recall the myriad debates we have held
on the preventative function of the Council. Climate
change will therefore become one more early-warning
factor in order to be able to take action effectively when
it comes time to anticipating tensions. Humanitarian
crises due to food insecurity, water insecurity, massive
displacement of people and uncontrolled migratory
flows can be anticipated and we can implement the
appropriate measures. The Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
Ms. Monique Barbut, provided us with an outstanding
briefing on this.

Secondly, the Council needs to ensure that the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel pay
due attention to the issues raised today, especially
the destabilizing role played by climate change in the
region. In order to do this in an orderly manner, it is
necessary to listen to and address the needs put forth
by the Sahel countries that are with us today. We have
recently seen how these countries are putting in place
a whole series of inter-State cooperation structures,
which are trying to establish a connection, which we
see very clearly, between security and development.

Finally, as was also brilliantly suggested by my
friend, the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, we think it
is a very good idea for the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate to analyse the impact of climate
change and look at whether or not the effects of climate
change exacerbate the fragility of specific peoples and
make them more vulnerable to violent extremism and
terrorist recruitment. Mr. Laborde has our full support
in that task.

The fact that we are holding this meeting today - at
which the challenges, including climate change, of a
region on the Council's agenda are being considered
from an integrated approach - is itself a great step
forward, but we must continue working along these
lines, because climate change is part of our present and
it will no doubt define our future.

