Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
very name of Afghanistan is reminiscent of vivid
images of seemingly endless war, carnage, repression,
displacement, destruction, poverty and despair.
Afghanistan was long left to itself to struggle with its
numerous problems. Time and again, our warnings that
the situation in Afghanistan, and in particular the
policies of the Taliban, pose serious threats to
international peace and security were either taken
lightly or went unnoticed. As a result, the neighbours
of Afghanistan had to bear the repercussions of the
situation in that country. Among these are unremitting
flow of refugees, insecurity, drug trafficking and
epidemics, to name but a few.

The horrific terrorist attacks of 11 September
have brought Afghanistan to the centre of the
international community's attention. The challenge of
restoring stability in Afghanistan requires political will
and commitment, as well as well-coordinated collective
actions. Afghans have been compelled to resort to force
to resist the rule of the Taliban, whose ideology has
nothing to do with Islam and prescribes terrorism and
the gross violation of human and minority rights.

In response to terrorist threats, a military
operation has been staged. However, I need to note
here that military action is not the solution. The people
of that poor nation have suffered enough and do not
deserve to suffer from another war. They must be
offered other alternatives.

Where do we go from here? How should we
respond to the pressing challenge of re-establishing
peace, security and normalcy in Afghanistan? How
might we help Afghans rid themselves of the Taliban
phenomenon? The third ministerial meeting of the "six
plus two" group, held yesterday, provided an
opportunity to contemplate these questions. I shared
some of my views with my colleagues.

It is imperative to pursue a political objective
beyond military stand-up and to prepare for a peaceful
end to decades of conflict, war and the harbouring of
terrorism. The United Nations has a central role in that
regard. In this respect, the Islamic Republic of Iran
appreciates the continued commitment and support of
the Secretary-General. In the same vein, we welcome
the timely re-appointment by the Secretary-General of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, a seasoned diplomat who is also
very familiar with the situation in the country. I would
like to take this opportunity to reassure him of the
commitment of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to extend to him its fullest support and
cooperation in the discharge of his mandate.

In the light of the developments of the last several
days - the liberation of Kabul, Kandahar, Mazar-e-
Sharif, Taloqan, Herat and other provinces in northern
and southern Afghanistan - the time has come to
advance with much vigour and expedition the process
of forming a broad-based Government in Afghanistan
so as to avoid the recurrence of past situations.

The idea of a broad-based Government is not a
new one. Over years of negotiations and deliberations
on this subject matter at various forums, there has
emerged a set of principles by which a national unity
Government in Afghanistan should abide. These
include, as far as internal processes are concerned,
democracy, the rule of law, accountability and respect
for human rights and the rights of minorities. As
regards foreign relations, the post-Taliban Government
is expected to be committed to international law; to
peaceful and friendly relations with its neighbours; to
preventing the use of its soil for subversive,
destabilizing and terrorist activities; and to banning the
production of, trade in and trafficking of narcotic
drugs.

As an essential step, the Security Council should
move to adopt a resolution enumerating the principles
of the post-Taliban Government, defining the presence
and the monitoring role of the United Nations during
the transitional period and seeking the mobilization of
financial and other resources for the rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of the country, the
repatriation of refugees and the eradication of narcotics
cultivation and smuggling.

There is also an urgent need to piece together a
time-bound transitional arrangement to move from
post-conflict to normalcy. This urgency has been
further augmented by recent military developments.
The liberation of Kabul should be viewed as a military
necessity that should be followed immediately by
urgent action by the United Nations to establish, in
consultation with Afghan groups, an interim
administration. That authority, which should work
under a United Nations umbrella, should reflect the
ethnic composition of Afghanistan and be of an
administrative rather than of a political character.

We call on the United Front, as well as other
legitimate groups inside and outside Afghanistan, to
cooperate actively with Mr. Brahimi in order to
establish such a multi-ethnic interim administration,
which would bring about national unity and pave the
way for a broad-based and multi-ethnic Government in
the country.

A political and monitoring presence of the United
Nations is one of the prerequisites for such a successful
transition. It would provide guarantees for adherence to
the principles of a proper transition of power in
accordance with an agreed timetable and, more
importantly, confidence-building among various
Afghan groups, as well as institution-building. At the
same time, a military presence of the United Nations is
needed to ensure peace, order and security until such
time as the national army and police are in place. This
will not necessarily require a large-scale international
military deployment.

Apart from issuing resolutions, the Security
Council is required to supervise the situation. It should
constantly review and monitor the situation and
ascertain whether the parties are adhering to their
commitments. However, we should be careful to
confine our exercise to delineating the general
principles and framework and not decide on who
should rule the country. Such a decision is totally for
the Afghan nation to make. All the Afghans within and
without the country should be given a chance to take
part in the process of State-building and to enjoy the
right to run for public office. Moreover, the democratic
principle of "one person/one vote" must be upheld.

Furthermore, we have made clear to the United
Front the expectation of the international community
that it will exercise maximum restraint whenever and
wherever it takes over Taliban-controlled territories.
Here again, we welcome their issuance of a general
amnesty and call on them to ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law with regard
to all Afghans and foreigners. This, indeed, would set a
yardstick by which the international community would
judge and decide.

Poverty certainly renders peace fragile. The
international community, in particular international
financial institutions, should contribute significantly to
the restoration of peace and normalcy to Afghanistan
through mobilization of assistance for reconstruction
and development. We need to invest in and for the
future. This could be pursued through, inter alia,
holding a United Nations-sponsored international
conference on the reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan. We sincerely hope and believe that a
coalition for the peace and reconstruction of
Afghanistan would be stronger and much broader than
the current campaign against terrorism there.

We are gravely concerned about a humanitarian
catastrophe in Afghanistan. Winter is approaching and
after three years of drought, Afghans are in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. It is estimated that some 6
million people face starvation. Conditions for
vulnerable groups, such as women and children, are
even worse. We must not let them starve to death. To
avert the existing as well as the impending
humanitarian crisis, the provision of assistance to
Afghanistan, especially the north of the country, has to
proceed at a much more energetic pace.

In conclusion, the time has come to give
Afghanistan back to its people and enable them to
exercise their right to self-determination. We have to
seize the opportunity, for the costs of failure are
immense. We must trust the wisdom and aspirations of
the Afghan nation. They deserve a better, saner, more
prosperous and more hopeful life.

