Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to congratulate you,
Madame President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council, and to pledge our full support to you. I would
also like to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Nawaf Salam of Lebanon and his team for their
excellent conduct of our work in September.

Brazil stands in solidarity with the aspirations
expressed by the populations of many Arab countries
for greater political participation, economic
opportunities, freedom and dignity. We have
consistently called on the countries concerned to
address such aspirations through dialogue and
meaningful reforms, and to refrain from the use of
force against peaceful demonstrators. Brazil has
unequivocally condemned human rights violations
wherever they occur.

The situation in Syria is of great concern to us.
Brazil has voiced this concern publicly and in our
conversations with the Syrian authorities, individually
and alongside our India-Brazil-South-Africa (IBSA)
partners. We have called for violence to cease and
humanitarian access to be granted.

Brazil has supported the establishment by the
Human Rights Council of a commission of inquiry,
which will be chaired by a Brazilian national. We hope
that the Syrian authorities will cooperate with the
commission. We take note of the initiatives announced
by the Syrian Government, including measures aimed
at reforming the political system and the release of
political prisoners. Such initiatives, however, cannot
attain their goal if violence continues.

We appreciate the efforts made by the sponsors of
this draft resolution (S/201 1/612) to take different
views into account, but we would have wished that
further efforts had been made to muster broader
support before it was put to the vote. Because of
Syria's centrality to stability in the region, it is all the
more important that the Council be able to act with
caution, and preferably with a single voice. We are
convinced that more time would have allowed for
differences to be bridged and for legitimate concerns to
be accommodated. We regret that this was not the case.

Brazil firmly believes that meaningful and
inclusive national dialogue, leading to effective
political reform, is the only way out of the current
crisis in Syria. We encourage the League of Arab States
to continue to play a constructive role through its
diplomatic efforts. Both collectively and individually,
Brazil will continue to advocate for a political
engagement that can effectively bear fruit and pave the
way for a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria.

