Mr. Patifio Aroca (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Argentina for the invitation
extended to the Government of Ecuador to take part
in today's important event. We are honoured by the
fact that you, Madam President, are presiding over a
body of this nature with the great ability, leadership
and strength you show as President of the Argentine
Republic.

During the recent summit of the Common Market
of the South (MERCOSUR) that took place on 12 July
in Montevideo, the States convened resolved to "request
Argentina to submit the matter of the massive espionage
case uncovered by Edward Snowden for consideration
by the Security Council". They also resolved to
"demand that those responsible for those actions
immediately cease therefrom and provide explanations
of their motivations and their consequences". In similar
terms, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America spoke at the last Guayaquil, summit which was
held just five days ago, when it was decided to "warn
the international community about the seriousness of
these actions, which imply a threat to the security and
peaceful coexistence among our States".

This takes place in a context where undoubtedly
Latin American regional authorities are assuming a
growing role when it comes to collective security, which
was commendibly cited by you, Madam President,
and by my colleagues in their earlier statements.
Accordingly, I will not refer to matters already covered
in statements that, to no one's surprise, are designed
to honour Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which brings us here today.

In compliance with the MERCOSUR agreement
referred to previously, which we endorse, I would like
to make the following statement.

Just a few weeks ago, the world saw a sequence
of events more akin to a Cold War spy novel than to
modern times. On 5 June, leaks began to appear in
publications in major global media outlets, leaks that
were mixed with almost deathly intent and unspooled
as a reality show before global public opinion. The
leaks came from a former 29-year-old American analyst
who sought to escape deportation to his country, where
he would be tried for those leaks. After a journey that
began in Hong Kong and was supposed to end in Latin
America, today, it seems to have stopped, but it may not
yet have completely run its course, despite the granting
of asylum by Russia.

During those few days in June, we saw the size
and the discretional nature of a massive surveillance
apparatus that suddenly brought all the inhabitants of
the planet closer than ever to an Orwellian nightmare.
Although at first it appeared to be a simple matter of
wiretapping, it was later discovered that there was
discretionary monitoring of emails. While it seemed
initially that the apparatus was being used in operations
against organized crime, later we learned that it was
also being used to gain advantage in trade negotiations
with other countries. If we once thought that they were
simply looking at unaffected States, we now know that
everyone - absolutely everyone: debtors and creditors,
friends and enemies, South and North - is considered
a usual suspect by the authorities of the United States of
America. Now we know that our communications are
permanently monitored by them.

No one knows yet if Mr. Snowden will once again
manage to leak information that he claims to possess.
Of course, it seems that he will not do it when he is in
Russia. In any case, the wounds opened by those events
should be assessed within the main multilateral forums.
They deserve to be so because not only do they reflect
an unacceptable imbalances in the global governance
system, which in no case would help to build a climate
of trust and cooperation between countries, and, in
the final analysis, a climate of peace among nations.
They deserve to be assessed because we have also have
moved dangerously close to the limits set out by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

The imbalances to which I refer are clear - the
United States, like any other countries, has the need
to deal with demands related to its national security, it
goes without saying, but those legitimate demands must
be dealt with in a way that does not affect the rights of
individuals or indeed the sovereignty of other nations.
That is to say, limits must be set. However, we are now
faced with the fact that any limits there may have been
have vanished. The national security of the United
States has been placed above all universal moral values.

Such a drive has meant that the principles of equality
and non-interference in the affairs of States, established
in the Westphalia peace agreement, have now vanished
into thin air. The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has been violated. The rights to the privacy
of correspondence - article 12 - and to freedom of
expression and opinon - article 19 - the rights of all
citizens of the world, including United States citizens,
have been trampled in the name of a greater goal, that
is, national security f or rather, for the sake of the
profits of the national security industry.

Where are the limits, really? Has the time not
come for the Council to take up this question again and
discuss it? In the end, does this not pose a threat to
global peace? What mutual trust could possibly exist
among nations under such circumstances? We believe
that the time has come for the United Nations to face up
to this matter responsibly.

As we have seen with the disappearance of such
limits, this situation threatens to build walls between
our countries. If it has not done so already, it could
also affect international cooperation against organized
crime; strangely enough, there is even the possibility that
trade negotiations could be disrupted. Paradoxically,
even the very national security of the United States will
suffer from the increase in global mistrust generated by
massive espionage.

The events to which I have referred have also
revealed other very disturbing realities. To start
off with, it has re-ignited the debate on the right to
asylum, which all human beings have, as enshrined in
international law, as well as the ability of any sovereign
State to grant it. This is a right that is granted to avoid
fear of political persecution; its legitimacy can only
be determined by the country granting it. Let us also
remember its peaceful and humanitarian nature, which
cannot in any case be described as unfriendly towards
any other State, as established in General Assembly
resolution 2312 (XXII), on territorial asylum. I should
also like to quote Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the case at hand:

"Snowden's case has shown the need to protect
persons disclosing information on matters that
have implications for human rights, as well as the
importance of ensuring respect for the right to
privacy."

Leaders, who should be giving explanations and
facing up to the debate on the limits of what we are
discussing, have instead launched a crusade against
the right to asylum - a full-on diplomatic offensive
against countries that have taken to the global stage to
show interest in such an important case. States to the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
(ALBA), have been under pressure, simply because
they are considering a request for asylum. All those
countries have have signed the 1954 Caracas Convention
on Territorial Asylum, which is perhaps one of the most
important instruments of the Inter-American human
rights system.

The day the United States signs that treaty - even
the day it ratifies the San Jose' pact, one ofthe foundations
of the Inter-American system of human rights - we
will be closer to seeing that country adhere to the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, and it will
become a part ofa group of equal nations, committed to
complying with international law.

Instead of joining this group, we find ourselves
with a country that prefers to lunge forwards and blame
the messanger in order to cloud the message. The final
result was that a group of countries decided to endanger
the life of the President of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, forcing him and his entourage to make an
emergency landing in violation of international norms
governing respectful relations among nations.
It is not the revelation of the offence that threatens
the climate of understanding among nations, it is the
offence itself. In a fragile world where armed conflicts
are barely affected by international pressure, such
actions do not help generate trust but tension.

I would like to conclude with two comments.

First, the Government of Ecuador fully supports
the request of the Bolivian Government that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights conduct an exhaustive investigation into the
unjustifiable treatment suffered by President Evo
Morales Ayma during his trip from Moscow to La Paz.

Secondly, massive global, discretionary and
unlimited surveillance must stop. It is for the Security
Council to urgently make that demand of one of its
permanent members, since, theoretically, it is up to this
body to maintain peace on our planet. That, too, is the
demand of Latin America, a zone of peace that, through
organizations such as MERCOSUR and ALBA, has
demanded an end to those practices. It is also required
by the spirit of coexistence, which inspired the drafting
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is also the appeal
of billions of people in the world who understand that
any action that aims to ensure the security of a country
has its limits, which are the human rights of everyone
on the planet.

