The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

Like previous speakers, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2002/1126) and to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his informative
briefing.

My Government welcomes the holding of
municipal elections in a fair and peaceful manner. The
Chinese delegation takes note of the fact that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is developing a set of progress
indicators to allow it to track the achievement of
benchmarks and to highlight areas where efforts need
to be intensified. Further efforts will focus on engaging
the municipal level following the municipal elections.

At the same time, we also note that the Kosovo
Assembly rejected the proposals of the minority
representatives for the law on higher education. The
Secretary-General expresses his regret at this, and we
hope that this matter will be handled appropriately so
as to protect the rights and interests of the minorities in
a practical manner.

On the matter of elections, my delegation
endorses the Secretary-General's assessment, in
paragraph 49 of his report, that elections are only the
first step. Meaningful participation in elective bodies at
the central and local levels by all communities in
Kosovo is an important element in ensuring not only
successful governance, but also that Government
provides good services to all communities. It is in this
sense that we express our concern over the low turnout
of Kosovo Serbs. We hope that UNMIK will take
effective measures to ensure that Governments at the
central and local levels will safeguard the interests of
minorities.

As Mr. Guehenno and all speakers here have
pointed out, Kosovo still has a long way to go towards
national reconciliation. The Chinese delegation will
continue to follow closely developments in the
situation in Kosovo. We look forward to the Security
Council's mission to Kosovo, to be led by Ambassador
Kolby, and we anticipate fruitful results from it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now call on the representative of Yugoslavia.

