The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We would first like to commend and acknowledge
the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to congratulate him on
his persistent efforts to work for peace in the terrible
conflict that the people of Syria have endured.

Today the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
voted in favour of resolution 2268 (2016), adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, in the belief that
the text reaffirms the view that a solution to the armed
conflict in the country must be political, peaceful and
negotiated. My country will support any measures
aimed at building confidence and peace. In that regard,
we welcome the announcement that a cessation of
hostilities is just about to take effect, and we hope
that all the parties involved will comply strictly with
the agreement. We are pleased that the stakeholders
who possess influence on the crisis in Syria are
displaying the political will needed to pave the way to
the peace that the Syrian people long for. We must act
decisively, and we believe that this quest for a space
in which to dialogue that has motivated the Russian
and United States delegations is an encouraging sign
in support to the efforts of the United Nations, Special
Envoy De Mistura and the Security Council.

We would like to express our appreciation and
support for the diplomatic efforts to achieve a firm
and lasting peace in Syria by all the parties involved.
We also welcome Mr. De Mistura's announcement of
a resumption of intra-Syrian peace talks scheduled for
7 March, and we hope they will include representatives
of every sector and group involved in the conflict and in
fighting terrorism. We are aware that identifying shared
elements that will enable the groundwork for political
negotiations to be laid is a difficult task, but it is a highly
important one that will require the commitment of all
parties if we are to make concrete progress in helping
the people of Syria. We reiterate our call for peace
negotiations to continue without preconditions so as to
enable the Syrian people to overcome the tragedy of the
war that has made them victims of the actions of the
armed groups and terrorists operating in their country.

We have said since the beginning that, in order to
end the war, the peace process must include all parties
and that the Government of President Bashar al-Assad
must be recognized in this resolution. Venezuela
believes that the legitimate Government of President
Al-Assad is a key actor in the political equation of the
solution of the conflict. Excluding it from the talks
would be condemning them to failure. We also believe
that the Security Council has no authority to rule on the
legitimacy of the Syrian Government. That is up to the
people of Syria alone, and is a matter of respect for the
sovereignty of each country and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The people of Syria have their reaffirmed political
independence with the assistance of the international
community, free of foreign interference and imposed
solutions that favour interests other than their own.
In that regard, Venezuela reiterates its support for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, as well as its right to self-
determination, in accordance with international law,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

The solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
closely linked to the cessation ofhostilities. We therefore
welcome the fact that in recent days humanitarian
assistance has reached at least part of the population in
urgent need of food and medicine. We understand that
it is not enough and, as we have said, much more must
be done in the humanitarian context. Nevertheless, this
concern is included in paragraph 6 of the resolution and
enjoys the support of the International Syria Support
Group. We hope that all parties will allow the end to the
siege of hundreds of thousands of people.

As has been agreed, the cessation of hostilities
does not apply to terrorist groups that are bleeding
Syria dry, such as Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State
in Iraq and Al-Sham. It is important to note that the
Syrian Government, with the support of the Russian
Federation, is tirelessly fighting the aforementioned
terrorist organizations and their associates. These
terrorist groups threaten international peace and
security by expanding their actions to other countries
of the Middle East, North Africa and other regions.
The international community must provide its full
support to the Syrian authorities and all groups fighting
the scourge of terrorism. In this context, efforts must
be redoubled to prevent the financing, training and
transfer of weapons to these groups, as well as their
use and encouragement as instruments to overthrow
Governments in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.

Finally, our country will remain committed to
achieving a peace in Syria that will bring an end
to this dreadful conflict on the basis of a political
negotiated solution under the leadership of the Syrian
people, its Government and the institutions, thereby
guaranteeing the sovereignty and independence of that
kindred country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

