Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. We are confident
that your wisdom and skill will ensure success for your
presidency. I cannot fail to express our appreciation to
the Ambassador of France for his presidency of the
Security Council last month.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report on the issue under consideration today, and to his
Representative for the statement he made this morning.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
sisterly country of Djibouti for the efforts made on behalf
of our brothers the Somali people to overcome the crisis
in Somalia and for creating the necessary environment to
set up the Transitional National Government (TNG).
Finally, I am duty-bound to welcome the Prime Minister
of the Transitional National Government and the
delegation accompanying him, as they represent the State
of Somalia.

We take part in the Security Council's meeting
today to express our support to sisterly Somalia and its
people. We also express, together with all other Arab
States, our concern that Somalia become again a
united, fully sovereign and independent State able to
defend the Vital interests of the Somali people,
following the attempts by evil forces - external and
internal - to tear apart the social and political fabric
of its society and destroy its economic infrastructure.

We consider our support for the Transitional
National Government a priority for achieving unity and
comprehensive reconciliation with a View to re-
establishing stability and security and reconstructing
the country. We urge the Security Council in particular,
and the United Nations in general, as well as the
international community, to ensure that this matter is
taken up seriously, proceeding from the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

Such attention may solve some problems in
Somalia. However, translating concern into
programmes requires large financial allocations. We
hope that Arab States will be able to cover some of
these financial needs. In this regard, however, we
would recall the responsibility of the international
community to stand in solidarity with other States and
to provide financial assistance to Somalia, when
required, in order to enable it to fulfil its duty towards
its people. Allow me to repeat our call for a redoubling
of efforts to provide immediate assistance so as to
enable Somalia to reconstruct and rehabilitate its
society and re-establish stability and security.

The appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Representative for Somalia responsible for following
the developments of the Somali situation in all its
aspects, in coordination with the Transitional National
Government, the neighbouring States and regional and
international organizations, will surely help solve some
of the principal problems in Somalia, particularly those
relating to the parties that remain outside the circle of
national unity. It should also help in reinforcing State
institutions, through the provision of financial and
technical assistance from specialized agencies and funds.

The Government of Somalia, today more than at
any time in the past, must be dealt with through an
honest approach that is far removed from the maze of
international political sensitivities, international
polarization and narrow interests. Dealing with
Somalia at the international level, particularly at the
United Nations, in a neutral, unbiased and objective
manner, distanced from the sensitivities of the recent
past - and we trust that it shall be thus - will provide
impetus towards unifying Somali society, following a
comprehensive reconciliation. We believe that the
current Transitional National Government in Somalia is
working towards this objective.

Giving the Prime Minister of Somalia the
opportunity to speak to the Security Council today and,
indeed, the very holding of this open debate to allow
Member States, and Arab States in particular, to
express their points of View, are in themselves positive
developments. We hope that the Council will continue
dealing with similar humanitarian situations in the
same way, the solution of which may well contribute to
international peace and security.

After having heard the statements made by some
members of the Security Council today, we felt a clear
sense of hesitation. The reasons cited call, we believe,
rather for Council's intervention, not reluctance and
hesitation in taking a position. As the Ambassador of
the Libyan Arab J amahiriya said this morning, insisting
on the need to hesitate will not help to solve Somalia's
problem, but merely add to its deterioration. We
therefore express the hope that the Council will adopt a
more positive position so as to assist the Transitional
National Government and the Somali people to
overcome their problems and difficulties.

