Mr. Sezibera (Rwanda): I address the Security
Council today on behalf of His Excellency President
Paul Kagame, who was invited in his capacity as
Chairperson of the African Union to contribute to this
important discussion, which will help us highlight
the threat posed by mercenary activities to peace and
stability in our region. I bring the Council his greetings
and good wishes for the success of this meeting.

I also take this opportunity, on behalf of President
Kagame, to congratulate His Excellency President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and the Government of
Equatorial Guinea as they steer the work of the Security
Council for the month of February. You, Sir, can count
on the active support of the African Union and Rwanda
during your presidency. You represent our common
goal to achieve substantial progress in promoting peace
and prosperity in Africa and all over the world.

The issue of mercenaries has a long history in Africa
and has presented a grave threat to the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States.
In reaction to that threat, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) established the Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, as adopted by
the Heads of State and Government of OAU member
States in 1977. The term "mercenaries" at that time
was used to refer to persons recruited locally or abroad
to fight for financial or material gain. However, that
definition, including the mercenary activities covered
in the 1977 Convention, may no longer be adequate to
describe mercenary activities in Africa today.

It is important to make a distinction between
the role played by providers of military and security
services that are operating within a clear national
legal framework and mercenary groups that are
operating clandestinely to provide military support to
groups determined to destabilize constitutional order
and authority.

Mercenaries are part of a worrisome increase in
the incidence of transboundary criminal networks,
some of which are well financed and have sophisticated
communication and military equipment, and many of
which are connected to global terrorist networks. The
Council is aware that Rwanda is among the countries of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
that have been victims of such cross-border terrorist
networks, as reported to the Council in document
S/2018/1133. It is for that reason that the Council can
count on our full support for the objectives you, Sir,
have outlined for this meeting.

Mercenaries today are not only involved in active
combat; we now see an increase in cyberattacks and
industrial espionage carried out by mercenary groups
from the comfort of their homes. They continue to evolve
and innovate. We cannot, and should not, be static in our
response. Therefore, the existing policy frameworks of
the African Union and of the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries of 1989 need to be updated in order for
them to cope with emerging realities. For its part, the
African Union will review the 1977 Convention with a
View to further strengthening its provisions.

In conclusion, to address and neutralize the
threat of mercenary activities in Africa, we must take
robust measures to deal with this persistent source of
instability on our continent. Only a collective and well-
coordinated approach at the regional and international
levels will allow us to end the phenomenon of mercenary
activity by disrupting its financial networks and cross-
border recruitment, thereby defeating its operations.

I thank the President again for his decision to raise

awareness of this critical matter.

