Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I wish to start by
thanking the Algerian presidency for convening this
important meeting. I would also like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, for the way he conducted
the Security Council mission to the Central African
region. The mission spoke with one voice, and there
was teamwork. The leaders of the region whom we met
were very attentive to the messages that the Council
had to deliver.

The Council mission took place at a crucial
moment, as the sustainability of peace and stability in
both Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will depend mostly on the achievements to be
reached by the main national actors and by the
international community during this transition period.
Last week, Ambassador de La Sabliere spoke on the
positive developments in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as on the difficulties
facing this process in those countries.
My delegation is deeply concerned at the
developments in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In our opinion, the countries of
the region should avoid any action contrary to the spirit
of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on the Great Lakes,
which states that the countries of the Great Lakes
region "fully support the national peace process in the
region and refrain from any acts, statements or
attitudes likely to negatively impact them, including
through the media".

When the mission visited Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the issue of the ex-
Far/Interahamwe was fully discussed at the appropriate

level, as all Council members have previously stated.
In both countries those forces were recognized as a
source of instability in the region - and they are.
There is, therefore, a common understanding on the
need to find a solution to the ex-Far/Interahamwe
issue, one independent of the perception of each of the
countries and of the Security Council. In our opinion,
the long-lasting solution to this issue should be found
through dialogue and the operationalization of the
existing bilateral and multilateral mechanisms, such as
the Joint Verification Mechanism and the tripartite
agreement, and in full respect of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of the countries of the
region.

Other factors that concur for the same objective
are the ongoing enhancement of the presence of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
east of that country; the development by the Congolese
authorities of the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement plan, to be
supported by MONUC in particular; and the ongoing
"Walungu operation", a joint exercise of the Congolese
Armed Forces and MONUC aimed at repatriating
Rwandan armed elements.

The use of legal instruments such as an arms
embargo, and a more proactive attitude on the part of
the international community with regard to the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, which has been
referred to here very vividly by the Ambassador of
Pakistan - and we support his idea - will also
contribute to the same purpose.

The countries of the region should, therefore,
refrain from any action that may only exacerbate an
already volatile situation and fuel tension among local
communities.

Regarding Burundi, it is important that the
international community adopt a concerted position on
the FNL (Rwasa) question, in conformity with the
position of the countries of the region that classify the
FNL as a terrorist group.

Everything possible should be done to ensure that
the elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi will constitute a new source of hope
and not the beginning of another cycle of violence. It
is, therefore, important that the holding of elections not
be considered an end in itself. The question of power-
sharing in the post-electoral period should be central to
the political strategy of the two countries.

My delegation particularly appreciates the
importance given to the regional dimension in these
discussions. We are dealing with countries that have
more to share than to divide them, taking into account
their history and the traditional ties of their people.
Burundi's request to join the bilateral and trilateral
mechanisms created by Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda deserves the
attention of the countries concerned, as well as that of
our Council.

Good examples of the past, such as the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries, are a source
of inspiration for the countries' confidence-building
process at the present stage. In this connection, the
recommendations made by the multidisciplinary
mission to the region, led by Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh two years ago, are of great
importance and require due implementation.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the
recommendations set out in the mission's report. They
contain elements that will help our Council to continue
to work jointly with the authorities of the countries and
with the regional and subregional authorities. This will
render the usefulness of our mission more relevant and
timely than ever.

