Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Your personal
presence here today, President Aliyev, is an expression
of the importance your nation attaches to the global
fight against the scourge of terrorism. My delegation
welcomes you to the Council today and thanks you for
presiding over this meeting. We also wish to
acknowledge the presence of the various high-level
delegations around the table today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

Terrorism remains a perennial threat to the world,
and we believe it is apt for the Council continually to
reassess the wide array of counter-terrorism measures
at its disposal. South Africa condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. The killing of innocent
civilians is never acceptable. We are firmly committed
to addressing the threat posed by international
terrorism through multilateral forums and in
accordance with human rights, international law and
the United Nations Charter.

The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
coordinating international efforts to fight the deadly
scourge of terrorism. It is important that Member
States pool their resources in combating terrorism
globally, and the multilateral system should be
strengthened to deal with those efforts. We should also
avoid the temptation to create parallel structures
outside of the United Nations, which results in
duplication, competition and the depletion of limited
resources that could have been used to reinforce United
Nations counter-terrorism global strategies.

South Africa is of the view that terrorism cannot
be defeated militarily or unilaterally. There is an urgent
need to focus on the deep-seated root causes of
terrorism and to develop collaborative strategies to
tackle the challenges of terrorism. In that regard,
concerted and sustained efforts must be reinforced in
order to resolve terrorism-related conflicts in all parts
of the globe.

We are concerned about the uncontrolled spread
of arms and ammunition in the Sahel region, emanating
from the Libyan conflict. That is directly related to the
increase in terrorism activities and transnational
organized crime in the Sahel and West African regions,
which present a threat to peace and security and
undermine efforts made thus far towards achieving
democracy, peace and stability. The global campaign
against terrorism should also include a worldwide joint
commitment to eradicating poverty and socio-economic
underdevelopment. Countermeasures can never be
sustainable if those factors are not addressed in relation
to counter-terrorism initiatives.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a useful and flexible collective
platform for guiding the international community's
response to terrorism. It provides a holistic and
multifaceted response to the challenge that is premised
on respect for human rights and the rule of law. The
Strategy recognizes that it is important to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism not
only in their own right, but also as part of an effective
anti-terrorism strategy. Furthermore, the strategy builds
on the international consensus that terrorism cannot be
ascribed to any particular religion or culture.
South Africa is convinced that international
efforts to support counter-terrorism initiatives have a
better chance of success if they also focus on regional
cooperation and coordination. It is up to all countries
and subregions to contextualize the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and to make it meaningful for
themselves as they address the diverse range of local
actors required for its successful implementation. A
one-size-fits-all approach would not work.

In that regard, we acknowledge the joint
initiatives of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force designed to strengthen regional cooperation
in the implementation of the Strategy, and their close
cooperation with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. We also appreciate the technical assistance
and cooperation that are offered to those countries and
regional organizations that need to address challenges
related to terrorism.

There should be greater interaction and
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
Security Council in order to ensure that actions taken
by the different structures in countering terrorism are
complementary, and not competitive or duplicative.
South Africa has taken note of the review of the
existing United Nations structures to combat terrorism
and the recent announcement made by the Secretary-
General regarding the appointment of a counter-
terrorism coordinator. In creating such an office, it is
important that the mandate and scope of the coordinator
be clarified, as should be the relationship between the
coordinator and existing United Nations structures
dealing with terrorism, each of which has its own
specific mandate. My delegation is of the view that the
creation of any new office should be measured against
its contribution to facilitating international efforts to
combat terrorism rather than duplicating existing
structures or placing additional burdens on Member
States, especially those from the developing world.

Building on existing international solidarity and
cooperation is the key to progress in addressing the
scourge of terrorism. It is therefore important that we
continue our efforts to finalize the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism by reaching
agreement on a definition of terrorism. We encourage
delegations to participate in activities aimed at
finalizing the draft convention, including discussions
on submitting a draft resolution.
As stressed in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, respect for human rights is
an essential element of our counter-terrorism efforts. It
is not possible to claim the moral high ground while
abusing basic human rights and compromising laws in
the interests of political expediency. We cannot remain
silent where rights are ignored and individuals are
subjected to unlawful detention, torture and
assassination. The Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
should be supported.

Security Council sanctions have to be capable of
withstanding legal scrutiny, including on the question
of due process. We therefore welcome efforts to create
fair and transparent procedures to be used in listing and
de-listing processes. Similarly, the Office of the
Ombudsperson, with the support of the members of the
Security Council, is playing a significant role in
strengthening the legitimacy and credibility of the
work of the sanctions committees.

In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that the
United Nations counter-terrorism agenda should place
a particular focus on the deep-seated socio-economic
and political disparities that are the breeding ground
for the spread of the terrorism in different parts of the
world. We also want to express our support for the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of
today's meeting.

