Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, let
me congratulate Lithuania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. We
offer our thanks and congratulations to the Lithuanian
delegation for placing this important item on the agenda
and for the comprehensive concept note (S/2014/74, annex) it prepared, which outlines key elements for the
discussion today. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his substantive report on the issue (S/2013/689), as
well as the briefers for the information and insights
they have again imparted.

As a member of the Human Security Network,
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
this afternoon on behalf of the Network by the
representative of Slovenia.

For a number of years, we have discussed in this
Chamber the subject of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. A number of Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements on the issue
have been adopted. Yet, regrettably, we still see today
an alarming number of civilian casualties, including,
unfortunately, women and children, in many areas
plagued with armed conflict.

Since today's debate focuses on enhancing the
protection offered by United Nations peacekeeping
missions, which is one of the five core challenges to
the protection of civilians highlighted by the Secretary-
General, I shall keep my statement within that scope.

First, the following principles are now well
established. It is the State that has the primary
responsibility to protect its citizens. All parties to
armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Leaders of
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates need
to understand clearly their mandates and priorities
derived from the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Likewise, military and police personnel and other troop
components at all levels in the chain of command need
to be fully informed and understand their mandates and
responsibilities. It is therefore essential that Member
States and the United Nations work closely to ensure
that those key elements are communicated to, received
and implemented by all those involved in such missions.

Secondly, it is essential that there be a common
understanding of peacekeeping mission protection
mandates by the relevant actors, namely, host countries,
troop- and police-contributing countries, parties to
the conflict, military and police personnel and other
protection actors. A clear and comprehensive United
Nations policy guidance codifying protection-of-
civilians mandates needs to be developed and revised
as needed. The guidance can be developed through an
exchange of information, experiences, best practices
and lessons learned among peacekeepers in the field, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries,
host Governments and other actors. With that type of
clear guidance, a mission's planning process, strategy
development and translation into systematic operation
on the ground can be more effective. In turn, the
mission's ability to protect civilians will be enhanced
and be more effective.

Thirdly, intensive predeployment and periodic
in-mission training, both on operational tasks and other
protection-related elements, is vital. Those elements
include, inter alia, international law, gender-based
issues and cultural sensitivity. Tailor-made training
courses for military, police and civilian personnel in
response to different situations on the ground also
need to be developed through close consultations and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
contributing countries.

Fourthly, peacekeeping missions with
protection-of-civilians mandates are often conducted
with insufficient resources or with a lack of capacity or
both, which ultimately compromises their operational
ability to protect civilians. Therefore, the assessment
of threats to civilians must be incorporated into any
mission strategy, structure and resources before
mandating missions, so that they can be designed
properly and resources allocated accordingly.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General,
who, in his report, states that the informal expert group
on the protection of civilians is a valuable forum that
can provide the Council with information, analysis
and options on situations involving serious protection
concerns. The Council should consider making full use
of that body.

The protection of civilians is an important task that
allows for no compromise, so when the Council gives
missions the protection mandate and if we expect them
to perform their duties successfully, we must do our
utmost to support them. We must provide them with
adequate resources and equip them with the necessary
capacities.

In conclusion, I wish to thank and congratulate
Lithuania once again for continuing to focus attention
on this important issue. Let me reiterate that, in
Thailand's view, durable peace is not tenable if civilians
lack security and are not safe. Furthermore, attacks
on civilians, whether deliberate or indiscriminate, are
unacceptable. Those who commit such crimes must be
held accountable.

