Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I am pleased to join the Council for today's
debate. This provides me the first opportunity, since I
took office several weeks ago as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, to take part in a debate of the
Council and thereby renew the political support of my
Government for this body.

Moreover, the issue that we have gathered here
today to address - the future of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) - holds
a special place in our own foreign policy agenda.
MINUSTAH is the only peacekeeping operation in our
region - Latin America and the Caribbean - and,
as a troop-contributing country, we feel a deep sense
of connection with the people and the Government of
Haiti.

We thank the Russian Federation for having
convened this debate, and we commend the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nigel Fisher, and all the staff of MINUSTAH for
the important work they are doing in Haiti in the face of
major challenges. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2013/139), which informs our debate
today.

We have mixed reactions to the content of the
report. On the one hand, it reports gradual progress
in certain areas and presents us, in the annex, with
an encouraging plan for the period 2013-2016. On
the other hand, we note with concern the persistent
uncertainty surrounding the pending elections, which
are 16 months overdue. We note also that there is a lack
of political consensus for a national unity dialogue and
that, as the report stresses, rule-of-law initiatives have
yet to produce significant and sustainable change. For
instance, the Haitian National Police is not yet in a
position to assume full responsibility for the provision
of security throughout the country, and food insecurity
poses a serious threat to social stability.

More specifically, we note, first, that the key
short-term priority is the holding of local, municipal
and legislative elections. Postponing them yet again
could jeopardize the Haitian rule of law. That is why
we welcomed the Security Council's press statement of
28 January 2013 (SC/10901), and we call once again for
the urgent holding of credible, inclusive and transparent
elections, in accordance with the Constitution. We
note with appreciation the recent designation by
the legislative branch of its representatives to the
transitional college of the permanent electoral council.
We hope that this process will be completed as soon
as possible and that, once established, it will show the
necessary independence.

Secondly, we support the development of a
political agreement, and we are concerned that key
decision-making on the issue is being undermined
by the lack of consensus at the national level. In
Guatemala, our Government has been able to work
in an inclusive manner through the identification of
shared priorities and by obtaining commitments from
major stakeholders for the approval of an agreement
for justice and security in Guatemala. My country is
prepared to share its experience in that regard with the
sisterly Republic of Haiti.

Thirdly, we agree with the Secretary-General that in
order to reverse the rising trend of major crime in Haiti,
especially those mentioned earlier by the Republic of
Korea, including sexual violence against women and
children, it is important that the Government continue
to strengthen rule-of-law institutions and step up its
efforts to combat impunity. The establishment of sound
rule-of-law institutions, including the police and the
judiciary, requires that they be allowed to operate as
independently as possible.

Fourthly, we continue to be concerned about the
situation of the more than 300,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) living in camps. We encourage the
Government, with the support of the international
community, to improve conditions in the remaining IDP
camps and to continue advancing with reconstruction
efforts.

In addition, I wish to express our full support for
the Secretary-General's initiative of 11 December 2012
for the elimination of cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we
deem particularly suitable the appointment of Dr. Paul
Farmer, as the Secretary-General's Special Adviser
for Community-based Medicine and Lessons from
Haiti. Let me also express our satisfaction at the recent
signing of the new integrated strategic framework for
the period 2013-2016. In that context, we are concerned
that last year's Haiti's flash appeal is still far from
meeting its goals.

Turning now to the consolidation plan, we welcome
the concise version that we have received, which is
still being examined by our national authorities. We
note the natural assumption that the Mission marks
2016 as its horizon. While that assumption is a step
in the right direction, we believe that the criteria to
be taken into account for an exit strategy include the
objective conditions that will enable the United Nations
to withdraw responsibly from the country. Those
conditions for the strategy need to be flexible and
adapted to the realities on the ground in Haiti.

In that respect, we would refer to paragraph 17 ofthe
annex to the report of the Secretary-General. We have
some doubts about the usefulness of projecting figures
involving uniformed personnel, and their budgetary
implications, on the basis of hypothetical scenarios.
Therefore, we would appreciate more information about
the criteria used to propose a 30 per cent drawdown,
since the implementation of such a proposal could be
premature in relation to the realities on the ground. We
make this point because we deem it very important that
MINUSTAH be provided with adequate resources to
fulfil its mandate.

Likewise, we think that there is a sequence that
must be corrected with regard to the mandate of
MINUSTAH, since the budget is approved in May and
the mandate is renewed in October. A more logical
approach would be for the mandate to determine
the budget, and not the other way around. With the
consolidation plan still under development and as we
cannot be certain of electoral logistical requirements,
we trust that there will not be any further reductions in
the number of uniformed personnel.

Finally, we believe that progress in Haiti will
depend on the convergence of several factors: adequate
resources; the effective leadership of MINUSTAH;
and the political will of Haiti, the country hosting, and
benefiting from the support of, the Mission. We deem
the latter - the political will and the political efforts of
the Haitian Government - the most important.

If the necessary basis for such convergence is
lacking, then any involvement of the United Nations will
face major obstacles, both in terms of achieving success
and of maintaining a secure environment. Guatemala
is proud to have been part of MINUSTAH since its
inception, and we will continue our commitment to
the people and the Government of Haiti as long as
necessary.

