Mr. Muita (Kenya): I thank you for giving me
the opportunity to address the Council on a matter that
Kenya considers to be crucial to peace and security in
Africa. My country commends the Federal Republic of
Nigeria not only for having highlighted an important
subject, but also for its robust role in enhancing
preventive diplomacy on the African continent.

In their efforts to promote peace and security,
African leaders have been mindful of the need for the
support of the international community. Consequently,
the African Union Peace and Security Council protocol
mandates that Council to cooperate with the United
Nations Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the relevant United Nations
agencies and international organizations.

In this regard, Africa has taken the lead in
addressing conflicts in the continent and beyond by
deploying peacekeeping and mediation missions in
order both to maintain peace and security and to protect
civilian populations. Africa is ready and willing to
assume greater responsibility in that respect. However,
there are many challenges that face the continent in
implementing preventive diplomacy. In that context, we
are encouraged to note that the Secretary-General has
underscored the necessity for a close strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union and has given direction on mechanisms and
processes to be put in place so as to enhance this
critical endeavour. The United Nations Office for West
Africa is a good example of this partnership.

In the same spirit, we welcome the recent
establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union in Addis Ababa. The new integrated
Office will go a long way in coordinating peace and
security issues between the two organizations. We
commend the critical role played by the Department of
Political Affairs in strengthening this strategic
partnership.

Africa has long remained a continent prone to
strife. Endemic warfare has impacted negatively on the
continent's socio-economic development agenda,
laying fertile ground for further conflicts. In addition, a
vicious cycle has been created that serves to banish the
continent to perpetual underdevelopment. Promoting
economic development is therefore a vital tool for
enhancing preventive diplomacy.

The causes of conflict in Africa are numerous.
However, at the heart of many of these is the
competition for resources that are scarce because of
underdevelopment. If one throws in the effects of
climate change on the continent's socio-economic
environment, one finds a recipe for turmoil that is all
too common.

Other challenges to peace and security include
inequality, ethnic tensions and governance shortcomings.
The strengthening of governance institutions is
particularly cardinal in efforts to enhance preventive
diplomacy, especially as the conduct of credible
elections is concerned.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
in preventing conflict has proved invaluable in Africa.
Regional bodies such as the East African Community,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern Africa Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States have on
various occasions intervened in a timely manner and
averted what could potentially have been catastrophic
disasters. The place of regional organizations is unique
in this regard and should be recognized and supported.
We should nurture and encourage them to continue in
this role.

Indeed, Africa has its own unique mechanisms for
the settlement and prevention of disputes, and these
local solutions are best placed to deal with conflicts
across the whole continent. What ails these regional
institutions is the lack of capacity, including resources.
The international community can contribute to the
prevention of conflicts on the continent by helping
existing regional mechanisms to better deal with the
situations that arise. In that way, local ownership of
these processes will be enhanced.

Leadership on the continent has evolved over the
years to embrace the values of democracy and good
governance. The realization of these core values, as
well as respect for human rights and the end to
impunity, are all prerequisites for sustainable peace and
development that have helped the continent move
forward. These values should continue to be promoted
and be thoroughly embedded in social and political life
on the continent in order to ensure lasting peace and
pre-empt the outbreak of conflict.
20

In conclusion, it is a fact that the African Union
and regional organizations have made considerable
sacrifices in responding to urgent demands for
peacekeeping and mediation. This has been done
despite such challenges as the lack of sufficient
resources. It is imperative that the question of
predicable and sustained resource availability be
addressed to bolster conflict prevention mechanisms.

I would strongly urge, therefore, that the United
Nations and the international community invest more
in conflict prevention mechanisms in order to save the
huge amount of resources, both capital and human, that
is expended in addressing fully fledged conflicts.

