Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the United States for arranging this timely and
important meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Nakamitsu for the introduction to the subject.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
definitely a growing threat to international peace and
security. Having looked around the table - before I
begin my formal statement - I would like to say that
I cannot help but reflect on the composition of the
Security Council. We have Ukraine and Kazakhstan,
which have scrapped nuclear weapons; we have Bolivia
and Uruguay, from a continent free from such weapons;
we have the five countries that possess such weapons;
and Japan, the only country that has experienced their
destructive force and power. It therefore seems to me
that this ought to be the perfect group of countries to
move forward on this particular issue.

For close to half a century, Sweden has been a
champion of disarmament and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. As so clearly articulated
by the Secretary-General in his opening address to the
General Assembly on Tuesday (see A/72/PV.3), those
goals are intrinsically linked. We have a moral and
humanitarian responsibility to make progress on both.
The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
initiative is an expression of the widespread and well-
founded frustration that exists with the lack of progress
on nuclear disarmament. That will remain so until we
see real progress with nuclear-weapon States delivering
on their commitments.

Sweden is committed to the success of the current
review cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the call in successive Security Council
resolutions to all States that have not yet done so, to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
without delay and without conditions. In addition to
providing analytical and forensic expertise, Sweden has
contributed financially in support of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) verification of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the regime established
by resolution 1540 (2004). Through the European
Union, we have contributed significantly to outreach
programmes designed to help countries strengthen
their export control systems.

Regrettably, since we joined the Council in
January, we have been called upon, time and again, to
address the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
illegal testing of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles,
and we have condemned those provocations in the
strongest terms. Likewise, we have been dealing with
numerous cases where horrific chemical weapons have
been used by the Syrian regime and by Da'esh. The
Council's efforts to stop the spread of these deadly
weapons need the full support of all Member States
to succeed. For that reason, Sweden has called for
the universal and comprehensive implementation of
existing sanctions regimes. This applies not least to the
non-proliferation-related sanctions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We must all work together to
implement those sanctions fully, so as not to contribute
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's illegal
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles programmes.
Improved monitoring and targeted capacity-building
are important measures. Ijoin the Secretary-General
in his call for unity in the Council and diplomatic
engagement to resolve the crisis.

Atrocities such as those perpetrated in the Idlib
province in April are unacceptable, and those responsible
must be brought to justice. Sweden applauds the way in
which the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
fulfilled their mandate by investigating cases of alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria and identifying
those responsible, with a high level of expertise
and professionalism. We must continue to give our
full and unambiguous support to these important
mechanisms. The Council must stand united to ensure
the accountability of perpetrators.

It would be remiss of me not to mention, in
that context, resolution 2231 (2016) and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action JCPOA. As stated by
Federica Mogherini last April,

"the JCPOA was a historic achievement for the
security of the region and of the whole world, a
success for multilateral diplomacy that has proven
to work and deliver".

It is absolutely vital that all parties continue to
implement their JCPOA commitments meticulously
and unfailingly. Strict and effective verification by
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Joint
Commission for addressing implementation matters are
vital components of the agreement.

Implementing the resolutions is just one side of
the coin. We must also nurture and defend the existing
multilateral instruments that we have established to
curtail the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Unity is key. That applies to the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, but also other important non-proliferation
tools, such as the resolution 1540 (2004) regime and
the IAEA-strengthened safeguards system, to mention
just two.

The spread of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the gravest challenges to international
peace and security, and a crucial responsibility of
the Council. Sweden will continue to do its part to
promote disarmament and non-proliferation, respect
for international law and accountability for those who
violate their international legal obligations.

