Ms. McAskie: I am very pleased indeed to brief
the Council on my recent mission, particularly in
conjunction with my colleagues Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Fall, as I think this is a good example of how all
parts of the United Nations Secretariat are working
very closely to address the very complex situation that
is developing in that region.

In accordance with the Council's request, we
attempted to provide some maps through the use of the
overhead projector, but this room does not lend itself to
that; we tried, but they were absolutely impossible to
read. We do have a map handout, which I have been
told will be with us in a moment. I will have that
circulated, hopefully while we are speaking.

Between 17 and 25 April, I visited the three
Mano River Union countries of Guinea, Sierra Leone
and Liberia. The primary objective of the mission was
to make an assessment of the humanitarian situation in
the subregion and to evaluate the humanitarian
coordination mechanisms among and within the three
countries of the Mano River Union. This was seen as
essential in View of the regional dimension of the
present crisis, the recent changes to the structure of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
as well as the findings of the visit undertaken by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the recent interdisciplinary
mission to West Africa led by my colleague, Mr. Fall.
In addition, the Secretary-General requested that,
during my Visit, I collect views and information
relevant to this Council's request for a response to
paragraph 9 of its resolution 1346 (2001), in particular
on the question of how to take forward the issue of
refugees and internally displaced persons in and around
Sierra Leone, including their return to safe areas.

I was accompanied by one of our major donors,
Ambassador Marika Fahlen, the Swedish Ambassador
for humanitarian affairs, along with staff of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I should
add that I found it extremely useful for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to travel to a
country such as Sierra Leone, where there is a major
peacekeeping mission, and I am recommending that we
do this more often.

In Guinea, we benefited from the fact that we
arrived at the same time as the United Kingdom
Secretary of State for International Development,
Ms. Claire Short, and Mr. Charles Josselin, French
Minister for Francophonie and Cooperation, who were
visiting the region. Again, this was very useful.

I met with senior officials of all three
Governments: in Guinea, the Prime Minister; in Sierra
Leone, the Minister for Foreign Affairs; and in Liberia,
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Planning and the
Joint Presidential Committee on Humanitarian Affairs.
In all three countries, I consulted, of course, as usual,
with the United Nations country team, non-
governmental organizations, local civil society and the
media.

It is painfully evident that the regional approach
being developed is absolutely the right one, particularly
among the three countries of the Mano River Union.
The major finding of my mission is the extent to which
the crisis in each of the three countries is fuelling
crises in the neighbouring countries. There is not a
single border that is not affected, exacerbating the
humanitarian crises with humanitarian consequences
and making it painfully evident that the solutions to
these crises must be looked at in an interrelated way.

Let me deal specifically with the three countries,
very briefly. In Guinea, we found a nation which, after
years of dealing with the spillover from the war in
Sierra Leone and the cost of that, is now, unfortunately,
facing a humanitarian crisis of its own, with numbers
of between 200,000 and 300,000 internally displaced
persons. The further deterioration of the situation in
Liberia may well increase that number. We travelled to
the Languette area - or Parrot's Beak, as it is known
in Sierra Leone~ Kissidougou and Gueckedou, and
we visited camps in the region, including transit
centres in Conakry.

What was painfully obvious, in addition to the
regional nature of the crisis, was the fact that there is a
real dearth of strategic information from one country to
the next. We found that the lack of information inside
Guinea as to what the situation is in neighbouring
countries has often given rise to proposals for the full
return of refugees to their countries of origin. Our
assessment is that conditions for a return to Sierra
Leone or Liberia do not exist at this time. We were
very pleased to receive assurances from the Guinean
Government that it is fully committed to meeting its
obligations under the Convention for refugees and, in
fact, is working very closely with UNHCR in its two-
track approach. The two-track approach, of course, is
the dual one of assisting refugees close to the border to
relocate to secure areas deeper within Guinea, while
providing assistance to those who are making their way
voluntarily across the borders. In fact, UNHCR, with
the full support of the Government of Guinea, has the
exercise of moving refugees away from the Languette
well under way; 40,000 have been relocated so far and
they anticipate completing that some time within the
next 10 days.

What we found, however, is that this relocation,
along with news of an improved situation in Sierra
Leone, has also spurred an increase in attempts by
some to return to southern Sierra Leone via areas held
by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is
placing an enormous burden on the humanitarian
community and in fact is creating serious difficulties
for the refugees, who find that their return home is not
an easy one. Refugees are being stopped as they cross
through RUF territory, as the RUF is intent on
registering them. We heard first-hand reports of goods
being stolen and the United Nations on the ground is
investigating the claims made by international non-
governmental organizations that refugees have, in fact,
actually been attacked.

Within Sierra Leone, I would say that there are
five main issues which characterize the humanitarian
situation. First, the community is trying to deal with
the spontaneous returnees, including those who
returned under a planned programme from Conakry to
Freetown. About 55,000 have returned so far and we
expect that those numbers could easily reach 100,000
over the next few weeks. The resettlement of internally
displaced persons in their own villages that are now
safe has begun, but, in addition, there is the potential
for further displacement as the RUF withdraws from
Kambia. Continued relief will be needed for some
400,000 internally displaced persons within the
country. Now, in an unfortunate irony, Sierra Leone is
having to deal with an influx of Liberian refugees
across the border into areas to which the humanitarian
community has judged there to be no room for Sierra
Leone refugees to return. Thus, we are trying to stop
the flow of refugees from Sierra Leone into the south-
eastern part of the country and yet we are now faced
with a potential influx of Liberians across the Mano
River itself.

Within Sierra Leone, it will be recalled that the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General was recently appointed as Humanitarian
Coordinator within UNAMSIL. This was a difficult
decision, but is, in my mind, a very positive
development. The Humanitarian Coordinator will need,
however, to work very closely with those members of
the humanitarian community who are non-United
Nations to assure the broader humanitarian community
that this does not mean any reduction of attention to
their needs. The current individual has been requested
to report back once he has been on the job for a few
weeks, with a view to determining whether the
presence of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs should be strengthened in
support, given the fact that the Deputy Special
Representative carries with his title a very long list of
complex responsibilities, including issues relating to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and to
governance.

What we found is that, over the past few months,
there has developed a noticeably improved relationship
between UNAMSIL and the humanitarian community,
and we were very pleased to acknowledge this. The
humanitarian operations have benefited somewhat from
UNAMSIL logistics capacity. This is welcomed and we
would look for opportunities to increase it.

The mission visited camps for internally
displaced persons. We saw the first internally displaced
persons returning to their own villages - a real sign of
hope. We visited one of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration camps, though it had
very few people in it, and we saw, in the South-West,
some returned refugees being resettled in areas which
are not their homeland, as their homes in the North are
still behind RUF lines.

In Makeni, we met with the RUF leadership, Issa
Sesay and his colleagues. The message that we gave to
the RUF from the point of View of the humanitarians
was to request free and safe access for humanitarian
staff and freedom to undertake assessments and
provide assistance without escort in these areas. I made
it clear that the ability of the humanitarian community
to access areas behind the RUF line would require not
just their word, as they insisted that we would be safe,
but tangible proof that this would be the case, as we
have not, as members know, had good experiences in
the past.

One of the issues we raised as a sign of good faith
is the release of the child soldiers, as well as the girls.
Whenever we talk about the child soldiers, I have
asked the humanitarian community also to emphasize
that girls are being abducted.

I just had word this morning that, apparently, the
RUF has released 97 children to the non-governmental
organization Caritas, in Makeni. I do not know how
many are boys and how many are girls, but this first
release of 97 children is a very good sign.

One of the issues for Sierra Leone that will be
extremely difficult, with the strengthening of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the hope for a return to a secure environment
within the country, is the extent to which the
Government will be able to resume services. The
humanitarian community is already extremely
overstretched; we have received about 25 per cent of
the funds requested in the consolidated appeal, and we
have been making another appeal for funds to assist in
the humanitarian effort. What we have to remember is
that, as the Government tries to restore services,
government workers themselves are among the
displaced: in the refugee camps in Guinea you find
professionals and government workers, and the
Government, at number 175, is already the lowest on
the Human Development Index scale. That, plus the
ravages of war, will mean that plans to reinstate
government services as UNAMSIL moves forward will
require enormous assistance to the Government:
capacity-building and resources.

The situation in Liberia - unlike that in Sierra
Leone, where you could say that there are strong signs
of hope - is more one of growing despair. The sense
was that the political and military situation was rapidly
deteriorating. The Mission itself, in fact, remained in
Monrovia as it was unsafe to travel to areas affected by
the crisis. Newly displaced persons were featured on
the front pages of the local papers every day, along
with the country's preoccupation with the sanctions,
particularly as we were there just a few days after the
visit of the Chairman of the Council's sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Mahbubani. We met with
opposition parties as well as with members of the
Mano River Women's Peace Network, all of whom are
seriously concerned about the possibilities of Liberia
falling back into a state of civil war. It was reported to
us that the two main rebel groups, ULIMO-K and
ULIMO-J, which in the past have been fighting each
other, had formed an alliance and that in response
President Taylor is mobilizing the National Patriotic
Front of Liberia, the group that was disarmed in 1997
and 1998.

There is fighting all along the border of northern
Lofa county- the county that borders South-East
Sierra Leone and South-West Guinea. That fighting has
increased the number of internally displaced within
Liberia; the figure we have been given is between
60,000 and 80,000, of which one third to one half have
been created in the past three to four weeks. The
Liberian Refugee, Repatriation and Resettlement
Commission estimates that there are still, in addition,
some 160,000 Liberian refugees in the region and
about 75,000 Sierra Leone refugees in Liberia, of
whom about 50 per cent are receiving assistance from
UNHCR, while the rest are inaccessible. As I
mentioned, some of the Liberians are now fleeing
across the Mano river into Sierra Leone, and it is
conceivable that some Sierra Leone refugees within
Liberia may possibly return with them. The
Government is appealing for assistance, and Liberia
was covered in the West African regional consolidated
appeal, which was launched a month and a half ago at
Geneva. But so far we have received a very small
amount: about 8 per cent of that appeal has been
funded so far.

Let me mention one or two quick conclusions,
and then one or two recommendations from the visit.
First of all, I have thrown out a lot of numbers. The
numbers are extremely confusing; they change from
week to week; they change as people move; and they
change as we get better access and as we estimate
better. So I apologize if the numbers that members
have now are not the numbers they had before; that is
the reason: when you are dealing with problems of
displacement, that is the risk we run. The overall
estimate, however, is that with refugees and displaced
persons, we are dealing with something between 1
million and 1.5 million people in the three countries of
the Mano River Union.

As I said at the outset, the Mission confirmed the
need for the United Nations to address the situation in
that part of the world from a perspective fully informed
by the regional dynamic. An understanding of the
regional interplay among the three countries members
of the Mano River Union is critical to addressing the
volatile humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and now, unfortunately, Guinea.

In that connection, we confirmed that
coordination, information exchange and analysis
required strengthening not just on a country basis but
on a regional basis. Assistance needs are still extremely
high, not just for refugees but for the growing number
of internally displaced persons.

While events in Sierra Leone give cause for
encouragement, developments in the two neighbouring
countries give much cause for concern. And the
encouraging news in Sierra Leone brings its own
problems: the problems of the reinstatement of
Government authority and the enormous costs that will
go along with that if we are to sustain the growing
security in the country.

In terms of the recommendations of the Mission,
it is our recommendation that a subregional capacity
should be established by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to
provide mechanisms to facilitate the exchange and
analysis of strategic information, including
Geographical Information System (GIS) data, on
developments in the subregion between the United
Nations and its partners in Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia, and to support subregional contingency
planning and resource-mobilization efforts. That
presence should be linked to the proposed United
Nations office for West Africa, although, depending on
the ultimate location of that office, the OCHA element
need not be co-located with the political office, as the
OCHA office must be based in one of the countries in
crisis.

There is also an urgent need to enable United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to provide aid to internally displaced persons and host
communities through funding of the consolidated
appeal process for West Africa and UNHCR. I would
also add that there is a need for donors to support the
Mano River Women's Peace Network as part of the
effort. We talk a lot about the role of women in peace-
building, and here we have an opportunity to do
something practical about it.

In addition, OCHA will strengthen its presence in
Guinea and in Liberia, and recommends very strongly
that the international community continue to support
UNHCR's two-track approach for Sierra Leone
refugees in Guinea.

Finally, pending the resolution of the mechanism
to ensure increased access to UNAMSIL logistics
capacity for humanitarian actors, we are calling on
donors to increase their support for the World Food
Programme (WFP) logistics operation in Sierra Leone.
The relief agencies use WFP helicopters for
assessments and medical evacuations.

Finally, funding is needed also to build the
Government's capacity to extend basic services to
newly liberated areas. The grave situation of internally
displaced persons, refugees and other vulnerable
communities is exacerbated by endemic poverty and
inadequate government capacity, as well as by the
chronically low international response to appeals for
international assistance.

