Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As Jamaica nears the end of
its term in the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July, my delegation believes that it is time
to congratulate you, Madam, on the work you have
accomplished. We are extremely honoured to take part
in this important discussion, which we are certain will
be successful.

We especially welcome the concern that the
Security Council has always shown for the tragic plight
of children affected by armed conflict. We believe that
this heightened awareness will prompt the Council to
propose the solutions that are required by war
situations in which children are the first victims. We
also welcome the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report of 19 July,
issued in document S/2000/712, and the measures
relating to integrating the protection of children into
peacemaking and peacekeeping.

For some time now, the world has witnessed a
phenomenon whose grave consequences trample on
universally recognized values, namely, the tragedy
experienced daily by tens of millions of children as a
result of war.

Very fortunately, the international community has
become aware of this tragedy. The Convention on the
Rights of the Child has been adopted; a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict has been appointed; the
International Labour Organization has adopted
Convention No. 182 concerning the prohibition and
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms
of child labour; and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict was adopted
last May.

Increasingly, protests are being heard and steps
taken to put an end to the tragedy of children caught up
in armed conflict. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, adopted in July 1999,
classifies the enlistment of children under 15 in
national armed forces as a war crime. In its resolution
1261 (1999) of 25 August 1999, the Security Council
openly urged States and all relevant parts of the United
Nations system to intensify their efforts to ensure an
end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. It especially urged States and the agencies
concerned to facilitate the disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
children used as soldiers.

States are mobilizing to achieve this lofty
objective and Africa has shown the way. Following the
examples of South Africa and Malawi, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
long striven to make human rights the key focus of its
national reconstruction police, demonstrated its
determination to solve the problem of children in
armed conflict. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
became the third African country to establish a national
plan of action pursuant to the resolution adopted at the
1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights.

The Congo's legal arsenal will soon be complete
in terms of significant legal provisions protecting the
rights of children. Through its legislative edict No. 90-
048 of 21 August 1999, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has already ratified the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It is in the
process of ratifying the related African Charter. It is
almost ready to ratify the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which was
opened for signature and ratification on 5 June. It
intends to ratify all pertinent instruments relating to
that Convention.

I need hardly recall that, wherever countries are
at war, even those that have signed all conventions
relating to the rights of the child, children can be found
on the front lines when they should, in theory, be found
at their school desks. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is no exception to this rule. When the armed
aggression against it began, 6,000 to 7,000 children
were members of the government forces. However, the
number enlisted in the armed groups in the East and in
Equateur province is still hard to assess.

In response to this situation, the Government
quickly understood that the place of children was not in
the army but in their families, at school or in
communities where their youth and vulnerability would
be fully respected. The Government began by taking
certain conservative measures to end the recruitment of
children into the Congolese armed forces and to begin
the process of demobilizing former combatants.

Starting with the prohibition of the recruitment of
children in the armed forces, in accordance with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and then
assigning them tasks not involving the use of weapons
and prohibiting the dispatch of minors to the front in
case fighting resumed, my Government moved forward
at high speed.

A truly decisive turning point was reached when,
despite the ongoing state of war, the Government
convened in Kinshasa, from 6 to 10 December 1999, an
important forum on the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers. The main objectives of
the forum were, first, to confirm the commitment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the peace process
and to complying with the international conventions to
which it is a party; secondly, to share the experiences
of other countries in the demobilization and
reintegration of minors into family and society; and,
thirdly, to alert donors, partners in bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, and national and international
non-governmental organizations specialized in this area
to the need to become heavily involved in supporting
the process.

The Kinshasa forum was a total success. It
enjoyed the participation of experts from several
Africa, European, Asian and American countries.
Delegations were present from, inter alia, Angola,
Kenya, Liberia, Mozambique and Chad for Africa; the
United States of America, El Salvador and Nicaragua
for America; Belgium, France and Switzerland in
Europe; and Cambodia and Sri Lanka for Asia.

At the close of their work, the participants in the
Kinshasa forum paid tribute to the political resolve of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to recognize the phenomenon of the child
soldier and its determination to demobilize these
children. They took note of the decision to establish an
intergovernmental arrangement for coordinating and
addressing all aspects of demobilization and
reintegration.

They also expressed the view that the
demobilization of children should be included as a
priority objective of any peace process and that
keeping children out of wars is an act to prevent
conflict and uphold human rights ideals. They called on
African States to incorporate in their national
legislation the principle of setting 18 as the minimum
age for enlistment in their armed forces. They appealed
to the international community for effective support for
domestic processes to demobilize and reintegrate child
soldiers, in particular in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They invited the media to launch a
campaign to promote demobilization and reintegration
among children themselves and in societies at large,
and to refrain from broadcasting pictures and reports
that could encourage children to enlist in armies.

They called on States to pay particular attention
to disabled children, to so-called witch children and to
children who are under the protection of the law. They
encouraged reintegration, especially by returning
individuals to their family units, to their jobs, to
education and to training, bearing in mind the specific
needs of various groups. They called on international
advocacy groups to refrain from looking at the problem
of child soldiers from a political standpoint and from
using the phenomenon for political purposes, pointing
out that this would run counter to the clear interests of
the children and of human rights.

On 9 June 2000, as a culmination of all these
efforts, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Laurent-Desire Kabila, promulgated decree-law 66
on the demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
law provides the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with an intergovernmental coordination arrangement -
or even better, with concerted action to address all
aspects of the demobilization and reintegration of
children who had been recruited as soldiers.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
convening of the Kinshasa forum on the demobilization
and reintegration of child soldiers was welcomed as a
source of great hope and as a response entirely
commensurate with the expectations of Congolese
families and communities ravaged by the suffering and
trauma of the war of aggression. If these efforts are not
sustained, we are could see the dream of protecting our
children vanish into thin air.

My Government appreciates the activities carried
out in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
representatives of the United Nations system,
especially by the country office of the United Nations
Children's Fund, whose deep interest in this matter we
hail. We also appreciate the activities of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and that of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in support of Government efforts in the
process of demobilizing child soldiers. We thank the
humanitarian agencies for their constant assistance to
refugees and those displaced by the war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of whom children
constitute the most vulnerable group. But this is just
one way for the United Nations to ease the effects of
armed conflict on children.

If Government efforts to protect children, inter
alia by completing the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers, are to yield the desired
results, the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must shoulder its responsibilities to
the full. It must rigorously apply Council resolutions
that call for the total, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Ugandan and Rwandan troops from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which they are occupying in violation of the very
Charter of the United Nations.

I take this opportunity to ask whether the $500
million allocated last year for victims of conflicts and
natural disasters in Africa might not be of some benefit
to Congolese children who have been the victims of the
aggression by Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi.

I take this opportunity also to ask all cooperation
and development agencies to join the action of the
Congolese Government, which has led the way, and to
support its efforts in the framework of the National
Commission on Demobilization and Reintegration,
which is mandated to carry out the successive phases of
these activities both in Kinshasa and in all the
provinces of our country.

