Mr. Seck (spoke in French): I would first like
to congratulate you, Sir, on Chile's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and the outstanding
way in which you humanitarian led its work this month.
I also congratulate the Permanent Representatives of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
whose countries have just joined the Council. I wish
you and them every success in the execution of your
duties.

I take this opportunity to express, in no uncertain
terms, the Committee's firm condemnation of the
terrorist attacks that occurred in Paris on 7 January and
the equally heinous acts of terrorism that recently took
place in Nigeria, northern Cameroon, northern Mali,
Pakistan and, of course, the Middle East. Through
me, the Committee would like to express its heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the victims' families, as
well as to their bereaved people and Governments.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people observed with great
interest the debate organized by the Council on
30 December (see S/PV.7354). Although the debate
did not lead to the adoption of practical measures, as
recommended by the Committee in its statement, all
members of the Council reaffirmed their commitment
to the principle of a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution and
the exercise of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in a viable and independent Palestine, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security. We take
this opportunity to commend the important role played
by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, as representative
of the Arab countries to the Council, and to encourage
it to pursue its commendable efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict, in the knowledge that the status
quo is no longer tenable.

With the failure of direct negotiations and the
Security Council's inability to act, the State ofPalestine
has seen fit to join several international treaties,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, in order to strengthen the fight against violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law, as well as impunity. The Committee regrets that,
in response, the occupying Power has chosen to flout
its obligations to Palestinian people by holding - who
knows for how long? - the tax revenues it collects on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority, in accordance with
the Oslo accords. This attitude is counterproductive,
as is Israel's threat to impose new punitive measures.
Furthermore, it is regrettable that the international
community, including the Council, has remained silent
and inactive on this matter.

Fortunately, at this session States members of
the General Assembly have reaffirmed their strong
commitment to a settlement based on established
principles and the relevant United Nations decisions.
A more significant number of States - most recently
Sweden - have also recognized Palestine, while
several parliaments - including those of Spain,
France, Ireland, Belgium, Portugal and the United
Kingdom - as well as the European Parliament, have
voted in favour of such recognition, reflecting the
resolve of the international public opinion to see an end
to this conflict.

While the Committee welcomes the progress made
on the ground to date, in particular with regard to the
reconstruction of Gaza, as provided in the temporary
tripartite mechanism, it believes that much more
remains to be done and as soon as possible. More goods
and services must be allowed to enter Gaza because
tens of thousands of Gazans continue to live in flimsy
tents or damaged buildings, exposed to the elements
of a rainy and particularly cold winter. In this regard,
while we welcome the generous support of donors, the
Committee urges Israel to assume its responsibilities as
the occupying Power under the Geneva Conventions.

The General Assemblyjudiciously proclaimed 2014
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People in its efforts to reinforce Member States' support
for the Palestinian people and enhance the possibility
of reaching a peaceful settlement of the decades-long
conflict. Unfortunately, our hopes were dashed during
the Year of Solidarity when direct negotiations failed in
the spring and the situation's rapid deterioration led to
the devastating war in Gaza in the summer.

The framework of the problem remains the same.
Israel continues to occupy the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Settlement
construction in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
continues. Palestinian religious buildings continue to
be attacked. In 2014 alone, there were at least 36 attacks
on mosques and churches, in addition to the total
destruction of 73 mosques and churches in Gaza during
the summer's crisis. Moreover, acts of provocation and
incitement to violence by settlers and other Israelis
remain commonplace.

Alarmed by the current situation, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people joins many speakers here today in stressing
that the status quo cannot continue, for the situation
is unacceptable and threatens international peace and
security. With a view towards the future, the Committee
hopes that the Security Council, the supreme organ
responsible for international peace and security, will
assume its Charter obligation to provide the means to
settle the seemingly endless Israel-Palestinian conflict.

