Mr. Wang Min (China): I thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing.

China welcomes the positive progress achieved
by Bosnia and Herzegovina in enhancing national
reconciliation, promoting economic development and
building and strengthening the rule of law. Meanwhile,
we note that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face
complications and difficulties in achieving sustainable
economic and social development and lasting peace
and stability in the country, and that it continues to
need support and assistance from the international
community.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

China also respects the right of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to decide the future of their
country, and supports the right of all the country's
ethnic groups to live in peace, harmony and common
development. We hope that all ethnic groups will work
on behalf of the long-term interests of their country,
take practical measures to strengthen the outcome of
the political process, resolve their differences through
dialogue and cooperation, and implement the Dayton
Peace Agreement in a comprehensive manner with
a view to achieving greater progress in all areas of
State-building.

The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
extremely complex and sensitive. The international
community should take a balanced and prudent approach
by fully respecting the leadership and ownership of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and commit
itself to playing a positive role in promoting unity and
cooperation among all the ethnic groups of the country.
China supports High Representative Inzko in his efforts
to fulfil his mandated activities in an appropriate and
constructive manner and to continue to play a positive
role in promoting the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

China welcomes the assistance provided by
the International Monetary Fund in maintaining
the financial and economic stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. China is prepared to join the international
community in its ongoing efforts to make its due
contribution to the peace, stability and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

