Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, and wish to thank him for presence
here among us. From this seat and on behalf of His
Excellency Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, allow me to convey
to His Excellency Mr. Roth Marc Christian Kabore',
Chairman-in-Office of the Conference of Heads of
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
our very best wishes for success in leading the fight
against terrorism and its consequences for the Sahelo-
Saharan region. We reiterate our thanks to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Africa, His
Excellency President Pierre Buyoya, African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Angel
Losada Fernandez and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their
enlightening briefings.

The Sahel region is at the heart of the concerns
not only at the level of the West Africa subregion but
also at the continental and international levels. The
climate of insecurity and instability in the Sahel is
increasingly worrying. For several months, communal
conflicts in Burkina Faso and Mali have added to the
security, humanitarian and development problems.
The increasing mobility and sophistication of terrorist
armed groups and ethnic militias operating in the region
have led to an increase in the number of casualties in
recent months.

Allow me to express here the strong condemnation
by the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
of the recent incidents of intercommunal violence and
the asymmetric and coordinated attacks against the
armed forces, United Nations peacekeeping forces
and the defenceless civilian population, particularly
in Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. We convey our
condolences to the families of the victims, as well as
to the Governments of the countries concerned, and
in particular extend our most heartfelt sorrow to the
Government of the Niger for the more than 20 soldiers
who died yesterday in a terrorist attack and to France
for the two soldiers who fell in the field of honour while
rescuing the hostages kidnapped by the terrorists.

In that context, we believe that there should be
no feeling of impunity and abandonment on the part
of the States of the region. We therefore reiterate the
urgent need for the national authorities to act swiftly
to identify and prosecute those responsible, once
identified and detained, to the fullest extent of the
law. That would reassure the population, restore the
authority and legitimacy of the States and weaken the
sense of impunity that fosters violence.

To end the conflicts gripping the Sahel, it is
necessary to provide rapid responses to the crisis while
proposing a sustainable approach. In other words,
we need to reconcile what on the surface may seem
irreconcilable: the most pressing and lasting needs.

Indeed, there are many urgent needs. Due to the
lack of security, 900 schools, for example, had to
close in Mali and in neighbouring Burkina Faso, 440
schools must also remain closed, excluding 66,000
children from the education system in the current year.
But the G-5 Sahel must do more than fight terrorism.
While security investments are necessary, they remain
insufficient. Security pressure has generated significant
macroeconomic and fiscal costs for every country of the
region, including negative effects on social investment.

We must also be aware that military approach
alone will not resolve the security crisis in the
Sahel. We must undertake a reflection on excessive
militarization - in a region in which almost all the
world's armies are present, which makes it attractive to
extremist and terrorist groups of all kinds - which has
continually dragged the States of the Sahel into a cycle
of exponential increases in military expenditure for
their survival. The cycle is unsustainable and is being
maintained at the expense of the investments needed to
develop the region and offer hope to young people.

Numerous reports have revealed that armed groups
recruit either from helpless and unemployed youth or
from rural communities that feel neglected by public
authorities. It is therefore important that States become
aware of the distress of those millions of citizens
and generate tangible and lasting political responses.
Accordingly, projects within the frameworks of the
Sahel Alliance and the Priority Investment Programme
must remain a priority for implementation by the G-5
Sahel States, with the support of international donors
and partners.

Parallel to that work, in Mali, a country where
extremism has spread, retaking national territory must
also be a priority. The different communities have
always lived in peace and harmony throughout the
country, while conflicts and tensions were managed
through dialogue. The State must restore that tradition
and culture of dialogue, rebuild confidence and promote
reconciliation and cohesion among communities
through coexistence in the context of home-grown
processes, which will involve raising awareness of the
importance of peace for development and the promotion
of positive values, but also of the resolution of land
disputes and the administration ofjustice.

The close collaboration of the G-5 Sahel with
such partners as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and INTERPOL should be
underlined. The joint assessment missions carried out
between July and October 2018 between the Permanent
Secretariat and the UNODC will undoubtedly create a
legal framework for the implementation of the police
component in order to ensure that the Joint Force
can adequately fulfil its mission to combat terrorism
and organized crime by ensuring transparent judicial
follow-up. We also commend the strategic partnership
with INTERPOL, which is essential for the exchange
of information and the use of its database for the
registration of Joint Force investigations.

Furthermore, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the final communique of the fifth ordinary
session of the Conference of the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State, in which they reaffirmed their willingness
to mobilize more domestic resources for the full
operationalization of the Joint Force. In line with the
9 April communique of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, we stress the need for the Security
Council to extend support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) beyond Mali to all components
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as part of an integrated
approach to its work. It is certainly an issue that cannot
be avoided in the next month's negotiations on the
renewal of MINUSMA's mandate.

In View of the fact that the situation in the Sahel
is a real threat to international peace and security, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, for its part, expresses
its support for the calls by the leaders of the region to
place the mandate of the Joint Force under Chapter VII
of the Charter, in order to provide it with the additional
political legitimacy that this important initiative and
the critical situation in the region deserve. Moreover,
the critical situation of not taking rapid and decisive
measures could extend to the coastal countries of the
area, such as C6te d'Ivoire, Togo, Benin and Ghana. We
believe that it is necessary, as Minister Barry indicated,
to assemble an international coalition similar to those
assembled for Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya, but this
time with the help of the African Union, so as to stop
this gangrene of insecurity. Without such a coalition,
this scourge would extend beyond West Africa.

In conclusion, allow me to point out that, although
the implementation of all the aspects that we have
highlighted will not return to us the thousands of
human lives lost, they are nevertheless likely to create
the conditions for optimism and new hope for peaceful
coexistence, the acceptance of intercommunity
harmony and the return of the authority of States in all its
fullness so that they might assume their constitutional
prerogatives, provide legitimate protection to persons
and property and stand as united and indivisible States. I
would conclude by congratulating each of the G-5 Sahel
States for the multiple efforts they are making within
the framework of the complete operationalization of the
Joint Force.

