Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Two months after the deadly attacks in Nairobi, where
Al-Shabaab slaughtered over 60 civilians and wounded
hundreds more, and over a month since the suicide
bombing in Volgograd that took the lives of six innocent
people and injured more than 30, we are again and
again reminded that terrorism remains one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security. As
we adapt to the evolving terrorist landscape, we must
continue to work as one United Nations to respond to
those challenges and threats.

The Security Council's three counter-terrorism
Committees play a crucial role in stemming the
growth of Al-Qaida, boosting the capacities of States
to counter-terrorism, and ensuring that weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) stay out of terrorists' hands.
We commend the Council's continued commitment
to promoting the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which have helped
to build policy, legal and institutional frameworks for
Member States and regional organizations to counter
terrorism. As always, we are grateful to the Chairs of
these committees - the Permanent Representatives of
Australia, Morocco and the Republic of Korea - for
their excellent work.

The Security Council sanctions against Al-Qaida
are today preventing terrorists from travelling
internationally and from raising money to fund acts
of terror. But those sanctions are effective only when
they are implemented fully. That is why bolstering
implementation must be the Committee's first priority.
We are encouraged that the Committee has endorsed
the Monitoring Team's recommendation to engage with
States, in confidence, to understand situations where
sanctions are not being implemented. If necessary, the
Monitoring Team can then work with Member States
to rectify any issues and provide the Committee with
recommendations to tighten enforcement in such
instances. We hope that the Monitoring Team and
the Committee will continue to explore ways to deal
with these cases of non-compliance. We also support
a focused effort to strengthen Member States' legal
and technical capacities to implement the assets freeze,
travel ban and arms embargo.

The United States recently contributed $400,000 to
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) to provide technical assistance to
help countries develop national capacities, to propose
listings and to implement the sanctions. We encourage
others to support these and other initiatives. We also
continue to support the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We welcome
Assistant Secretary-General Laborde's appointment
and look forward to working with him and his team.

Almost a decade after its creation, CTED has
become an indispensable player in the United Nations
efforts to identify trends in terrorism, diagnose
the capacity gaps of Member States, and facilitate
funding for capacity-building projects. These will
allow countries to develop the capacities to deal with
terrorism and related threats within their borders and
regions. The United States supports CTED's work
on issues as diverse as strengthening border security
in the Sahel, boosting the capacity of civilian courts
to prosecute terrorists, and training judges and law
enforcement officials in South Asia. Since 2011, we
have funded $8.4 million in capacity-building projects
to support the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and the wider United Nations counter-terrorism legal
and policy framework.

We continue to believe that greater interdependence
and collaboration between CTED, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and CTITF, as well as
non-United Nations actors, such as the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum, can better insure a more effective
whole-of-United-Nations approach to countering
terrorism and the violent ideology that underpins it.

To prevent and respond to terrorist threats around
the globe, over the long term our collective efforts must
be comprehensive and address the political, social and
economic drivers of the instability that can create the
space for terrorists and violent extremists to operate
and recruit. In many cases, the most effective way to
address terrorist threats over the long term will be not
through training and equipping the military or security
services, but through non-counter-terrorism tools and
programmes designed to build the basic capacities of
civilian institutions in particular countries to provide
justice, education, jobs and liberty to local citizens.
That is why we must continue to encourage CTED
to work closely with development actors, such as the
United Nations Development Programme and others, as
it carries out its work.

The efforts of non-State actors to gain access to
weapons of mass destruction or help others to do so
remain among the greatest challenges to international
security. We applaud the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for its adoption of a
more forward-looking strategic approach in its twelfth
programme of work, which will help the international
community to better address those threats. A few
examples of how that has been put into action include
an increase in the number of official country visits,
unprecedented work with parliamentarians via the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, and the Committee's recent
request to States and international organizations to
submit information on effective practices and lessons
learned.

The United States believes that effective monitoring
constitutes an essential element in fostering the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, the United States recently submitted additional
information on the steps it has taken and continues to
take to meet its obligation. In particular, for the first
time we included information that shows the United
States has put in place measures to implement all of our
200-plus obligations.

Next year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption resolution 1540 (2004). We look forward
to working with the Committee, the United Nations
Office on Disarmament Affairs and other bodies to
use this milestone to reinvigorate efforts to implement
the resolution fully and reduce the threat posed by the
nexus of non-State actors and WMD.

The United Nations has created a plethora of
committees and entities that are dedicated to responding
to the changing threats terrorism poses. The measure of
our success, however, will be determined not by how
many committees we create or how many projects we
implement, but by how many lives we save. We must
continue to coordinate our efforts and work as one
United Nations to rid the world of that pervasive threat.

