Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this afternoon's
briefing on inter-mission cooperation and United
Nations peacekeeping, and more generally for your active
chairmanship of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Herve Ladsous and Under-Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for their briefings today.

Over the past several years, inter-mission
cooperation has become an important part of United
Nations peacekeeping. We see this most visibly in
the sharing of assets, such as helicopters and troops,
between missions in response to crises. As many have
said, the support that the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire received from its sister mission in Liberia
in the aftermath of the contested Ivorian presidential
elections is an excellent example of such inter-mission
cooperation. Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Haq referred to
many other such examples.

But inter-mission cooperation is both Wider and
deeper than an asset surge in times of crisis. A new
mission can be bolstered and deployed more quickly by
the temporary transfer of resources from neighbouring
missions. Often, speed of deployment is politically
critical in such missions. We saw this in the example
of the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syrian
benefiting from staff redeployed from the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force for an urgent
Syrian mission.

Peacekeepers operating in the same region can profit
immensely from sharing risk analysis, from conducting
joint planning and operations against common threats,
and from sharing experiences of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding work in communities living in border
regions. Transferring military assets and personnel,
civilian expertise, experience and planning is a natural
response to challenges that escalate quickly to crisis
point and which may not respect international borders.
The Security Council should recognize and welcome
that reality.

Mr. Kapoor, who spoke on behalf of India,
suggested that inter-mission cooperation is promoted
not to increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions but to cut down the resources available
to individual peacekeeping missions. I do not
recognize that description. Effective use of resources
is, of course, important, but the motivation behind
inter-mission cooperation is greater effectiveness. The
Security Council saw for itself in West Africa that
force commanders on the ground are actually often the
driving force behind inter-mission cooperation, and
that it is capitals that put a brake on such cooperation.
In that context, I pay particular tribute to the flexibility
shown by Pakistan, whose troops were involved on that
occasion.

We have heard several strong examples to illustrate
the benefits of inter-mission cooperation this afternoon.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa have been
working together to tackle the threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army, including by establishing a joint
radio network for information sharing. MONUSCO
helicopters provided critical support to UNMIS during
the crisis in Jonglei in January of this year. The United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, UNMISS and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur are set to begin monthly coordination meetings
to support the Joint Border Verification And Monitoring
Mechanism. As I mentioned, military observers were
redeployed from across the region to ensure rapid
deployment of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in Syria in May earlier this year.

The United Kingdom recognizes that some Council
members have reservations about inter-mission
cooperation. We understand that inter-mission
cooperation, while critical to effectiveness, usually
offers only temporary solutions and it should not
prevent us from addressing more deep-rooted structural
deficiencies faced by individual missions; nor should it
be used to avoid addressing shortages of critical assets
which affect several missions.

But we are confident that inter-mission cooperation
as currently practiced by the United Nations adheres
to peacekeeping principles. Appropriate and necessary
consultation with troop-contributing countries will
continue, of course, to take place, and final authority
will, of course, remain with the Security Council. So
while we understand why delegations may wish to
express their concerns and set down their constraints,
we feel that they should not be overemphasized at the
expense of a concept that has led to more effective
peacekeeping, which we should all support.
We know that armed groups posing a threat to
security and stability frequently live and operate in
border areas. We have held debates in this Chamber
to consider the insecurity caused by the illicit flow of
weapons, drugs and people across porous borders that
separate countries affected by or at risk from conflict.
We know that borders may often be breached by flows
of refugees, which can be a cause of greater instability.
We must therefore ensure that peacekeeping operations
on either side of such borders have greater flexibility to
share resources, expertise and planning in developing
joint approaches to tackling such challenges.

Peacekeeping operations must be able to rapidly
surge assets to the point of a crisis. We remain open to
proposals to make inter-mission cooperation easier to
achieve in order to ensure that peacekeeping missions
are more effective and sustainable.

