Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing the United Kingdom's continued
support for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Their work is
essential in helping to tackle impunity and in delivering
justice to the countless victims of atrocities in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. All States should respect
that work and the independent and impartial way in
which it is conducted. I would also like to express
our thanks to President Meron, President Joensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
excellent reports and briefings.

Cooperation from all parties is essential to the
effectiveness of the ICTY. The United Kingdom notes
the new Serbian Government's assurances to the
Prosecutor's Office of its continued cooperation, albeit
at a technical level. Progress has been made. Crucial
investigations into support networks that allowed
Mladie and Hadzie to escape capture are advancing.
This progress must continue. Anyone who has provided
assistance to fugitives must be held accountable.

Croatian and Bosnian cooperation has also been
positive. We expect this to continue over the coming
months, and encourage the Croatian authorities to react
with dignity and respect to the acquittals of Gotovina
and Markac. These verdicts were reached through
an impartial and independent judicial process. It is
essential that all sides respect these verdicts.

We share the Prosecutor's concern about the
ability of national institutions to prosecute war crimes
effectively. Efforts to advance regional reconciliation
and to promote the rule of law rely on the effectiveness
of these institutions. We join the Prosecutor in calling
on Croatia to focus on domestic prosecution of war
crimes and deal with this legacy of the past urgently.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is also experiencing
difficulties with domestic prosecutions, as we heard.
Its adoption of the cooperation protocol will help tackle
the backlog of cases and improve parallel investigations
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. We
encourage Bosnian authorities to redouble their efforts
to adopt the cooperation protocol.

We understand that staff retention difficulties
are having an effect on the ICTY's ability to keep the
Karadzic' trial on schedule. Nevertheless, we urge the
ICTY to take all necessary steps to minimize delays
and complete the trial by 31 December 2014. The timely
completion of all trials is essential for transitioning to
the Residual Mechanism. With that in mind, we support
the requested extensions of the judges in both Tribunals.
Predictable continuity is required in the interests of
both justice and effectiveness. Neither justice nor
effectiveness will be served by micromanagement of
the Tribunals by the Council.

We reached an important milestone with the start of
the Hadeie trial. This demonstrates that, no matter how
long it takes, anyone accused of serious international
crimes will be held accountable and brought to justice.

Let me now turn to the ICTR. Nine fugitives remain
at large. Apprehending these individuals is an urgent
and immediate priority. Justice will not be served
while these individuals evade justice. We encourage
all Member States to provide their full, unequivocal
support and cooperation to apprehend these fugitives
and bring them to justice.

Close cooperation between the ICTR and the ICTY
is increasingly important as the date of the ICTY's
transition approaches. We welcome the fact that ICTR's
transition to the Residual Mechanism is under way
and that the transfer of judicial functions is almost
complete. We encourage further cooperation.

Resettlement of acquitted individuals is a
fundamental expression of the rule of law. Host States
for the five acquitted individuals in Arusha have not yet
been found, as we have heard. Resolving that matter is
a priority. We encourage every effort to find a solution
as soon as possible.

Regrettably, ICTR staff retention remains an issue
and places strain on existing staff members. There is
no easy solution to the ICTR turnover rate problem. We
thus encourage the Tribunal to prioritize its resources
to the best of its ability and to operate as effectively
as possible. We are pleased that the judgement in the
Ngirabatware case is expected this month. Ensuring that
trials are completed on time is, of course, fundamental
to the ICTR's completion strategy.

In establishing the Tribunals, the Security Council
sent an important signal of its commitment to the fight
against impunity. We and the Victims of the atrocities
owe a debt of gratitude to the Tribunals for what they
have achieved. We also owe our respect to the Tribunals
as independent and painstaking instruments of justice.
But, as we get closer to the fulfilment of the completion
strategies, it is important to recognize that that is not
the end. The pursuit of justice for all of the Victims
requires that every effort be made to advance domestic
prosecutions and, in that way, to ensure that everyone
who should be held accountable is indeed brought to
book.

