Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like, like previous speakers, warmly to
thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for his
presentation of the Committee's programme of work,
as well as for the outstanding work he and his team in
the Spanish Mission are doing in the context of the
chairmanship of the Committee.

As an associated country of the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Italy on
behalf of the European Union. I should like, however,
to make a few comments in my national capacity.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee remains at the
heart of efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.
That devastating scourge poses a threat to all of
humankind. We are pleased that, during the past three
months, the Committee has continued to work actively
to implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

We are grateful to Ambassador Arias, as I have
just said, and to the team of experts of the Secretariat
for their outstanding work. I should like also to add
that my delegation fully agrees with the assessment of
the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee just
given by Ambassador Arias in his statement.

During the past period, positive results were
achieved in terms of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). In this connection, we welcome the fact
that all Member States have already submitted their
initial reports. We should take note also of the fact that
ongoing efforts have been made to ensure maximum
transparency in the work of the Committee and to
ensure progress in the area of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.

By the same token, it should be noted that a great
deal remains to be done with respect to the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).

In this connection, I should like briefly to
emphasize a few trends in the work of the Committee
to which my delegation attaches particular attention.

First, we are aware that consideration of the
report has been slowed down because of the
complexity of the evaluation criteria used in stage B.
Furthermore, we are concerned that 48 States have still
not complied with the timetable laid down for the
submission of reports. In this connection, we share the
view that technical assistance should be facilitated for
those countries requiring it. We welcome all of the
efforts made to go from stage A to stage B, which
would focus on the practical application of universally
adopted counter-terrorism measures.

Secondly, my delegation attaches great
importance to cooperation between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations. Bulgaria supports strengthening contact
and cooperation to combat terrorism between the
Committee and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The priorities of the Bulgarian chairmanship of
the OSCE in 2004 will include giving final concrete
form to cooperation with the Committee and with
specialized agencies of the United Nations system. We
hope that the joint meeting of the Committee and the
OSCE, which is planned for 12 March in Vienna, will
make a useful contribution to this. The seminars and
other joint initiatives of the European Union and the
OSCE make a valuable contribution to drawing up the
necessary legislation and to strengthening the capacity
and expertise of States in such areas as banking,
customs and border control. We look forward to the
seminar to take place on 7 November under the aegis of
the Italian presidency of the European Union and of the
European Commission.

Thirdly, my country reiterates its position that the
struggle against terrorism should be waged with strict
respect for human rights. Any action, whether at the
national, regional or subregional levels, must be in
accordance with the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law. Terrorists should not
have the slightest pretext for their hateful acts.

Fourthly, we share the concern of numerous
delegations that the Committee's work should be given
a more practical orientation. In this context, we support
the Committee Chairman's idea of submitting to the
Council a report on the difficulties encountered by
Member States - and himself - in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

