President Morales Ayma (spoke in Spanish): The
presidency of the Security Council has called on its
members to discuss the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

Bolivia is located in a region that has been declared
nuclear-weapon-free for more than half a century.
For that reason, I recall article I of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:

"Each State Party undertakes not to transfer
to any recipient whatsoever and not in any way
to assist, encourage, or induce any non-nuclear-
weapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices".

I call on all States represented around this table to sign,
ratify and give immediate effect to these provisions.
That is the best way to avoid the catastrophic possibility
of the use of such weapons. It is an ethical imperative
and a debt to future generations.

The States Members of the United Nations system
are obliged to comply with the essential tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations, adopted in 1945, and
above all to resolve their international disputes through
the use of mechanisms of peaceful settlement. In no
dispute may they use weapons of any kind. Rather, it is
negotiation, diplomacy, dialogue and judicial settlement
that must guide the actions of the countries. Bolivia
is convinced that only through these means will we
achieve more just societies with shared responsibilities.

We must be capable of leaving the primitive use of
weapons among peoples in the past. I must highlight as
an example the contribution of the International Court
of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations system, in the effective resolution of disputes
between States in different latitudes and different
situations. We are convinced that it is essential to
discuss not only the effects, but above all the structural
causes of armed conflicts and the real motivations for
breaches of international peace, security and justice.

One example of that is Iran, a country that has
already been referred to this morning. In 1953, the
United States financed, organized and executed a coup
d'etat against a democratically elected Government
that, in exercise of its sovereignty, nationalized its
oil from the hands of an Anglo-American company.
Then, for several decades, it supported an authoritarian
Government that allowed oil profits to benefit
transnational corporations.

That was the situation until the 1979 revolution.
Now that Iran has regained control of its resources, it
is once again a victim of a United States siege. Bolivia
categorically rejects the unilateral actions undertaken
by the United States Government against Iran. It also
condemns the fact that the United States has withdrawn
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, using
excuses to pursue its policy of interference and
intervention in the internal affairs of that sister country.

I would also point to the region of the Middle
East, rich in natural resources but disproportionately
affected by invasions, wars and situations ofunjustified
aggression that continue to produce pain and mourning
among its peoples. That region has been the scene of
the three greatest aggressions committed in the twenty-
first century. The first was the illegal invasion of Iraq,
based on the lie that the country possessed weapons
of mass destruction. That invasion resulted in more
than 1 million deaths. The second aggression was
the overthrow of the Libyan Government, with tens
of thousands of dead, on the pretext of humanitarian
motivations. The serious political instability and
humanitarian crisis it unleashed in North Africa are
ongoing. The third aggression is the civil war in Syria,
which over the past eight years has caused more than
half a million deaths. That war is the direct product
of interference and the financing of the armed groups
and terrorist organizations that are confronting the
Syrian Government.

In recent months, the United States has once
again demonstrated its contempt for international law,
multilateralism and the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. Every time the United
States invades a country, launches missiles or finances
regime-change, it does so together with a propaganda
campaign that reiterates that such action is in the name
of justice, freedom, democracy, human rights or for
humanitarian reasons. I would like to inform the Council
that the United States is not interested in democracy,
for if that were so it would not have financed coups
d'etat and supported dictators. It would not threaten
democratically elected Governments with military
interventions, as it has done with Venezuela. It is not
interested in human rights or justice. If so, it would
sign and ratify international human rights treaties. It
would not threaten the investigative mechanisms of the
International Criminal Court. It would not encourage
the use of torture or withdraw from the Human Rights
Council. It would not separate migrant children from
their families or put them in cages. The United States
is not interested in multilateralism. If so, it would not
have withdrawn from the Paris Agreement or renounced
the global compact on migration. It would not launch
unilateral attacks or make unilateral decisions, such
as illegally declaring Jerusalem to be the capital of
Israel. Such contempt for multilateralism is motivated
by its desire for geopolitical control and to appropriate
natural resources.

Nonetheless, we commend the countries - France,
Germany, the United Kingdom, China and Russia - that
stand firm in defence of the nuclear agreement signed
with Iran; did not abandon the Paris Agreement;
defend the principles of the sovereign equality of
States and non-interference in internal affairs; respect
international law and commitments made and uphold
multilateralism. The responsibility of our generation is
to bequeath a fairer and safer world to future generations.
That will be achieved only if we work together to build
a multipolar world, with common rules for respecting
and defending the United Nations from all threats.

