We would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month and on convening this high-level debate on the drivers of conflict and insecurity. Since gaining its independence, the Sudan has endured a number of internal disputes and conflicts. The complexity of conflicts in the Sudan is a result of their multiple dimensions and the historical and modern-day factors that have sparked and inflamed them. These conflicts have adversely affected the overall humanitarian and economic situation in manifold ways. What has happened in the Sudan is an instance of the types of conflicts and civil wars that have befallen other African nations. Such conflicts have erupted for various reasons. A large proportion of those conflicts are the legacy of colonialism, while others are the result of the political manipulation of small-scale tribal and ethnic disputes, as well as of disputes over how to organize national elections or whether to accept their outcomes. Some are linked to struggles over State authority, while others are driven by disputes over natural resources and the benefits thereof. The effects of the desertification and drought that have ravaged the Sahel region have led to conflict over water and pastures. In certain situations, such as that of Darfur, conflicts arise between farmers and pastoralists. In the same vein, some regions of Africa continue to grapple with conflicts over identity that undermine national cohesion. The proliferation of small arms and light weapons amplifies the spread of these conflicts. Therefore, the only way to eliminate the challenges arising from conflicts and their drivers is to address the widespread proliferation of weapons and ammunition in developing countries, by taking three actions, namely, establishing good systems for managing weapons stocks, controlling their movement and destroying excess weapons. In spite of that bleak picture, the future does look brighter, in view of the progress made in achieving peace and security in Africa in recent decades, especially since 2004 with the contribution of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. Consequently, the goal of putting an end to wars in Africa is an achievable one, as the continent has a judicious plan to promote peace, security and stability. The plan's other aims include making progress in the areas of good governance, respect for human rights and the rights of peoples, commitments not to attack Constitutional arrangements, early warning mechanisms, conflict prevention and resolution, and the use of traditional and civil mechanisms to resolve disputes, drawing upon the significant and effective social heritage of those mechanisms. These efforts are reinforced by the political will of African States to address the causes and roots of conflicts; political will is a basic prerequisite for that process. A few weeks ago, the Sudan was able to reach a peace agreement that ended decades of war and silenced the guns in Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. A final observation I would make is that, in order to assess the causes and drivers of instability and conflict, it is essential first to understand the nature, dimensions and political and cultural contexts of each individual case. Such an approach makes it possible to develop a comprehensive and suitable strategy that incorporates formal and informal mediation mechanisms at the community, national and continental levels and that consolidates the efforts of all stakeholders, including the United Nations, in a more effective manner.
