Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
welcoming the Secretary-General's briefing, as this will
probably be his last public meeting on the issue. I want
to thank him for his unflinching activism on the Middle
East peace process. It has been a difficult and, at most
times, frustrating portfolio, but he has not wavered in
his resolve to bring a conclusion to what is one of the
longest-running issues on the Council's agenda. I agree
with every word that he said in his briefing just now.
But it is perhaps with his successor in mind that I want
to talk today. He faces a challenge on which we, in the
broadest possible sense, have failed for over 60 years.

So, what can we do, as members of the Security
Council, to make sure that the ninth Secretary-General
of the United Nations does not have to endure the
frustrations of his predecessors? What can we do
together to ensure that the people ofIsrael and Palestine
enjoy decades of peace ahead rather than relapse into
more decades of division and hatred? I want to focus on
three issues where our activism is needed most: illegal
settlements, Gaza, and incitement and violence.

The United Kingdom's position on settlements is
clear. It is a position shared by all of us around the table,
I think. The settlements are illegal under international
law and take us further away from the two-State
solution that we all want to see. Despite the findings of
the Middle East Quartet report this year, the situation
has only gotten worse. As the Foreign Minister of New
Zealand said, we are especially concerned by the land
regulation bill in the Knesset, which would retroactively
legalize settlement outposts in the West Bank. Should
that proposal go ahead, it would be a serious blow to
the prospects for a two-State solution. It would pave the
way for an exponential rise in settlements deep in the
West Bank and create more grievances, hopelessness
and anger among Palestinians. The United Kingdom
regularly raises the issue of settlements with Israel,
at all levels. The Foreign Secretary raised it when he
met Prime Minister Netanyahu on 30 September. But
we should also use the voice of the Council to make
that call, to urge Israel to cease its policy of settlement
expansion so that that grave barrier to peace can
be lifted.

Turning to Gaza, it is clear that there is a real risk
of a return to conflict. As we saw in October, rocket
attacks have continued, as have the Israeli responses.
We should speak loudly and clearly in the Chamber.
Terrorist groups in Gaza must permanently end rocket
fire and other attacks against Israel. But the woes of
Gaza go beyond the unacceptable acts of those groups.
It is estimated that 90 per cent of Gaza's water is not fit
even for agricultural use, and that Gaza continues to
have the highest unemployment rates in the world. Some
progress is being made - education and health facilities
have now largely been rebuilt - but reconstruction
is far from complete. Efforts need to focus on house
rebuilding and reviving the economy, stimulating
exports and creating jobs. So we encourage the Israeli
authorities to improve Gazans' access to clean water
and to improve the flow of the necessary construction
materials into Gaza, such as concrete. In tandem with
that, let us recognize that our support is needed too.
Donors must honour their commitments made at the
International Cairo Conference on Palestine for Gaza
Reconstruction. Too many are still outstanding. The
United Kingdom stands ready to play its part.

Turning to my third point, we are pleased to see
that the levels of violence have dropped in recent
months, but again there is much for both parties to
do to de-escalate tensions and prevent incitement.
We cannot underestimate just how corrosive racist,
anti-Semitic and hateful language is in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories. Together, we must
deplore incitement on all sides of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including any comments that stir up hatred
and prejudice. Sadly, such hatred is not limited to
words alone. We are appalled by terrorist attacks
against Israeli citizens. We are appalled at the violence
committed by extremist settlers against Palestinians.
We unequivocally condemn all such incidents.

Before I give up the floor, I recognize that it will
take more than the Council's words to finally make
progress. We also need to work with partners in the
region and internationally to produce improvements on
the ground and build trust between the parties, if we are
to secure progress towards meaningful negotiations.
With that in mind, it is incumbent upon the Council to
take appropriate action in support of those efforts. We
believe that there is clear merit in a Council resolution
that commands the full support of the Chamber. We
will judge any proposal that emerges on its merits and
on whether it supports progress towards peace, but
there is a great deal that we can all agree on, and I hope
that we can make progress towards a lasting peace in
the days and weeks ahead.

