Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today's meeting and for
initiating this very worthy mission by the Security
Council. On behalf of Ambassador Power, let me thank

all Council members for contributing to a timely and
constructive Visit to South Sudan. Special thanks go out
to Ambassador Gasana and the Rwandan delegation for
their strong partnership as co-leaders of that portion of
the trip.

The Council is a long-time friend of South Sudan.
It is therefore fitting and fair to characterize the visit
as an emergency call, given that the deteriorating
political, humanitarian and security crisis unfolding
there. In less than 24 hours on the ground we were able
to hear from many key stakeholders and to convey the
Council's concern over the direction events had taken.
We held candid and tough exchanges with
PresidentKiir andRiekMachar andtheir senioradvisers,
delivering a number of key messages, including that
there was no military solution and that the fighting must
stop; that it was time to resume the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led peace talks
and to develop plans for a transitional Government of
national unity; that there must be accountability for
perpetrators of human rights violations; and that there
must be respect for and cooperation with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), including
by not interfering with humanitarian access. We also
clearly signalled that the Council was prepared to
impose consequences on spoilers of the peace process.
At the conclusion of those discussions, there was a
sense of hope, but not confidence, that those leaders
would take positive action.

In one of the most striking portions of the trip, the
Council travelled 325 miles to the north to Malakal
to see the plight of the internally displaced first-
hand. Imagine 17,000 civilians, across all ethnicities
and demographics, living in the most difficult of
circumstances at an UNMISS protection of civilians
camp. We were struck by their resilience as they
engaged with the Council on politics, security and the
leadership of women, all while making their case for
peace.

Similarly, we heard very clear messages from
faith-based civil society and women's leaders during
a meeting in Juba. In that dialogue, leaders stressed
the importance of holding inclusive political talks. As
well, they called on their leaders to allow humanitarian
access to fight acute malnutrition, to commit to full
accountability and to stop the war now.

Let me conclude on South Sudan by reporting
that the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ellen Margrethe Lej, joined the programme
in her designated capacity before officially starting
work on 1 September. We were able to offer our
staunch support for her throughout the visit. We also
were able to see new UNMISS Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Johannes Tesfamarium, and our
troop-contributing countries in action, as well as to
be briefed by Deputy Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General Raisedon Zenenga and Toby Lanzer
on UNMISS operations and the humanitarian situation.
Our message to all of UNMISS was to thank them for
their courageous work and to tell them that they had the
Council's full support.

Before I conclude, let me mention that the Council
also used its transit time in Nairobi to meet with
Kenyan President Kenyatta and to hold a joint meeting
of the Council and IGAD ministers and representatives
to discuss South Sudan and Somalia. Both meetings
provide valuable insights as we continue to work
closely with the region to bring peace and security in
both countries.

