Allow me, at the outset, to thank the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, His Excellency Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, and the Permanent Mission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for organizing today's open debate. Our appreciation also goes to Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Ibrahim Mayaki, Chief Executive Officer of the African Union Development Agency; Sir Hilary Beckles, Vice Chancellor of the University of the West Indies; and Mr. Munir Akram, President of the Economic and Social Council, as well as the other briefers, for their insightful briefings. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace focus on political processes and political solutions with strategic frameworks to address the complexity of conflict in today's world. Such frameworks are meant to address the fragmentation that exists both within the United Nations system and among Member States. Policy actors have concluded that the best approach to determine the pathway for sustaining peace, after decades of top-down peacebuilding efforts, is bottom-up, which is more inclusive and able to address the grievances that give rise to conflict and those that result from war. Peacebuilding actors need to identify ways to navigate competing demands through integrated response strategies that address the root causes and drivers of conflict and insecurity. However, contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity include poverty, inequality, terrorism, violent extremism, irregular migration, intercommunal violence, organized crime, the forceful acquisition of natural resources and, recently, the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as the ever- growing threat posed by climate change. Those factors contribute significantly to the sustained and challenging security situation, with a cumulative impact on individuals and societies. Insecurity is also increasingly driven by the reoccurrence of conflicts in certain countries, rather than by the emergence of new ones. Those conflicts are deeply rooted in social, economic and political inequalities, coupled with weak State capacity and bad governance, in addition to various demographic factors such as increased population growth and rapid urbanization. The sum of those factors creates opportunities for violence that has persisted over time and further changed the global security architecture. According to the World Bank and the United Nations, countries experiencing violent conflict are unlikely to make significant progress for a generation, putting the Sustainable Development Goals out of reach for millions. The COVID-19 pandemic represents a specific and immediate threat to the very survival of the world population, made increasingly difficult owing to the vulnerability of the world's socioeconomic infrastructure. The effects of increasing population, changing demographics, urban crowding and a dynamic geopolitical landscape have further challenged mitigation efforts aimed at the ravaging pandemic. Nigeria, like many African countries, is more vulnerable to the economic impact of climate change, particularly in relation to the depletion of natural resources, which has long-term environmental implications. Given the importance of agriculture as a main source of livelihood for a sizeable number of people on the continent, such climatic issues often lead to socioeconomic and political exclusion, which tend to aggravate pre-existing tensions within marginalized communities. Those developments explain why conflicts are prevalent on the African continent. It is also worth knowing that, in conflict-affected countries, where populations already suffer from multiple risks associated with the pandemic, the situation is further worsened by lack of access to markets and the disruption of supply chains and mobility restraint leading to the closure of markets. The inability to maintain social distancing among populations where health and sanitary facilities are inadequate, especially in camps, also presents a challenging security risk scenario, with the potential for high rates of infection to spread easily to communities within proximity. The COVID-19 pandemic has therefore unmasked the varying shades of inequality as well as impacted prospects for resilience and recovery. The Security Council should therefore rise to the occasion, with cross-cutting engagement in the Peacebuilding Commission's strategic advisory capacity and the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund. That will help to address essential governance gaps and initiate projects and programmes that stimulate socioeconomic and political participation designed with respect to local customs and values of Member States in order to address the root causes of conflict. International and regional initiatives also play a significant role in addressing conflict and insecurity in the world. The Security Council and the United Nations system, in tandem with States, regional organizations and other stakeholders, must be proactive in preventing conflict from emerging in the first place. However, when conflicts do emerge, all mechanisms must be rolled out to respond and resolve them quickly. To that end, the Council should draw upon all the mechanisms of the United Nations system to address, prevent and respond to conflicts and threats to international peace and security. My delegation is of the view that an effective long-term strategy needs to be put in place to tackle such issues as a matter of priority. That includes addressing youth unemployment, the marginalization of women, social exclusion, inequality, respect for human rights, creating gainful employment opportunities and building a society based on the rule of law, sustainable growth and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which aims to leave no one behind. We agree that we must address climate change and its consequences, including the degradation of the ecosystem. The issue of climate change must be integrated into peace efforts, which must in turn be adapted to changing climates and environments. That will, no doubt, require a holistic approach and joint and collaborative effort to tackle the problems of conflict and insecurity. In conclusion, there is no denying the fact that tackling the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity in the world is a collective responsibility. The entire United Nations system must support national and regional efforts to combat the threats that continuously lead to conflict and insecurity among Member States.
