Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution, which
is of course on the Iran sanctions regime. The present
report covers the period from 25 June to 12 September,
during which time the Committee conducted its work
using the standard no-objection procedure envisaged in
paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the conduct of the
Committee's work.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its consideration of the final report of the
Panel of Experts, in particular in view of any follow-
up action by the Committee. Taking into account the
report's conclusions, the Committee intends to continue
its deliberations on the recommendations of the report,
which have not yet been concluded.

The Committee continued to consider its response
to the Panel of Experts' report (S/2014/394, annex)
concerning the interdiction in the Red Sea by a Member
State on 31 March of a cargo of conventional arms that
was allegedly loaded onto a vessel in the Iranian port of
Bandar Abbas. Following the Panel's clear conclusions,
the Committee wrote to Iran on 9 July in relation to
that incident, seeking its comments. Iran has not yet
provided a response.

During the reporting period, the Committee
considered requests for guidance from Member States
covering a range of issues, including notification
requirements and proposals for possible cooperation
with Iranian companies in the field of mine action and a
request for the delisting of an entity that is currently on
the consolidated list of designated individuals, entities
and good to which the sanctions apply.

The Committee also provided a response to
an international organization, clarifying whether
its proposal for technical assistance to Iran was in
compliance with the sanctions regime, and is currently
working with the organization on a similar request.
The Committee welcomes such engagement on matters
of implementation and compliance, and encourages
Member States to seek guidance from the Committee
on the application of the Council's measures to support
their implementation.

The Committee received a communication from a
Member State during the reporting period relating to
actions it had taken to implement the relevant Security
Council measures. The Committee encourages
Member States that have not yet submitted reports to
do so as soon as possible, in recognition that national
implementation reports are an important means of
enhancing implementation of the sanctions measures.

In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
pleased to report that, following the Council's decision
in resolution 2159 (2014) of9 June to extend the Panel's
mandate to 9 July 2015, the Secretariat has finalized
the administrative steps related to the experts'
appointment. On 1 August, the Panel submitted its
programme of work for the new mandate, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of the same resolution. On behalf of
the Committee, I would like to recognize the efforts of
the Panel in assisting the Committee's work, and we
look forward to further close and fruitful collaboration
with the Panel under its new mandate.

During the reporting period, the Panel continued
its important outreach work by visiting a Member State
at its invitation, from 29 June to 2 July, to discuss the
measures taken by the particular State to implement
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010). The Panel of Experts and its individual
members also participated in relevant international
meetings and conferences, including the third plenary
meeting of the Financial Action Task Force and working
group meetings, the European Union Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament Conference, and a symposium on
managing sanctions risks in the maritime transportation
sector, hosted by the Governments of Australia and
Singapore last week in Singapore, on 12 September.
Finally, the Committee remains fully committed to
Member State implementation of all relevant obligations
as the P5+1 negotiations continue.

