Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The question of Angola, having dragged on for
so long, has finally entered into a phase of positive
change that is worthy of celebration. We have always
believed that at the core of the question of Angola is the
lack of mutual trust between the parties concerned,
particularly on the part of UNITA. This requires the two
parties, especially UNITA, to make unremitting efforts to
achieve genuine national reconciliation.

We note with satisfaction that, in recent days, the
Angola Government and UNITA have at last made
important progress in implementing the Lusaka Protocol
and in fulfilling the tasks enumerated in the consolidated

 

timetable. We note in particular that the goals set in the
military area are gradually being realized. We hope that
both parties will consolidate and maintain the positive
momentum in the peace process and eliminate their
differences through candid consultations.

We are pleased to learn that UNITA has completed the
quartering of its troops. We hope that the work of
demobilization will start as soon as possible. We hope to
see a fifth meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi and expect the Angolan Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation and a single parliament to be
established soon, allowing Angola finally to embark upon
the path towards peace and reconciliation.

Since its establishment, the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) has made important
contributions to the monitoring of the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and to assistance in the restoration of
peace and the realization of national reconciliation in
Angola. We believe that, as the Angolan peace process
develops and UNAVEM. III gradually fulfils its tasks, it
will be necessary to make appropriate adjustments to this
Mission, which is currently the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation. In the meantime, at this critical
juncture in the Angolan peace process, the continued
presence of UNAVEM. III is essential to the complete
fulfilment of various tasks set out in the Lusaka Protocol
and to the final realization of peace in Angola.

In view of this, the Chinese delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

In accordance with Security Council resolution 976
(1995), the mission of UNAVEM. III will be concluded next
February. After that, whether and how to maintain a United
Nations presence in Angola is a question of concern. Years
of war and conflict have left Angola in ruins and the task
of reconstruction is very arduous. The Chinese delegation
believes that the international community, including the
United Nations, should continue to focus on and support the
cause of peace and reconstruction in Angola.

The Chinese Government recently donated a cargo of
goods to the Government of Angola in support of the peace
process in that country. In the future we shall, within the
limit of our capabilities and together with the rest of the
international community, continue to make our contribution
to the peace and reconstruction of Angola.

