Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
presentation. I associate myself with the remarks to be
made later by the representative of Ireland on behalf of
the European Union and, especially, express the
condolences of the British Government to the
Government of Kenya, to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and especially to the family of
the Kenyan military observer killed in Ituri on 12
February.

Last year's Great Lakes mission was a valuable
initiative at a critical moment: critical for the peace
process in Burundi and especially for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the future of the region.
It is right that we should put the situation in a regional
context. The efforts of the transitional national
Government and the Governments of Rwanda and
Uganda to improve relations are indeed very welcome.

Turning to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I congratulate MONUC on its work. It is
striking that the attack last week took place during a
MONUC mission to stop harassment of the civilian
population. All the parties in Ituri must put an
immediate end to such violence. I rally readily to the
argument put forward by Ambassador de La Sabliere
that there is a strong case for MONUC to take a more
robust posture with the militia in Ituri. The failure to
do that at the beginning of conflict always pays us
badly at the end.

The transition process in the Democratic

Republic of the Congo - in particular, election
preparations, security sector reform and the political
and economic reunification of the country - poses

huge challenges. For that, we need a transitional
national Government-owned strategy and a real
national Government - one which then coordinates
fully with the donors. The United Kingdom will
continue to step up its engagement on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as long as the transition remains
on track.

The Security Council can support the process by
keeping the situation under regular review and
commenting, including publicly, as necessary. The
International Committee in Support of the Transition is
an important tool on the ground to help identify
concerns and urge solutions.

We also need to continue to tackle the violence in
the east. The arms embargo imposed by resolution
1493 (2003) cannot put a perfect seal on the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. How
could it, given the length of the border? But it can have
a real deterrent effect and make clear that we are
serious. We hope, therefore, that we can reach early
agreement on an arms monitoring mechanism.

Turning to Burundi, the African Mission is doing
a very good job under difficult conditions and serious
financial constraints. The African Union, South Africa,
Mozambique and Ethiopia are to be congratulated on
their significant contribution to supporting the peace
process in Burundi. The United Kingdom has made, is
making and will continue to make substantial sums
available, especially to the African Mission in Burundi.
We are also open to the idea that this force might in
due course be replaced by a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Burundi.

We look forward to the report of the Secretariat
mission that is due to travel to the region this week -
one of the three United Nations missions currently, or
soon to be, in the country.

Lastly, turning to impunity, we remain concerned
about the continuing and recent human rights abuses in
Burundi. In this context, we welcome and strongly
support the projects developed by the Burundi Field
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Progress towards establishing a truth and reconciliation
commission has been too slow. We hope that the
disagreement between political groups, which so far
has held up parliamentary adoption of the law on truth
and reconciliation, will soon be overcome, and the law
adopted.

In our view, it is important that the question of
impunity and post-conflict justice be addressed at an
early stage. That is necessary if there is to be lasting
peace in Burundi based on democratic principles
fostering truth and reconciliation and, at the same time,
achieving justice.

I have a lot more to say, but as others have made
similar points and as you, Mr. President, have imposed
a five-minute time limit, I will willingly stop.

