Mr. Pleuger (Germany): "Helpless outrage is a
characteristic emotion of the global age", a journalist
writing about child war amputees from Freetown
recently observed. I think that all of us feel outrage at
the devastating effect of armed conflict on children. We
are outraged at the cynicism and cruelty of adults who
steal the childhood of boys and girls by making them
fight in their wars.

The Council is one of the few bodies in the world
that does not have to confine itself to "helpless
outrage". The Council can act. Germany is very
pleased at the coincidence that its first public address
to the Council should deal with children and armed
conflict. This issue belongs firmly on the Council's
agenda. Germany will do whatever it can to ensure that
we do not stop at debate but also take action. We must
do this also out of respect for the dedicated work of
women and men in non-governmental organizations, in
the United Nations system and elsewhere, as was
demonstrated once again by yesterday's Arria format
meeting.

We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara
Otunnu and Ms. Carol Bellamy for their opening
remarks and for their reminders that we need practical
and concrete progress on the pressing issues facing us.

Germany welcomes this year's report by the
Secretary-General.

We believe it is an outspoken and focused report.
We are pleased with the forthright manner in which the
Special Representative has taken up the task entrusted
to him by the Council to name those countries that
recruit or use children in armed conflict in violation of
their international obligations. We especially welcome
the fact that the report is not limited to those five
countries that are currently on the Council's agenda.
This has ensured that many of the worst offenders,
including the worst offender, have been brought to the
Council's attention. We give our express
encouragement to the Special Representative to
continue to report on child soldier recruitment in any
conflict, without any geographic or other restrictions.

At the time of the last open debate on this item, in
November 2001, the Secretary-General had rightly
pointed out that we needed to enter an era of
application. Application is even more urgent today than
it was then. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has come into force. It lists the
conscription, enlistment or use in hostilities of children
under the age of 15 as a war crime. We urge all States
to ratify the ICC Statute and thus to join hands in the
fight against impunity from crimes that shock the
consciences of all. The entry into force of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict also
constitutes a milestone on the road to ending
recruitment of child soldiers.

Germany fully supports the Special
Representative's call for a vigorous monitoring effort
by the United Nations to ensure that States fulfil their
international obligations. The list annexed to this report
is an important starting point. However, monitoring
will only succeed if those who refuse to cooperate and
to act upon their international obligations face
consequences. We support every effort of the Council
to add bite to these monitoring efforts. And we support
Olara Otunnu's concept of systematic monitoring as a
trigger for action, as just set out in his opening
remarks.

The Council has made promising progress
towards including the rights of the child in its
deliberations and actions with regard to specific
country situations. The inclusion of child protection
units in peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and, most recently,
Angola has helped to bring the problem into sharp
relief. We are eager to hear about further results from
these new components of peacekeeping operations.
Germany considers it crucial that the Council take the
rights of the child into account in all its country-
specific actions. The problems facing us are by no
means confined to the three aforementioned countries
of Africa.

Urgent action is needed in many other fields as
well. The Secretary-General's report once again deals
with the cruel effects of anti-personnel mines on
children. Germany is strongly committed to the fight
against anti-personnel landmines. It is crucial to
enhance these efforts and to coordinate efforts in mine
action. This is a field where every additional effort
yields immediate results. Each mine we clear saves
lives.

We share the Secretary-General's dismay at the
disappointing progress made so far in curtailing the
availability of small arms and light weapons. This
directly contributes to the recruitment of child soldiers.
Germany urges clear progress at this year's conference
on the implementation of the Programme of Action on
small arms.

Many more pressing matters in this debate call
for urgent action. They include the aspects of gender,
humanitarian access and sexual exploitation - also by
peacekeepers. Some of these will be touched upon by
my colleague from Greece in his statement for the
European Union, with which Germany fully associates
itself.

The Council will hopefully soon adopt a further
resolution on children and armed conflict. Germany has
joined other members of the Council to make the draft
resolution as action-oriented as possible. We warmly
thank the French presidency for its great dedication and
expertise in chairing these complex negotiations.

Allow me to conclude by saying that the
Secretary-General's report underscores the importance
of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
We believe that both UNICEF and the Special
Representative, as well as other actors in the United
Nations system, have crucial and complementary roles
to play in this field. We encourage them and all
Member States to join efforts in a spirit of common
purpose.

