Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
delegation of the United States for a job well done last
month. Allow me also to thank the members of the
Council for their decision to send a mission to Central
Africa in November 2004, as well to thank the leader
of the mission for presenting its report. My
Government believes that such visits to the field are
useful to enable the Council to appreciate first-hand the
challenges being faced with respect to peace, security,
poverty and underdevelopment in the region.

The mission began its visit one day after the
historic signing of the Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. It is my Government's earnest
hope that the process that began in Dar es Salaam on
20 November will culminate in genuine and durable
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region and in the wider African continent.
We welcome the determination of the heads of State
present at Dar es Salaam to respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all States in the region and
to prevent the use of their own territories for
subversive activities by armed groups. We also
welcome their strong commitment to combat genocide
in the region and to disarm and arrest the perpetrators
of the genocide in Rwanda.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
that the allegations pertaining to the presence of
Rwandan army troops are false. We have thus far
deployed our troops along the common border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to counter
incursions perpetrated by former Forces armees
rwandaises(FAR)/Interahamwe from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Council members will be aware of my
Government's concern that for 10 years the problem of
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe based on the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been
conclusively addressed and, as a result, remains a
source of insecurity and unrest for Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider
region. Over the last 10 years, Rwanda's sovereignty
and territorial integrity have been repeatedly violated
with relative impunity by those forces. Cross-border
attacks are very frequent. Over the last few months
alone, over 600 of those forces have been captured
while conducting operations inside Rwanda. Their
cross-border operations have caused loss of life and
property and injury to civilians, as well as destruction
of infrastructure.

Despite numerous Council resolutions, those
forces continue to live and conduct criminal activities
from within their mobilized units in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They also continue to receive
military and other supplies and to recruit, train and
brainwash a significant number of members of the
younger generation that they involve in their military
activities.

We are aware that a new plan is now on the table
regarding the disarmament of those negative forces.
However, it is my Government's experience that it is
not absence of good ideas or new and fresh plans that
killed the old plans, but rather the lack of political will
to implement them.

My Government earnestly hopes that the problem
of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe can be rapidly and
decisively addressed by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo Government and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), so that the need for any country
in the region to take any action against those forces in
self-defense is eliminated.

My Government looks forward to the
operationalization of the Joint Verification Mechanism.
In that regard, Rwanda has demonstrated its
commitment by taking the necessary steps to fulfil its
obligations, including the appointment of
representatives. We look forward to the appointment of
all representatives so that the mechanism could be
operationalized in the very near future.

Concerning the situation in Bukavu and the wider
region of the Kivus, my Government would like to
express its concern about the plight of the
Banyamulenge people and other groups who are being
persecuted and marginalized. We appeal to the Security
Council to ensure that their rights and freedoms are
upheld as citizens of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and that those who have been forced to flee
their country are allowed to return home and live in
peace and dignity.

Turning to the situation in Burundi, my
Government welcomes the progress in the transition
process. My Government is encouraged by the
seriousness and resolve of the Burundian authorities to
settle the issues that are still outstanding and to respect
and maintain the electoral calendar. Rwanda supports
all measures that will ensure long-term peace, stability,
reunification, reconciliation, democracy and power-
sharing and justice and development in Burundi, and
will continue to support the transitional process.

The Rwandan Government believes that strong
and decisive measures need to be taken against the
Forces nationales de liberation (FNL), which,
following its joint attack with the exFAR/Interahamwe
against the refugees in Gatumba, slaughtered, in cold
blood, 160 Banyamulenge refugees and has
continuously been destabilizing the country.

My Government welcomes the conclusion of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa that, as long
as the problem of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe remains, it
will be a source of instability in the region. We also
welcome the mission's recognition that this group
poses a threat to the civilian population and
neighbouring countries and that needs, therefore, the
problem to be rapidly addressed. That is the most
critical factor for my Government - that the problem
be rapidly and decisively addressed without delay. We
indeed appeal to the Council to confirm that this
problem will be rapidly addressed.

My Government notes that in the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council yesterday, the
Council described the armed presence and activities of
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe as unacceptable. My
Government also considers the presence of those forces
in mobilized positions that pose a real and direct threat
to the security of Rwanda to be unacceptable. We also
find it unacceptable that those forces are a present and
increasing threat to Rwanda and the wider region, even
now, after the genocide.

For 10 years my Government has appealed for
this problem to be rapidly addressed. Elaborate plans
have been drawn up, including the timetables and plans
that were a key component of the Lusaka and Pretoria
agreements. While Rwanda fulfilled its commitments
under both agreements, by completely withdrawing all
of its troops from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has yet to fulfil its commitment to disarm,
demobilize and repatriate the ex-FAR/Interahamwe,
even now, five and a half years after the signing of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and three and a half years
since the signing of the Pretoria Agreement.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Council and to urge members to keep their attention
focused on this issue in order to quickly establish
peace and stability in our region.

