Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by welcoming Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, to
the Security Council and thanking him for his insightful
briefing. I also welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku.

I warmly congratulate Mr. Hashim Thaci on his
election and inauguration as President of the Republic
of Kosovo. The election was conducted in accordance
with democratic procedures and was a significant step
towards full-fledged democracy in Kosovo.

Seventeen years have passed since the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) was established. I remember that in 1999
UNMIK was the only governing body in Kosovo, really
an interim administration in the proper sense. Kosovo
wasjust a devastated land and people with no governing
structure. Now that Kosovo has its own Constitution,
Government and Assembly, the responsibility of the
Mission might have changed accordingly, and its role
should be reconsidered. The work and setup of and
resource allocation for UNMIK must accordingly
be different. What then should be the Mission's
current focus?

First, it should be to promote reconciliation among
different ethnic groups in order to prevent unwanted
instability in the Balkans region. In this regard, the
Kosovar and Serbian authorities must continue to
engage in dialogue and to normalize their relations, in
a spirit of tolerance and common interest.

Secondly, there are other risks, including the
infiltration of violent extremism and the continued flow
of small arms. These elements galvanize or aggravate
whatever antagonisms exist into violence, which could
spill over into the region. So these are the problems that
UNMIK must tackle as a matter of priority.

UNMIK has been playing an important role in
addressing these priorities. But at the same time, if the
international community coddles Kosovo too much, it
might hinder Kosovo's ability to stand on its own feet.
It is true that democracy has not yet fully taken root
in Kosovo and that the Kosovar economy is still weak.
However, in order to achieve sustainable stability and
prosperity in Kosovo, Kosovo's ownership is of vital
importance. Let us therefore trust in the Kosovar
people, who are well qualified and well equipped to
shape their own future.

In closing, I wish Ambassador Tanin every success
in his important work and assure him of Japan's strong
support for him and his Mission.

