Mr. Koenders: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today following my last briefing
on 26 January 2012 (see S/PV.6708).

The thirtieth progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2012/506), which is before the
Security Council, provides members with an update
on major developments in the country since the
Secretary-General's special report of 29 March 2012
(S/2012/186).

My briefing today will focus on the most crucial
issues of the moment for cote d'Ivoire, particularly with
regard to the security situation, the political situation
and activities undertaken by the Government, with
UNOCI's support, to put the country back on the path
to peace and stability.

I would like to start by saying that, as mentioned
in my recent briefings to the Council, Cote d'Ivoire
is making significant advances on the path to peace,
stability and development. The economy is recovering,
the country is progressively reintegrating into the West
African region, and the overall security situation has
improved since the end of the post-electoral crisis last
year. Moreover, further to the legislative elections,
the National Assembly began its work in April, with
a commitment from its President for the Assembly
to contribute to national reconciliation and provide
effective oversight of the Government on behalf of the
Ivorian people.

Yet, this positive picture should not obscure
the fact that the country continues to face important
challenges and significant threats as it transitions to a
peacebuilding phase. In the past couple of weeks, the
country has been characterized by a certain degree of
political anxiety, showing that the root causes of the
conflict - land-related issues, unreformed security
forces, impunity, and lack of national reconciliation and
political dialogue - need to be tackled urgently and in
a transparent manner to the benefit of all Ivorians.

First, with regard to the security situation, it remains
particularly volatile, especially but not exclusively in
the west, at the Cote d'Ivoire-Liberia border, given
the weak State authorities, large numbers of weapons,
armed elements, former combatants, militias and
dozos, as well as competition over the control of
resources. Reports of the rearming and recruitment of
former Ivorian and Liberian combatants and possible
attempts against State security constitute matters of
substantial concern for me. Attacks by armed men
have been carried out in the villages in the border area,
which is often characterized by violent inter-communal
confrontations that have the potential to escalate into
larger-scale conflicts as long as the underlying root
causes, such as land tenure issues, are not effectively
tackled.

The situation experienced a dramatic deterioration
last month when seven United Nations peacekeepers
from Niger lost their lives in an attack by armed elements
on the road from Para to Sao, along the border with
Liberia, showing the need for continuous vigilance and
enhanced action to ensure the protection of civilians.
The Government has strengthened its military presence
and established a commission to investigate the Para
attack, and UNOCI is providing technical assistance
and forensics support.

In response to the incidents in the west, UNOCI
has boosted its military on the ground by reinforcing
troops within Sector West, in line with our operational
imperative to protect civilians and firmly deter any
initiative to destabilize the country in different parts of
Cote d'Ivoire. We are working closely with the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to coordinate our
activities, for which a detailed plan of action has been
developed.

On their part, the Ivorian and Liberian Governments
have increased their military presence in the concerned
area and are liaising closely to exchange information.
Of special note are an action plan adopted by UNOCI
and UNMIL and a quadripartite meeting comprising
the Governments of the two countries, as well as
UNOCI and UNMIL, that was held in Abidjan on
14 June - just a few days after the attacks - and
resulted in an agreement between the parties to further
enhance cooperation, including by reinforcing their
presence on both sides of the border, intensified air
and foot patrols, and activities to protect civilians,
strengthened judicial cooperation, and measures to
promote reconciliation and development.

The need to combine firmness and vigilance,
and to call on the Government to further increase its
civilian presence, invest in development and ensure the
equitable treatment concerning the land issue cannot be
overemphasized at this stage. In particular, there is in
our View an urgent need to tackle the root causes of the
conflict and promote reconciliation through concrete
measures at the national level, while prioritizing the
strengthening of the rule of law and the restoration of
State authority. It is important that the Government of
C6te d'Ivoire place increasing emphasis on this very
burning issue.

National reconciliation is key to any process aimed
at stabilization and peacebuilding. In this regard, the
need for substantive genuine political dialogue remains
paramount. On 27 and 28 April, a conclave chaired
by the Prime Minister was held in Grand-Bassam,
with the participation of the opposition parties, which
resulted subsequently in a communique announcing the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for ongoing
dialogue through which the Government and opposition
have an opportunity to continue their exchanges.
Yet, a new momentum should be created to allow the
constructive engagement of all parties in political
dialogue. All parties should strengthen their political
will to engage in a well-formulated agenda for a serious
political dialogue.

The Government's initiative to engage in dialogue
with the political opposition is a positive step. It is
important now that the Government continue working
towards genuine political dialogue and reconciliation
at all levels, and ensure political space for the
opposition by clarifying the context and timetable
for these consultations and taking reconciliatory
measures where and when possible. At the same time,
the opposition should play the role of a constructive
opposition, use reconciliatory language, and contribute
towards building a better future for the country and
reconciliation.

The upcoming local elections, for which the
Government has requested United Nations assistance,
could contribute to strengthening national reconciliation
at the local level. However, if these elections are to be
successful, it is necessary that certain conditions be
met in terms of a larger responsibility of the Ivorian
Government and clarity on proper timing, inclusiveness
and security, as well as allowing for the reform of the
electoral and administrative bodies concerned. It is only
under clearly specified conditions related to these issues
that any possible UNOCI support should be considered
and given the means in financial, administrative and
military terms to do undertake such tasks.

Successful national reconciliation also requires
the promotion of a culture of respect for human
rights. It is of crucial importance that the progress
made be solidified, that impunity for human rights
violations end, that perpetrators be brought to justice
irrespective of their status or political affiliation, that
all detainees receive clarity about their status, and
that the investigation commission speed up its work.
UNOCI remains preoccupied about this situation and
asks the Security Council to pay special attention to
this important issue.

It is worth noting that, as indicated by the
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in
Cote d'Ivoire, many human rights violations resulted
less from the State's complicity than from its failure
to prevent them, especially owing to the slow progress
in reforming the security sector and restoring State
authority throughout the country. Thus, efforts that
could speed up security sector reform (SSR) and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
should be encouraged. In this regard, I wish to highlight
the positive steps taken by President Ouattara to further
the SSR and DDR agenda, including the creation of an
inter-ministerial working group to develop a national
framework for SSR and DDR. UNOCI stands ready to
continue assisting the Government's efforts to make
SSR and DDR a reality, which requires a unified DDR
entity, strict rules on eligibility, and a reliable base.

In this complex phase, it is important that the United
Nations continue to play its supportive role in assisting
the Government's efforts to stabilize the security
situation, protect civilians, restore State authority,
promote reconciliation, and undertake post-conflict
development assistance. In order to maximize its impact
in these areas, UNOCI, together with the United Nations
country team, is reinforcing its field presence. We
have opened field offices with our military, police and
civilian personnel presence in Guiglo, Tabou, Tai' and
Toulepleu - some of the villages that members of the
Security Council visited during the impressive mission
that they undertook to Cote d'Ivoire in May. We will
soon be opening additional offices and strengthening
existing ones to enhance closer cooperation and
coordination within the United Nations family, within
existing resources. Our action is based on continuous
vigilance, research for political solutions and efforts
to enhance reconciliation as key to accomplishing our
tasks successfully.

In conclusion, let me say that the continued support
of the Security Council is at this stage still crucial in
order to ensure that we, together, successfully tackle
the generalized risks that are typical of countries
transitioning to a peacebuilding phase. I remain
convinced that, with the Council's support, we can
make a positive contribution to making C6te d'Ivoire a
success story for its own people and, we hope, for the
United Nations as a whole.

