The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Executive Director Beasley for their comprehensive,
timely and convincing briefings. I highly appreciate
their unrelenting efforts to restore peace and stability
and improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. I
also wish to thank Ms. Rasha Jarhum for her briefing.

At present, the political security and humanitarian
situation remains grave in Yemen. The recent escalation
in the armed conflict in the country has not only led to
civilian casualties, but also destroyed roads, hospitals
and other infrastructure. Moreover, it has hampered
humanitarian assistance and further increased the
risk of famine and the spread of cholera. We are truly
saddened by the suffering of the Yemeni people, and we
express our concern about the situation in Yemen.

Yemen's problems can be resolved only politically.
Military means cannot achieve lasting peace. The
international community should safeguard Yemen's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, support the mediation efforts of the United
Nations and arrive at an inclusive solution through
dialogue and negotiation, based on resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its implementation mechanism, and the outcome
documents of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference.

We welcome the recent efforts of the international
community and Special Envoy Griffiths to advance
the peace process in Yemen. Thanks to the joint
efforts of the Special Envoy and the relevant parties,
progress has been made on such issues as the release
of prisoners and the evacuation of the injured, thereby
creating conditions for dialogue. The Special Envoy
has conducted intensive shuttle diplomacy. Closely
engaged with the relevant parties on this matter, he
has encouraged them to meet each other halfway and
to return to the negotiating table. The Special Envoy
is working to advance a framework for political
negotiation, and China appreciates his efforts.

The Security Council and the relevant parties
remain united and continue to support the mediation
efforts of the Special Envoy, including intensified
efforts to promote peace and dialogue and to nudge
parties in Yemen to put aside their differences with a
view to starting a new round of peace talks in Sweden
as soon as possible. We urge parties in Yemen to work
closely with Special Envoy Griffiths to return to the
track of dialogue as soon as possible and to sustain their
participation in negotiation. We call on the international
community and countries in the region to continue their
constructive assistance to that end.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Yemen has attracted the close attention of the region
and the world at large. The international community
should increase humanitarian assistance and assist in
a targeted way by providing goods such as food and
medication as well as funding support to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The international
community should also support Yemen in its efforts
to improve its economy, stabilize prices, ensure safe,
timely and unhindered humanitarian access and meet
the basic needs of the Yemeni people.

We welcome the indefinite postponement by the
Yemeni Government of restrictions on certain imports.
China will continue to work with the international
community to jointly and expeditiously bring the
issue of Yemen back on the track to seeking a political
settlement so as to achieve peace, security and stability
in Yemen as soon as possible.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

