Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2006/706) on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
provides a detailed analysis of the situation in Iraq and
the complex highs and lows of the Iraqi political
process at the current stage. We fully share the
assessments and conclusions of the Secretary-General.

I should also like to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
the briefing he has given us clarifying events in the
country. We should also like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Bolton for his report on
the security situation in Iraq.

The process of transforming Iraq is indeed very
complex and is being pursued against a backdrop of
continuous violence, extremist attacks and a lack of
consensus in society on most key issues of significance
there. We support the efforts of the Government of Iraq
to normalize the situation. Along with the Secretary-
General, we therefore welcome such actions on the part
of the Government of Iraq as the peace initiative for
Baghdad and the National Reconciliation Plan
proposed by Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, both of
which are designed to ensure the unity of Iraqi society.

We are closely following the discussion in Iraq on
federalizing the country. It is our view that Iraq can
select the form of government that meets the interests
of its multi-ethnic people, including a federal State.

Another important issue is the foreign military
presence in the territory of Iraq. We are convinced that
that presence must not be permanent or indefinite. In
the end, all foreign troops must completely leave Iraqi
territory and transfer responsibility for events there to
the national army and the police.

Combating terrorism in Iraq solely through the
use of force is short-sighted. A much more realistic
approach is to achieve national consensus and
reconciliation through a broad-based political dialogue.
We welcome the assistance that the United Nations is
providing in that regard to political factions in the
country. We believe it is necessary to continue to have
the most active participation of the United Nations and
UNAMI in the Iraqi political process.
With regard to the International Compact, in
principle we agree with the relevant provisions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on that
matter. We believe the Compact should serve the long-
term work of economic recovery and rehabilitation of
an independent Iraq.

