Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting to assess our mission to West Africa. I
would also like to congratulate, and welcome the
presence of, Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh, and
to thank him for his report. This is an assessment tool,
very important in measuring the feasibility of Security
Council missions. It is a very important exercise by the
Council.

A good number of positive changes have taken
place in Liberia, in Cote d'Ivoire, in Sierra Leone and
in Guinea-Bissau since we visited the West African
region. Our presence in the region, as well as our
recommendations, contributed significantly to those
changes. This is a clear demonstration of how
important the Council missions have been, and it is a
good reason to continue the practice - although we
need to improve the missions in order to render them
even more effective.

The West African region as a whole has never
been as close to peace as it is now. This is an
opportunity that the countries of the region and the
international community should therefore seize.

Despite the positive developments, each of the
countries requires particular attention from the
international community if it is to meet the challenges
of the post-conflict period. In Cote d'Ivoire, a
sustainable peace requires the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation as soon as possible, as
requested by the Ivorian authorities and by ministers
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) during the Security Council mission just
two months ago. Everything should be done to deploy a
sufficient number of peacekeepers in a timely manner.
The deployment of a sufficient number of peacekeepers
is one of the main guarantees of a successful peace
process. At this stage the expectations of the Ivorian
people of the role of the United Nations are very high.
The decision to be taken by the Council will therefore
have a very significant impact on the ground.

In Guinea-Bissau, efforts made by the new
authorities to restore legality need to be reinforced
through the provision of support. Clear reference has
already been made to this issue, in particular by my
colleague the Ambassador of Brazil. As has been
noted, Guinea-Bissau has become a good example of a
common effort by the Security Council, ECOWAS,
United Nations agencies, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries. As has also been
noted, this experience can be extended to Burundi as
well as, I am sure, to countries in the West African
region, such as Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.

The authorities in Guinea-Bissau continue to lead
the country towards normalcy. Parliamentary elections
will take place as planned, on the agreed date, as also
confirmed to the Council by President Rosa when he
met with the Council.

With regard to Sierra Leone, we welcome the idea
of an assessment of security conditions before the
complete withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). In our opinion, the useful
lessons learned from the case of Sierra Leone - as
stated in the report - could be the subject of debate
and analysis in a public Council meeting, with the
participation of those who were directly involved in the
work of UNAMSIL. Such a meeting could take place
after the complete withdrawal of UNAMSIL.
Recommendations could be made on how to better take
advantage of those lessons learned.

In Liberia, the response of the international
community to the forthcoming international conference
on the reconstruction of Liberia and the political will of
the parties will be determining factors in reaching long-
lasting peace in that country. It is important that the
pledges made by the donors be followed by concrete
and timely action. This could enhance the confidence
of all stakeholders in the Liberia process.

The cross-border issue requires a collective
response. We therefore welcome the forthcoming
meeting of the defence and interior ministers of the
region, to be organized in Dakar by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in cooperation
with ECOWAS, to attract donor focus to support
security sector reform. This initiative is an important
contribution to the regional approach being developed
by the United Nations missions in West Africa. AS my
delegation has repeatedly stated, the countries of the
region, ECOWAS and the African Union should be
fully associated with this regional approach.

It is our hope that the report to be submitted to
the Security Council by the Secretary-General on
cross-border issues will give a clear indication of the
role of the countries of the region in establishing such
mechanisms. In this connection, I would like to
welcome the suggestions made here this morning by
my colleague the Ambassador of Algeria concerning
participation by the Ad Hoc Working Group, which we
share. We stand ready to participate fully, since this is
an important peacekeeping and conflict-prevention
exercise that the Council could undertake.

In dealing with the African crisis, we should be
able to count on the support of regional bodies, such as
the recently established Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, to address adequately cross-border
issues. The strengthening of the United Nations Office
for West Africa, as proposed in the report, also
deserves particular attention.

The West African region has created important
mechanisms to address the problems affecting the
region, among them a moratorium on small arms and
light weapons. The main concern is to operationalize
those mechanisms. It is our conviction that the region
will be able to render the moratorium more effective
and operational, and this can be done if adequate
assistance is made available.

On the question of mercenaries, it is our opinion
that a legal approach should be taken, at the national
and regional levels, to end impunity for individuals
involved in such activities, since this represents a real
problem, particularly in West Africa.

Before concluding, let me state that full support
for the proposals contained in the report is a clear way
for the Council to be fully responsive to the crisis we
are facing. The situation is clearly improving, yet I
believe that more needs to be done in order to achieve
the objectives that we have set out in the Council. I
therefore believe that the meeting that you have
convened this morning, Mr. President, represents a
very important contribution towards that end.

