The President (spoke in Arabic): Ithank Mr. Feltman
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Jordan.

(spoke in English)

This open debate on the theme "War, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace" falls on the first
month of a year in which the international community
will commemorate and reflect on the start of the First
World War, a century ago -the defining moment of
the twentieth century. The debate today, however, is
not about the First World War. It is about the principal
lesson of the Security Council's experience, drawn
from 69 years of practice in ending war. The principal
lesson is this: stopping the killing is easier than ending
the conflict, and ending the conflict is considerably
easier than ending it permanently.

Ten years ago, under the Chilean presidency, a
significant debate was held here on the theme "Post-
conflict national reconciliation: role of the United
Nations" (see S/PV.4903), which resulted in an
important presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/2). The
debate shed light for the first time in such a setting
on the crucial value of truth commissions and judicial
accountability to national reconciliation, building on
an earlier rule-of-law debate sponsored by the United
Kingdom in September 2003 (see S/PV.4833). Most
important of all, by focusing on how a community or an
affected State recovers from the commission of serious
crimes, the debate emphasized the need for the United
Nations to build durability into conflict resolution.

Sadly, 10 years on, the Council still finds it difficult
not to address not just accountability effectively but also
the broader objective of ending conflicts permanently,
both non-international and international ones. What
the Council has never discussed as a separate subject
is the problem of divergent historical narratives, often
affected by ethnic or nationalistic distortions, and how
they may create conflict as well as impede post-conflict
national and international reconciliation. We therefore
invite the members of the Security Council and the
United Nations membership to consider more closely
the three sequenced objectives of conflict resolution,
namely, to end the fighting, to end the conflict and to
end the conflict permanently.

To end the killing, the methods first devised by
the United Nations in the period 1948 to 1961, most
notably by Dag Hammarskjold, Ralph Bunche and
Lester Pearson beginning in 1956, remain with us
still: ceasefire through mediation, which leads to the
separation of forces, the removal of heavy weapons
from the line of separation and the monitoring of the
ceasefire or truce through joint commissions, joint
patrolling and so on. That, the United Nations has shown
itself to be capable of performing. To end the conflict,
the Security Council, beginning in 1961, expanded
the development of peacekeeping with the adoption of
resolutions 161 (1961) and 169 (1961), at a time when
a ceasefire in the Congo was not so much mediated,
as was the case earlier in the Sinai, but fought for in a
country in the throes of a conflict. The political spaces
created by the United Nations Operation in the Congo
in pacifying parts of the Congo, through active counter-
insurgency operations, as well through the protection
of civilians, were then built on, both figuratively and
literally: roads were paved and buildings went up along
with new State institutions.
United Nations peacebuilding as we know it now
found its first real expression, therefore, in the Congo
from 1961 to 1964. Indeed, much of what we do now
was done then. There again, the United Nations has
developed some expertise. What must be conceded,
however, is that much of the work then was physical and,
as was common in Western Europe at the time, there
was little attempt to address the deeper psychological
issues at work before or after the conflict. "Rebuild,
train, develop the economy", said the operating manual,
and the rest - the trauma, the deep grievances, the
emotional pain, the burning anger - they were best
left to time and the fading of memory.

Unfortunately, human memory has never been that
accommodating and meek. Unless settled by a genuine
agreement, built on some deep soul-searching, divergent
memories can often lie in wait, like dry gunpowder, for
a long time, passed down in many communities from
parents to children, ready for a charismatic opportunist
to come and stir them abruptly and menacingly, to
violent effect.

For that reason, instances of fragile peace, even
superficial peace, have remained persistently on the
agenda of the Security Council, notwithstanding the
importance attached to the holding of elections and
power-sharing agreements and so on, because, for the
most part, the work of the Council has not dug deep
enough into why many of these sorts of conflicts
occurred in the first place. And why is that? We
are so sensitive to the use and misuse of historical
accounts - because so many and varied are the number
of disputed historical narratives - with the result that
we, the membership, and the United Nations generally
have not wanted to play with such a figurative bomb. If
we lift the lid off human civilization, even just slightly,
and look inside, rather than seeing supporting beams
of magnanimity and compassion, we fear we might see
only the thrashing, tight, circular currents of enmity
and bitterness. Better to have dialogue without history,
we have thought collectively, and besides, it will look
like reconciliation, which is good enough. So we
speak in many meetings of the Security Council of the
need for dialogue and reconciliation, with reference
to a particular agenda item or other, without in most
cases ever knowing what we mean by it. That, too, is
dangerous.

To end a conflict permanently, particularly ethnic
conflicts or conflicts sprung from extreme forms of
nationalism or ideology, the Security Council must
grapple with the psychological components of war. It
did begin to recognize the importance of memory when
it supported the truth commissions in El Salvador,
Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, among others, but that
was done more in the context of piecemeal strategies
and was often based on a desire to attain justice and
was not aimed at the permanent banishment of conflict
altogether. If it had been the latter, the practice would
have been mainstreamed into all of the work of the
Council.

But even in the pursuit ofjustice, the unveiling of
the truth in return for amnesty, common to many truth
and reconciliation commissions, was not certain to
reveal genuine remorse - that fundamental and needed
companion of truth - because a quid pro quo in the
context of an amnesty was required to draw out the
confession in the first place. Truth and reconciliation
commissions have on occasion needed, therefore,
historical commissions to supplement their work.

Also suggestive of the Council's current
unwillingness to recognize how necessary a
revealed truth is to a deeper form of conflict
resolution - notwithstanding its previous creation of
commissions of inquiry, as well as the ad hoc, special
and hybrid tribunals - has been its hesitating treatment
of the International Criminal Court, which, as the only
permanent international criminal court, remains the
best hope for establishing court-based records of fact
for the future.

Ultimately, of course, when ethnic wars or wars
sprung from extreme nationalisms or ideologies are
reverse-engineered back to their points of origin, what
do we find? Standing alone, or sometimes together with
other contributing factors, such as geography, climate,
scarcity and underdevelopment, is a lie, usually one
relating to a historical account, one that is sometimes
even fantastic in its audacity; a lie that produces only
more lies over time.

If that is the case, we must then accept that it is only
when the truth is recovered or a good approximation
of it is revealed that a permanent peace can ever
be obtained. Truth in that context does not mean a
declaration repeated so often that it is seen as true, but
the stubborn resilience ofa fact, maintained by a broad
supporting structure of corroborating evidence, against
which narrow and unfounded historical interpretations
can make no dent and would have little to no credibility.
Of course, where the evidence is correspondingly
weaker, the interpretations grow more numerous, and
debate should be welcomed.

Once the truth has indeed been established, it then
requires acceptance by all sides and, hardest of all, a
concession, namely, that each side, rather than point
fingers at the conduct of others, should reckon publicly
with its own actions. Only that can create a real
foundation for a shared narrative, followed by genuine
reconciliation and a permanent peace.

What can the Council do? As suggested in our
concept note (S/2014/30, annex), distributed to the
membership, the Council can begin by mandating
the creation of a historical advisory service to assist
countries in preserving what will one day be their
official memory - the reference point from which
the truth can emerge to relieve memory of its tension.
By doing so at the earliest stages of a peacekeeping
operation, the Council can help lay the foundation
needed for a country or countries to set up historical
commissions, if they are willing.

Ultimately, the Jordanian delegation believes that
the United Nations as an Organization should have a
sizeable historical advisory service, in addition to a
legal advisory service, which would not only help its
Member States to set up commissions and support
judicial systems, but also assist them in resolving the
many divergent narratives, both between States as well
as within them. We have long had, after all, judicial
mechanisms for the resolution of border or boundary
disputes. What we need now is a historical mechanism
to help us file down the sharpest differences in
historical interpretation - "border disputes of the
collective consciousness", so to speak - with the aim
of inspiring genuine reckoning. Extreme nationalism
and sectarianism in particular must be handled that
way, if we are ever to rid ourselves of their pernicious
effects. All of that is, of course, not easy * far from it.

To reckon with one's own individual conduct,
whenever that conduct is distinctly shameful to others,
is one of the most difficult undertakings for any human
being. The more shame the conduct generates, the more
difficult the reckoning. We know that because, for
the vast majority of humans who commit the worst of
crimes, even when confronted with clearest evidence of
the truth and their guilt and when there is no amnesty
from prosecution offered, they find it next to impossible
to freely admit their culpability or reckon with what
they have done. That is the story, the very history, ofthe
criminal prosecution ofthose most guilty of committing
the gravest offenses ever since the Nuremberg Tribunal.
Indeed, so rare is it - notwithstanding the thousands of
trials that have taken place around the world, national
and international - for a person known to be guilty of
war crimes, indeed found guilty beyond any doubt by
a properly constituted court of law, to admit guilt, to
reckon with their past; such cases, when they happen,
become a cause for widespread attention.

If that is the case in respect of individuals, what
then of a wider community, a tribe, a nation or a State,
which needs, for its own sake and for the sake of others,
to begin such a reckoning? The challenge, we admit,
is indeed breathtaking, but if we do not take it up we
will remain for the next 69 years caught somewhere
in the space between ending conflicts and ending
them permanently. Cement alone, along with training,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform, elections, power sharing, foreign direct
investment, peace treaties and forced amnesia will not
be enough - really, it will never be enough. In most
cases, the absence of the truth, acceptance and, most
important, the creation of a shared historical narrative
will puncture time and again our collective endeavour
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
That is the truth.

The obstacle before us may well appear too
massive for it to be scaled by the Security Council
or by the Organization. But it is worth remembering
the observations of a once-practiced climber, Dag
Hammarskjold: "Never judge the height of a mountain
until you have reached the top. Then you will see how
low it was." My delegation invites, with the sincerest
humility, the members of the Security Council to feel
for their harnesses and begin roping up.

(spoke in Arabic)

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

