Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Permit me at the
outset to thank Mr. Egeland for his comprehensive and
instructive briefing this morning on the fourth report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2004/431). Once again, he was
obliged to paint a sober picture in many respects. I also
want to associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

Over the past few months, the Council has looked
at the various facets of conflict resolution,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building. The
Council has discussed the issues of conflict prevention
and the role of the private sector in conflict and post-
conflict situations. The Council has also considered the
role of women - both as potential victims of conflict
and as indispensable actors in peace-building - and it
has taken action to address the plight of children
associated with armed conflict. Today, on the basis of a
new report of the Secretary-General, we are looking at
the victims of armed conflicts, the vast and ever-
increasing majority of whom are not soldiers, but
civilians. Civilians bear the brunt of armed conflicts
when it comes to casualties; they are usually totally
unprotected and defenceless, and they are exposed to
violence entirely beyond their control.

Preventing armed conflict is still the best way of
protecting civilians. However, as we are dealing in the
Council on an almost daily basis with conflicts and
crises around the world, prevention is, sadly, only one
of the elements on which we can focus.

The title of the Secretary-General's report, on
"the protection of civilians in armed conflict", contains
an umbrella concept of humanitarian policies that
brings together elements of protection from a number
of fields, including international humanitarian and
human rights law, the military and security sectors and
humanitarian assistance. Protecting civilians in armed
conflict is a priority identified in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, which notes the need to
expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies, in conformity with international
humanitarian law.

The Council has attached greater attention to the
need to secure the sustainability of its peacemaking
efforts by assisting in the establishment of post-conflict
political orders that are democratically legitimized, that
guarantee human rights and that are based on the rule
of law. The report of the Secretary-General reflects this
necessary interlinkage by stating that, if we want to
help countries to find a way out of conflict and to
prevent a slide back into conflict, the peace process must
properly address the adequate protection of civilians. If
the concerns of civilians are not properly addressed,
peace will be difficult to achieve and sustain.

It is safe to say that it has become common
wisdom that there is an interdependence among peace,
democracy, justice and development. Yet it is appalling
to observe that the determination to transform that
wisdom into practical action is greatly lacking. All too
often, efforts to strengthen the international rule of law
are on the defensive and international law is ignored, or
even declared obsolete, at the national level. In that
context, Germany recalls the well-established
obligations under international law - in particular, the
Fourth Geneva Convention and Additional Protocol I
to all four Conventions, which contain the basic rules
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Let me take this opportunity to express our hope
that the forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on
justice and the rule of law will reiterate that achieving
the purposes of the United Nations - notably, peace,
security and development - requires an increase in the
level of guarantees and protection afforded to civilians.
That is also the vision of the European Security
Strategy, adopted by European Union member States as
recently as 12 December 2003: to develop a rules-
based international order.

In that context, the International Criminal Court
deserves particular mention as an institution that has
the potential to address one of the worst root causes of
violating the integrity of civilians: impunity.
Combatants violating the principles of humanitarian
law - be it by acts directed against civilians or by acts
against humanitarian personnel - need to know that
they are acting against fundamental principles of
humanity and that their acts will eventually come under
the judicial scrutiny of the International Criminal Court
or of a regional tribunal. What is needed is to move
even further towards universal acceptance of its
jurisdiction, not to create new pockets of impunity, like
those proposed by Security Council resolutions 1422
(2002) and 1487 (2003).

Ever since the World Conference on Human
Rights, held in Vienna in 1993, our common
understanding of the interrelationship between human
rights and development has made great progress. The
right to development - which is now widely
recognized - synthesizes that understanding by
describing how the simultaneous enjoyment of civil
and political, as well as of economic, social and
cultural rights, is instrumental to the advancement of
development. The Human Development Reports of the
United Nations Development Programme underpin that
understanding from a practical perspective. The
Reports point both at the benefits of human rights and
good governance in the development context and at the
considerable costs of a lack of those benefits.
On the basis of the new report of the Secretary-
General that we are considering today, I would like to
share with the Council a catalogue of three areas for
measures to move our protection agenda forward.

The first area is the protection of women and
children. Women and children are among the most
vulnerable groups in times of conflict, whether they be
civilians or child soldiers. Women are more and more
frequently subjected to cruel, degrading and often
lethal treatment in times of conflict. In particular,
children suffer. They are defenceless in situations of
conflict if separated from or deprived of their parents,
and their ability to cope with a quickly changing
environment is very restricted. Many children without
protection are being kidnapped and made child
soldiers. Forcing children to carry arms rather than
letting them develop peacefully is one of the cruellest
acts. Women and children are also, to an unprecedented
extent, victims of severe and atrocious sexual violence.

The second area is humanitarian access and the
security of humanitarian personnel. Various crises and
emergency situations in recent years have shown that
humanitarian access and the security of humanitarian
personnel are linked. A lack of security for
humanitarian personnel results in the prevention of
access to vulnerable populations in need. The
consequences of the horrendous attack on the United
Nations office in Baghdad in August 2003 showed that
quite plainly. The Security Council reacted without
delay through the adoption of resolution 1502 (2003).

Germany supports efforts aimed at enlarging the
scope of protection of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel. Measures
taken to ensure adequate security for humanitarian
personnel will lead to better humanitarian access and
thus to the better protection of civilians. In addition,
the role that neighbouring States and regional
organizations have in helping to establish humanitarian
access may be further explored.

Thirdly, regarding refugees and internally
displaced persons, in general, their situation must be
improved - and not least, mechanisms for their
protection. More has to be done to avoid forced
military recruitment, and we have to ensure better
support for the return of displaced persons. In that
regard, we should examine how to better promote the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, which the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
established in 1998. Better publicity and public
awareness would give them more effect and respect.
We should also advocate the implementation of those
guidelines into the national legislation of States.

Germany thus proposes the following measures.
The first is a new resolution on the protection of
civilians; the most recent resolution that the Security
Council adopted on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (resolution 1296 (2000)) dates from 2000. That
resolution, as well as the preceding relevant resolution
(resolution 1265 (1999)), were regarded as a starting
point. After four years we feel the need for an update
of the most recent resolution, to take into account
recent developments and the changing character of
conflicts. Germany would support efforts aimed at
adopting a new resolution.

A second measure would be more frequent
reporting by the Emergency Relief Coordinator. The
Security Council has established a schedule of
briefings by the Emergency Relief Coordinator on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict every six
months. In addition, we receive humanitarian briefings
from the Emergency Relief Coordinator whenever a
crisis or humanitarian catastrophe occurs. We would
propose that the Council broaden the mandate of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator by giving him the
possibility of reporting on an ad hoc basis if a significant
threat to civilians in armed conflict exists. That would
give a more concrete and up-to-date picture and would
allow us to take quicker and more appropriate measures.

A third measure would be the promotion of the
responsibility of new actors. There are new actors in
the area of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
whom we have to deal with. More than ever before, we
need constructive engagement with non-State armed
groups. They not only have the potential to deny
humanitarian actors humanitarian access; they actually
do it. They are also a potential source of harm to the
civilian populations where they operate. Without
legitimizing them and their actions, we must explore
innovative ways to engage them in a constructive
dialogue and, where necessary, to pressure them to
make them abide by international humanitarian law and
human rights norms.

Negotiating with armed non-State actors is a
tricky issue. It requires flexibility and realism, but it
should not come at the expense of impunity.
Perpetrators of serious crimes against civilians must be
brought to justice, irrespective of whether those groups
operate against or in complicity with their respective
Governments. This is a very contentious issue because
questions of national sovereignty are at stake. But
national sovereignty cannot and should not be an
excuse when thousands of innocent, vulnerable
civilians are threatened. The imposition of targeted
sanctions and travel restrictions are possible measures
against non-State armed groups and those who back
them.

We also have to seek to protect civilians from
exploitation by peacekeepers. As members of United
Nations peacekeeping missions do not fall under
United Nations jurisdiction, we must find a way to
ensure that every country that provides peacekeepers
establishes and applies its own laws, and that
peacekeepers who commit crimes against the local
population are to be brought to justice and convicted. It
is not acceptable for pockets of impunity to remain for
United Nations peacekeepers.

