Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): After a thorough and
lengthy process, we are close to a first wind-up of a very
important debate on the topical issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The time has indeed come for
some concrete and coherent action.

In this connection, I would like to commend the
Canadian presidency, and you personally, Minister
Axworthy, for the preparation of this debate and, as a
matter of fact, for the very capable handling by Canada
of this whole issue. The Netherlands was more than
happy to assist Canada in its efforts during the
Netherlands' presidency last September. My delegation
appreciates highly the valuable input - including

 

today - by the Secretary-General and the former and the
present President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. A week ago the Security Council had the
opportunity to discuss this issue with three major
humanitarian non-governmental organizations, which
provided us with unique insight on how protection needs
present themselves in the field.

As the representative of Portugal will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate, I will limit myself to four specific observations.
Taking stock of what has been accomplished so far, I
would like to recall some of the main points made by the
Netherlands delegation in previous debates and to see where
we are now.

The first and most prominent point deals with the full
compliance with the rules and principles of international
law, including human rights and international humanitarian
law. Geneva should not be regarded as a distant cousin of
the United Nations family residing in New York, but as an
intrinsic part of it. The Geneva and Hague Conventions
should always guide us when we are dealing with armed
conflicts. They contain provisions for conflict prevention
and conflict resolution and should therefore be fully used.
In this connection, I would like to reiterate my delegation's
earlier observations on the International Fact-Finding
Commission. My delegation also believes that the Security
Council should further enhance its cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

The perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes should be prosecuted and duly punished. I
seize this opportunity to pay tribute once more to the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, which have clearly proved that we should not
hesitate to bring to justice those who might have considered
themselves immune. The early entry into force of the
Statute establishing the International Criminal Court will
further contribute to ending impunity and thus to the
prevention of future war crimes. Although the issue of
impunity is not dealt with in the draft resolution to be
adopted, we believe it merits the full attention of the
competent United Nations bodies.

My second point is respect for international law,
including human rights law, which is essential for the
prevention of armed conflict. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his outstanding millennium report,
gross and systematic violations of human rights offend
every precept of our common humanity. He referred in
particular to Rwanda and Srebrenica. In the face of grave
and widespread violations of human rights, the Security
Council cannot afford to stand by and watch. The Council
has the duty to act on behalf of the international
community and should therefore consider which role to
play in stopping these violations and thus prevent a
further aggravation of the conflict situation. Such
violations may well lead to crises that could endanger
world peace and security. The Commission on Human
Rights has an important role in making sure that human
rights standards are upheld. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that such violations are brought to the
attention of this Council.

Equally important, and this is my third point, is the
necessity of full and unimpeded access for United Nations
and humanitarian personnel to populations in need,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. It is
up to the countries where such people in need are to
make sure that their humanitarian requirements, including
their protection, are met. When these countries are not
able to provide for such needs, they should welcome
international support and support from non-governmental
organizations. The Council should act and take
appropriate steps when there is a denial of such access
including the freedom to move to the areas concerned, as
suggested in the draft resolution we are about to adopt.
Under specific circumstances, this may comprise the use
of all measures at the Council's disposal, such as the
imposition of targeted sanctions.

My fourth and final point is that my delegation
would like to emphasize how important the need is for
United Nations or United Nations-mandated action to be
adequate, comprehensive and integrated. Strategic
frameworks, such as the one agreed for Afghanistan, are
a powerful tool to ensure such an approach. By
combining actions in the field of politics, human rights,
humanitarian assistance, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and development, a very similar approach
was applied in the cases of East Timor, Kosovo and
Sierra Leone. The draft resolution before us contains a
menu of relevant elements, which should be considered
fully whenever United Nations mandates are being
prepared. The Netherlands would especially like to
encourage the Secretary-General to make full use of the
prerogatives conferred on him by the United Nations
Charter and to fully participate in the preparation of such
mandates.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
necessary prerequisites for adequate Security Council
action have been well defined by the draft resolution,

 

translating as much as possible the proposed
recommendations into a framework for future action. It is
up to the Council to take up the challenge and to ensure
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is part and
parcel of its work.

