Ms. Menedez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sharma for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2003/449).

The progress made by Timor-Leste with the
support of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) during its first year is
immense and encouraging. The foundations have been
laid for the development of a State that is democratic,
independent, respectful of human rights and integrated
into the region and that maintains good relations with
Indonesia. However, a long road remains ahead, and
the international community's assistance continues to
be essential.

Timor-Leste's public institutions must be
strengthened, and a culture of responsible management
must be developed. The administration, including the
judicial authority, must consist of apolitical and
professional officials, chosen in a transparent way on
the basis of their merits. The UNMISET Civilian
Support Group has a fundamental role.

Spain welcomes the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to human rights, which has
taken shape in the ratification of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and other fundamental
international treaties in that area. In addition, we salute
the establishment of the Office of the Provedor for
Human Rights and Justice, and we hope that it will
begin to function as soon as possible.

The continued progress in bilateral relations with
Indonesia is very encouraging. Both States, with
international help, must make all the necessary efforts
to comply with their commitment to reaching an
agreement on border demarcation before 30 June, as
well as to establishing a flexible border regime and
facilitating communications for the residents of the
Oecussi enclave.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
relations between Indonesia and Timor-Leste will
improve over the long term with the prosecution in
both countries of those charged with having committed
serious crimes in 1999. In that connection, we
acknowledge the important step taken by Indonesia in
bringing the perpetrators of those Violations before the
ad hoc Human Rights Tribunal. However, we are
disappointed at the way in which the trials are
proceeding. Therefore, we urge the Indonesian
Government to improve those judicial processes in a
transparent way in order to ensure that justice is done.
At the same time, the reconciliation process in Timor-
Leste must be completed. The Serious Crimes Unit and
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, both assisted by UNMISET, have
fundamental roles to play.

Furthermore, we hope that the treaties recently
signed with Australia on energy and maritime
resources help to foster the much-needed economic
development of Timor-Leste. Through the European
Union and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), we shall continue to support
programmes aimed at, inter alia, reducing poverty and
rehabilitating basic infrastructures. In addition, Spain
has included Timor-Leste in its international
cooperation plan, within the framework of assistance
provided to non-governmental organizations that carry
out development assistance plans in Timor-Leste.

Resolution 1473 (2003), which we recently
adopted unanimously, envisages an adjustment of
UNMISET's police and military components. The
National Police of Timor-Leste must prepare itself to
meet its new challenges with professionalism,
responsibility and effectiveness. With regard to the
military component, we support the revised strategy
proposed by the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, I wish to express my country's
support for the renewal of UNMISET's mandate for
one more year, until May 2004, so that it can
successfully complete work that has gone well thus far.

