Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pederson, and the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their briefings.

Unfortunately, today's meeting is a textbook example
of the how the Syrian issue is often discussed in the
Security Council. The humanitarian problems - which
certainly do exist - are being distorted and blown out
of proportion. We are also very concerned by what
is happening, however we are very conscious of the
primary reason they exist. None of us must forget
the fact that this situation is not due to the activities
of the regime and its allies, as our Western colleagues
repeat over and over again, but rather the activities
of terrorists working in the area - who, by the way,
cannot complain about insufficient material or military
support.

We must not forget that, if it were not for the
terrorists who went to Syria and tried, with the support
of some of our Western colleagues, to overthrow the
Syrian authorities, Syria would not be facing these
terrible problems, which have caused the deaths of
hundreds of thousands of people and affect the lives
of many millions of others who had to flee from their
homes or live in poverty.

Neither the Syrian people nor the peoples of other
countries will ever forget this. History, as my British
colleague said, will judge those who claim to stand
for Western values but, because of their geopolitical
ambitions, have almost destroyed an entire country and
condemned it to unprecedented suffereing, as well as
those who sang the same tune in the Security Council
spreading mendacious and unverified information
in order to impede the political process and national
reconciliation. Even if members do not have test tubes
in their hands today like their predecessors who lied
about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, they are still
doing the same thing.

Russia without doubt supports the efforts of
Special Envoy Pedersen and is taking active measures
to promote the political process and to restore trust
between the parties to the Syrian conflict. As has
already been noted, intensive work is being done in the
Astana process, together with Iran and Turkey and in
cooperation with the Special Envoy, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition. I would
like to emphasize that the Astana process is the only
forum contributing to political reconciliation in Syria.

The most recent meeting under the Astana format
took place on 1 and 2 August. A noteworthy feature
was the participation of Beirut and Baghdad as new
observers. The fifth summit of the guarantor countries
is planned for mid-September in Turkey. The meeting
in Nur-Sultan took place in a constructive atmosphere,
with all the participants, first and foremost the
guarantor countries, seeking compromise and more
effective cooperation. We hope that, despite the
increasingly blatant efforts of our Western colleagues
to impede the process, we will soon be able to launch
the constitutional committee. We, like Mr. Pedersen,
are optimistic that the preparatory work on this aspect
will soon be completed.

Nonetheless, we emphatically encourage - and I
would like to emphasize this insistence - all parties
genuinely interested in the success of the political
process who want to work towards a stable settlement
in Syria not to throw a spanner in the works of these
efforts. A lot has already been done. Any confrontational
or imbalanced actions or discussions, including within
the United Nations, will not help efforts towards a
political settlement in Syria. I will be quite honest:
such discussions or actions would directly impede
Mr. Pedersen's efforts, which is not what we want.

The joint statement issued by Russia, Turkey and
Iran on 2 August emphasized the need to establish
calm on the ground by fully implementing all of the
agreements with regard to Idlib, especially the Sochi
memorandum of 18 September 2018. It also expressed
serious concern at the increasing prevalence of
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in the de-escalation zone and
confirmed the commitment of the parties to further
cooperate on finally eliminating the terrorists. All
of this, of course, while respecting the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular
in Idlib, was discussed during negotiations between the
Presidents of Russia and Turkey on 27 August, where
they reaffirmed the Russian-Turkish understanding on
this and other issues.

Idlib remains the main theatre of tensions. Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham has effectively turned the region into
a bridgehead for attacks on the positions of Syrian
Government forces and against civilians in nearby
towns and cities. During this month alone, fighters
have been able to carry out more than 20 attacks on the
positions of Syrian forces, resulting in more than 140
killed and approximately 230 Syrian personnel injured;
dozens of civilians were also injured. Attacks are also
continuing on Russian military facilities in Syria. For
instance, the Khmeimim airbase was attacked by the
terrorists using missiles four times in August alone. If
one were to believe our British colleagues" assertions
that there are more infants than terrorists in Idlib, then
it would seem that many of those infants have grown
beards and know how to use the latest weapons. Do
you not think this is rather bizarre? We certainly do. In
answer to the constant provocation from the terrorists
and to reduce the threat against civilians, the Syrian
army, with the support of Russian aviation, has been
compelled to take action. However, we must emphasize
that all the measures have been taken strictly inside the
demilitarized zone, which should have been established
a year ago pursuant to the Sochi memorandum.

The possibility of a reconciliation has been
mentioned in this Chamber, but nobody has mentioned
that the Syrian Government agreed to the ceasefire in
Idlib brokered in Nur- Sultan on 2 August on the condition
that all parties adhered to the Sochi memorandum,
which would entail the withdrawal of heavy weapons.
However, the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists refused
to comply with the ceasefire and to withdraw fighters
beyond the de-escalation line. Therefore, the ceasefire
did not hold, and the fault for that does not lie with
Damascus but with the terrorists who are continuing to
bombard Idlib.

Russian and Syrian military forces are striving to
ensure that the actual situation in the Idlib de-escalation
zone is reported as widely as possible in the press. On
26 August, representatives of more than 20 Russian
and European media outlets visited the area around
Khan Shaykhun, in south-east Idlib province, which
was liberated by Syrian Government forces. Yes, this is
the very same Khan Shaykhun where, some time ago,
White Helmets staged a blatant provocation, alleging
that the Syrian forces had used chemical weapons. We
debunked those claims loud and clear a long time ago.
Journalists have been able to see with their own eyes
how the terrorists are using civilian infrastructure for
military ends, as well as inspect their extended network
of fortifications. We had hoped to hear about that from
our Western colleagues - although, of course, we did
not hear anything, even though journalists from these
Western countries were courageous enough to go out
there and find out for themselves the truth about the
situation in terrorist-controlled areas.

As for other regions in Syria, we are concerned
about the continued instability in the north-east of the
country. Despite the alleged end of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, terrorists are continuing their
underground activity and are activating their so-
called sleeper cells. This also complicates matters in
terms of the fighting between Kurdish formations and
Sunni Arabs who have historically lived in the area.
The Russian position on this remains unchanged:
we advocate re-establishing territorial integrity
and sovereignty in Syria as a guarantee of national
security for neighbouring countries and to achieve
regional stability.

The overall humanitarian situation in north-east
Syria also remains dire. A clear example of this is the
situation in the Al-Hol camp for internally displaced
persons, which is in territory outside the control of the
Syrian authorities. We have been asking for a long time
that the forces controlling this territory share with all
of us what is actually happening there. However, there
is still a complete void with regard to information about
what is actually happening beyond the Euphrates.
Accordingly, we have a logical question for those who
claim to care so much about humanitarian stability in
Syria. Why is it that they focus their attention almost
exclusively on Idlib province? Are they indifferent to
the fate of Syrians living in the north-east? Is it not true
that civilians are dying there as a result of the activity
of fighters and that infrastructure has been destroyed?
We have information suggesting that it is true, and we
have shared it with members. Do members not have that
information, or are they simply not interested in what is
happening there?

We are also worried by the situation in the Al-Tanf
area. We wish to recall once again that, under the
Geneva Convention, an occupying Power is responsible
for the population in the territory it is occupying. That
holds true of all the areas I have listed. Russia, together
with the Syrian Government and in coordination
with specialized international humanitarian agencies,
continues its work to dismantel the Rukban camp,
which is in the zone of illegal American occupation,
and help people resettle. In the second half of
August, an assessment mission of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent carried out a survey the civilian
population in the camp who wished to leave. Within a
month from now, we plan to organize the departure of
a total of approximately 16,000 people. Overall, since
March, some 18,000 refugees have already left Rukban.
Following their departure, almost all of them were able
to return to their places ofpermanent residence in areas
controlled by Damascus.

We continue to believe that humanitarian assistance
should be provided to all Syrians throughout the Syrian
territory without preconditions. We believe that it
is important to promote the reconstruction of Syria,
which should be carried out in strict accordance with
the norms of international humanitarian law and the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence.
We must work to create the conditions for and promote
the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of residence in Syria
and to ensure their right to return and to support.

In conclusion, let me share an observation about
a trend that we see recurring. As soon as the Syrian
forces gain some advantage on the ground and begin
to force terrorists out, our Western colleagues increase
their cries and calls for an end to military activity. It
seems they have forgotten our common decision to
uncompromisingly fight terrorists. As we have heard
today, those terrorists become "innocent babies" and
there appear schools and hospitals that have supposedly
been bombed by Russia but in fact either did not exist
or were not targeted.

We refute all that, but nobody listens to us. It seems
that the objective is not to establish the truth but rather
to reverse any move by Syria towards peace under its
elected President and legitimate Government.

I wish to disappoint some members. That process
is irreversible. There is already an agreed consensus
in support of a new peaceful Syria that is owned by
the Syrian people and not by Western puppets and
mercenaries. Terrorists and those who support them
no longer have the advantage. It is not possible to
save them. The sooner that is understood, the quicker
we will achieve peace in Syria and the more lives we
will be able to save. The Council should not forget
this enormous responsibility to history and future
generations that rests with it today.

