Mr. Mladenov: I brief the members of the Security
Council today as critical infra-Palestinian talks are
scheduled to open in Cairo tomorrow. The United
Nations, the Middle East Quartet and the international
community continue to support Egyptian efforts to
sustainably implement the recent infra-Palestinian
agreement and return Gaza under the control of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority.

By signing the Cairo agreement on 12 October,
Palestinians embarked on a long road that could lead
to reconciliation. First, however, they must resolve the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and return the Strip to the
full civilian and security control of the Palestinian
Authority (PA). If success is to be achieved, the failed
policies of the past must be avoided, security for
Palestinians and Israelis must be preserved, and all
sides must be willing to compromise in the interest
of peace.

Let me start with the good news. On 1 November,
we witnessed a landmark step as the Palestinian
Authority regained control over Gaza crossings. For
the first time in more than a decade, on 18 November,
the Rafah border crossing opened under PA control.
The handover has eased access at the crossings for
Palestinians with permits and ended the illegal taxation
imposed by Hamas at the crossings since June 2007. The
handover, if translated into full civilian and security
control by the Palestinian Authority of Gaza, could be
a step towards the normalization of movement in and
out of the Strip.

Another important step happened on 2 November
when the Palestinian committee tasked with
rationalizing and integrating Gaza's public sector held its
first meeting. Meanwhile, the transfer of responsibility
at Gaza-based public institutions is slowly proceeding
as well. Ministers of Education, Health, Transport
and Environment, among others, as well as technical
teams from ministries in Ramallah, have travelled to
Gaza to begin restoring Government control. Some 150
PA-employed teachers have returned to work for the
first time since 2007. A 10-day registration period for
all PA employees in Gaza began on 12 November to
determine staffing numbers, based on an evaluation of
qualifications against needs. The process is proceeding
in an organized manner. Some ministries, with low
numbers of employees, have already accomplished
the task, and others are expected to finish within a set
time frame. I encourage all sides to use tomorrow's
meeting in Cairo to reinforce their commitment to a
gradual process of implementing the Cairo agreement
and to ensure that positive momentum is sustained by
upholding commitments and ensuring follow-up.

Regrettably, there is also some not-so-good news.
Despite progress in implementing the Cairo agreement,
Gaza residents have not seen any improvements to their
daily lives. The lack of electricity has been devastating
for the provision of basic services. Power outages of
18 to 20 hours a day continue; most of the population
has access to piped water for only three to five hours
every five days; untreated sewage continues to flow
into the Mediterranean Sea at catastrophic levels;
45 per cent of essential drugs and medical supplies have
now reached zero stock in Gaza. Only the most critical
health, water and sanitation facilities are functioning,
thanks to donor-funded emergency fuel distributed by
the United Nations.

As the Palestinian Government seeks to return
to Gaza, it should take immediate action to reverse
measures that add to the burden of Palestinians living
there. The United Nations humanitarian appeal for
Gaza for 2017 calls for $25 million in new funding to
meet the most critical priorities - almost $11 million
of which remains unmet. I urge donors to support the
appeal in order to save lives. Last week, as co-Chair
of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee, Norway convened a
donor meeting in Ramallah to discuss how to support
returning Gaza under Palestinian Authority control.
The discussion focused on three themes.

The first theme was the need to immediately
alleviate the humanitarian situation on the ground,
namely, by increasing electricity supply to at least
pre-crisis levels, and accelerating the delivery of
projects that have direct impact on the lives of Gaza's
residents. The envoys of the Middle East Quartet have
already tasked the Office of the Quartet with producing
a list of projects that can be expedited. I encourage
donors to do the same. Such actions are necessary to
sustain support for the Cairo-led process on the ground.

Secondly, the donors also discussed the need to see
a realistic plan by the Palestinian Authority on how it
intends to take up its responsibilities in Gaza, which
the international community can support financially
and technically.

Thirdly, our common goal remains the return
of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. Difficult
issues - including security and putting all weapons
under Government control, the rule of law and the
functioning of the judiciary, civil service reform and
other complicated challenges - will have to be dealt
with in a step-by-step manner.

Turning to broader political dynamics on the
ground, I welcome the restoration of full security
coordination between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. It was publicly announced that that started
on 8 November. That is a positive development, as
coordination is critical to the security of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.

In a very worrying development, however, on
30 October, the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) uncovered
yet another tunnel that extended from Gaza into Israel.
During the operation, at least 12 Palestinian militants
were killed underground. According to statements by
a spokesperson for Islamic Jihad, the group's aim in
constructing the tunnel was to "kidnap Israeli soldiers,"
and it also stated that it will continue to pursue that goal.

I call on the international community to join
the United Nations in condemning the continued
construction of tunnels and the utterance of such reckless
statements. At a time when Palestinians in Gaza - who
have lived with closures for a decade, survived three
conflicts and have had to struggle to merely exist - are
seeing hope for the future, such actions and statements
risk a dangerous escalation that could destroy the
prospects for intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
In other developments, on 31 October, a 25-year-
old Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli security
forces while in his car near a West Bank settlement.
The Israeli authorities launched an investigation after
an initial IDF probe indicated that the driver did not
appear to have been attempting a vehicular attack
when he was killed. On 17 November, two Israelis
were injured in a ramming attack in the West Bank; the
Palestinian driver was shot and injured by the security
forces. Violence and incitement remain one of the
hallmarks ofthe conflict, and they need to be addressed
in order to rebuild trust between both sides.

Turning to the question of settlements, Israeli
planning authorities have approved building permits
for at least 418 housing units in the East Jerusalem
settlements of Gilo and Ramat Shlomo. They also
issued a conditional approval of 178 housing units in the
settlement of Nof Zion, located in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Jabel Mukaber. On 10 November, the
Israeli Prime Minister pledged to advance $226 million
for the construction of infrastructure in the occupied
West Bank that improves the connectivity of settlements
to Israel, potentially facilitating their expansion.

The United Nations considers all settlement
activities illegal under international law. They
constitute a substantial obstacle to peace and should
cease. Unfortunately, legislative action that undermines
the viability of the two-State solution also continues.
The Knesset considered a legislative amendment that
would require a majority of 80 out of 120 members to
approve any transfer of territory currently included in
Israel's defined municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to a
"foreign entity".

Against that backdrop, the Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 30 Palestinian structures,
displacing 53 persons, including 31 children, across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Three
Bedouin herding communities in Area C, including
Ain al-Hilweh, Um al Jmal and Jabal al-Baba, are at
risk of having a total of 520 structures demolished after
receiving removal-of-property orders in recent weeks.
Donor-funded structures serving as schools that are also
threatened with demolition are of particular concern.

Turning very briefly to Lebanon, Prime Minister
Hariri's resignation, while on a trip to Saudi Arabia on
4 November, shocked Lebanon and the region. While
new uncertainties have arisen, the people of Lebanon
have united behind President Aoun's call for Hariri to
return. Following the Secretary-General's statement
of 5 November, international statements of support
for Lebanon's security, stability, sovereignty and
independence have been issued at the highest levels.
Prime Minister Hariri is now in Paris and expected to
return to Lebanon later this week. The Officer-in-Charge
of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, my colleague, Philippe Lazzarini, is
scheduled to brief the Council on 29 November.

The security situation in the Golan remains of
concern. Fighting between the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces and armed groups and between different armed
groups in parts of the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side continues. In recent weeks, there were
reported incidents of spillover fire from the Bravo to the
Alpha side and retaliatory fire across the ceasefire line.
Those developments undermine the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces and
have the potential to escalate tensions and jeopardize
the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and Syria.

Let me conclude with a few observations on
Palestinian unity efforts. I again commend Egypt for
its leadership throughout the process. Many previous
attempts to bridge the Palestinian divide have failed.
We cannot allow this current effort to become another
missed opportunity. From the outset, Ihave consistently
engaged with Egypt, the Palestinian Authority, the
region and all stakeholders. Everyone understands
that failure today will destroy hope for the foreseeable
future. That division damages the Palestinian cause
for statehood. Two million Palestinians in Gaza have
high hopes that the Government's return will improve
their lives. After living in abject misery under Hamas
control and locked in by the closures, their situation is
close to exploding.

With all the difficulties inherent in the Egyptian-led
process and concerns about the timing and modalities of
the Palestinian Authority's assumption of full civilian
and security control of Gaza, the process must not be
allowed to fail. If it does, it will most likely result in
another devastating conflict. Whether that conflict
would be triggered by a meltdown of law and order in
Gaza, by the reckless action of extremists or by strategic
choice, the result will be the same - devastation and
suffering for all. That cycle must be avoided at all costs.

All of us, especially Palestinian leaders, Israel
and the international community, have an important
responsibility to advance the peace efforts. In that
context, I am concerned about the implications of
the latest developments related to the Palestinian
Liberation Organization representative office in the
United States. Only through constructive dialogue can
we hope to advance peace, and I call on all parties to
remain engaged in the peace effort.

I believe and hope that a genuine change in Gaza,
including full security control by the Palestinian
Authority, will contribute to restoring confidence in
the feasibility of a comprehensive peace agreement.
That is a Palestinian-owned process. All Palestinian
factions must seize this opportunity to open a new page
for their people.

