Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): Sir, your
presence here during this debate on Africa attests to the
importance that you personally and your country attach to
issues relating to our continent. My delegation appreciates
this very much and would like most warmly to
congratulate you.

Two years ago the Security Council, meeting in this
very Chamber at Foreign Minister level, requested the
Secretary-General to submit to it a report on the causes of
conflict in Africa, ways to prevent it and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development there. In
response to that request, the Secretary-General submitted
to the Security Council on 13 April 1998 a report of very
high quality in terms of both the accuracy of its diagnosis
and the remedies it proposed.

Having considered the report, the Security Council,
within the context of its mandate, developed a series of
concrete proposals relating to support for regional and
subregional initiatives in the areas of conflict prevention
and the maintenance of peace; the establishment of an
international mechanism to assist host Governments in
maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee camps;
the strengthening of Africa's peacekeeping capabilities;
the strengthening of the effectiveness of arms sanctions
regimes imposed by the Security Council; the urgent
resolution of the problem of illicit arms flows; and the
enhancement of the Council's ability to monitor activities
authorized by it but carried out by Member States or a
coalition of States.

With regard to conflict prevention, management and
resolution, Africa has endeavoured to equip itself with the
appropriate mechanisms at the regional and subregional
level. The Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, who spoke
earlier, emphasized the action that has been taken at the
continent level in Africa.

 

In Central Africa, a supreme council on peace and
security has been established in addition to the early-
warning system and the adoption of a non-aggression pact.
Peacekeeping exercises are also planned for the year 2000
in Gabon. All of these initiatives are contributing to a
strengthening of confidence-building measures between the
States of the subregion. In this connection, I should like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Governments of some
Member States represented here today for their support.

The favourable response with which the United
Nations system and other governmental and non-
governmental organizations greeted the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa led us to believe that the international community
would, in a meaningful way, join in the activities
undertaken by Africa to resolve conflicts, consolidate
democracy and ensure economic and social development.
But with regard to conflict situations in Africa the Security
Council is procrastinating, while in other parts of the world
it is taking prompt action on a humanitarian basis.

However, peace agreements are in force in various
places, and I have high hopes that the United Nations
missions being planned to help with the implementation of
the Lome Agreement for Sierra Leone and the Lusaka
accords for the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
deployed as soon as possible.

The activities undertaken by Africa demonstrate that
it is more than ever determined to combat the crises that
are impeding its efforts to ensure the well-being of its
peoples. The assistance of the international community is
essential if it is to achieve that end.

