The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Kuwait for convening this discussion on issues of
priority to the League of Arab States and outcomes of
the Arab Summit.

I want to express my warm welcome to Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States. We have been working together on many of
the most difficult issues that our two organizations
confront and it is for me an enormous pleasure to see
him sitting in the Security Council.

From day one, I have prioritized cooperation with
regional organizations to prevent conflict and sustain
peace. We know that no single organization or country
can address the complex challenges our world faces
today. Global problems require global solutions. That is
why partnerships remain essential to maximizing our
impact on people's lives and advancing a global order
based on international law.

Our cooperation with the League of Arab States
is pivotal. I was honoured to attend the Arab League
Summit in Tunis in March and appreciate the Tunis
Declaration's reaffirmation of the "universal and
noble values and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations" (S/2019/306, appendix 1, third preambular paragraph). Our two organizations share a common
mission to prevent conflict, resolve disputes and act
in a spirit of solidarity and unity. We work together to
expand economic opportunity, advance respect for all
human rights and build political inclusion.

Today, we recognize an expectation from the
peoples of the region * indeed, from people around the
world - for a new social contract for education, jobs,
opportunities for young people, equality for women,
respect for human rights and a fair share in national
wealth. We understand the impulse for a more inclusive
Vision rooted in cooperation, respect and dignity. We
appreciate all efforts to help break the vicious cycle of
conflict while establishing a new security architecture.

Within the challenges facing the region lies the
opportunity to build on the words and intentions of
the charters of our two organizations for action that
will bring real change to the peoples of the Arab world
and beyond.

In relation to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, for
example, we maintain our collective commitment to the
Vision of two States, based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, long-held principles, previous agreements
and international law. As I have said before, there is
no alternative to the two-State solution. There is no
Plan B. Ending the occupation that began in 1967 and
achieving a negotiated two-State outcome is the only
way to lay the foundations for enduring peace.

In Syria, deadly escalation in the country's
north-west has displaced hundreds of thousands, and
if continued could result in broader humanitarian
catastrophe for the 3 million people residing in greater
Idlib. After more than eight years of Violence, Syria's
conflict continues to take a devastating toll on the
country's civilian population, impose burdens on
neighbouring States and threaten international peace
and security. I reiterate my appeal for full respect
for international humanitarian law, which must
prevail in all circumstances, including in the combat
against terrorism.
The alarming violence in Syria is a stark reminder of
the urgent need to forge a political path to a sustainable
peace for all Syrians. This will require an inclusive
and credible political solution, based on resolution
2254 (2015) in its entirety, including the convening ofa
constitutional committee that is credible, inclusive and
balanced. The support and active engagement of the
international community, including the States members
of the Arab League, will be essential. And, of course,
any solution must respect the territorial integrity of
Syria, including the occupied Syrian Golan.

Regarding Libya, I would like to thank the League
of Arab States and its member States for its continued
support for the efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and my Special Representative,
including through the Libya quartet. However, I remain
deeply concerned about the impact of the armed clashes
on the country and on the region. There is no military
solution. We need to work towards a ceasefire and a
return to the negotiating table.

I welcome Iraq's sustained and active outreach to
strengthen its relations with neighbouring countries.
Conversely, Iraq needs the continued and sustained
support of the region and the international community
to help rebuild the country and overcome the trauma and
impact of Da'esh. Iraq's Arab neighbours have a critical
role to play. The United Nations will continue to assist
the Government of Iraq, including through stabilization
and reconstruction support, as well as in facilitating
regional dialogue and cooperation on border security,
energy, environment, water and refugees.

The League of Arab States is Vital in supporting
Lebanon's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Let us do more to help Lebanon - a country
that has been significantly. affected by regional
developments and the generous hosting of large
numbers of refugees - in strengthening State
institutions, upholding its international commitments
and remaining stable and secure.

In Yemen, we continue to work towards a
resumption of negotiations leading to a sustainable
political solution. Every effort is being made to address
the extraordinary suffering on the ground in what
remains the world's largest humanitarian crisis. The
implementation of the 2018 Stockholm Agreement will
not only significantly improve humanitarian access,
but will also help the way towards a lasting political
settlement. All these efforts require patience, good
faith and the continued commitment of all of us to
preserving and building on gains.
I note with deep concern this morning's security
incidents in the state of Hormuz. I strongly condemn
any attack on civilians vessels. The facts must be
established responsibilities clarified. If there is one
thing the world cannot afford, it is a major confrontation
in the Gulf region.

In Somalia, the international community must
remain united in supporting political progress and the
development of security institutions. The League of
Arab States is a key partner, both as an organization
and through its individual members, for political
support and economic development.

The Sudan is going through a delicate transition.
The United Nations is working with regional partners,
especially the African Union, in supporting this
process with the objective of enabling the Sudanese
parties to reach agreement on an inclusive, civilian-led
transitional authority.

On all these efforts and more, we continue to
invest in building our engagement with regional and
subregional organizations, including through regular
consultations and collaboration. Such activities
with the Arab League include our biennial general
cooperation meetings, sectoral meetings, capacity-
building exercises and staff exchanges.

With this in mind, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the United Nations Liaison Office to
the League of Arab States in Cairo will become
operational this very month. I am very grateful to the
Government of Egypt for its support and hospitality.
I fully expect that the Liaison Office - the first
funded by the United Nations regular budget - will
improve the effectiveness of cooperation between our
two organizations. I intend to continue this fruitful
engagement and deepen our collaboration to advance
the vision set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
in the interest of the peoples we collectively serve. As
we look ahead together, the Council can continue to
count on my full and active support.

