Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
having organized this open debate and to thank you for the
concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) on such an important
topic. We would also like to thank Ms. Kimberly
Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for their comments.

My delegation commends the work done by
Argentina as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues. During
the past two years, thanks to the remarkable efforts of its
delegation, we have agreed on six notes by the President
of the Security Council that reflect the consensus on
various issues. While recognizing the importance ofthe
adoption of those notes and their complex negotiation,
we believe that the due implementation of all those
notes is even more important. We cannot allow for such
developments to become a dead letter.

On the other hand, there are several other
outstanding issues to improve, for example, the need
to achieve better interaction between the Council and
the Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission and of the
country configurations, in particular their participation
in Security Council meetings, including informal
consultations, and a more analytical annual report of
the Security Council on situations under consideration.
We also need to improve the transparency of the work
of the Security Council and its interaction with States
that are not members of the Council during wrap-
up sessions, as well as the pursuit of mechanisms to
increase the transparency, interaction and efficiency
of the work of the subsidiary organs and the sanctions
committees. We reiterate the importance of continuing
to consider the issue of the selection criteria for experts
of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council, in
accordance with the note by the President S/2006/997,
in particular the criterion of broad geographical
representation. We also believe that it is essential
to further promote interaction between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries.

The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson has been one of the critical elements
in improving the procedural safeguards of the United
Nations sanctions regime. In the five years that the
Office has been functioning, we cannot forget the
reasons that led us to establish it. We welcome the
achievements to date, which, while significant, are not
definitive. Much remains to be done to achieve a system
that meets everyone's expectations.

In that regard, we wish to reiterate something that
we have said before in this Chamber. The mandate of the
Office of the Ombudsperson should be extended in two
ways: first, to other sanctions regimes and, secondly,
in order to entrust it with responsibilities beyond the
removal of names from the sanctions list. That is to say,
we would prefer the Office to have a greater role in all
sanctions processes, including serving as a filter during
the drawing up of lists. We must be mindful of the fact
that due process applies not only to individuals but
also to the effective implementation of sanctions. We
believe that the notion of fair and transparent processes
must be equally present in all regimes. That is central to
the credibility and legitimacy of the Security Council's
work.

In that regard, I would also like to mention the
importance of promoting and ensuring the independence
of the Office of the Ombudsperson. That requires
adequate arrangements with regard to the management
structure and conditions of service of the Office and its
members. We call on the Secretary-General to take the
necessary measures to address that issue.

With regard to the follow-up of situations referred
by the Security Council to the International Criminal
Court, we believe that that is a critical issue, since it
concerns the important relationship between the two
bodies. My country has devoted enormous efforts to
improving and strengthening that relationship. Such
experience results from our recent membership of the
Security Council, during which we discovered that the
relationship with the Court is holistic and dynamic and
requires ongoing dialogue.
In that regard, we reiterate our belief that the best
way to fill that gap is to have an appropriate forum
to discuss all aspects of the relationship between the
two bodies. We believe that, first, because of the large
number of referrals to the Court in the Council's work,
which shows a clear development in its approach towards
the Court, The second reason is because the ICC deals
with complex situations, in which the Security Council
seeks to achieve similar goals. Several arrest warrants
have been issued against individuals responsible for
atrocities committed during some of the worst conflicts
on the Council's agenda. The third reason is because
the Council must exercise its powers of referral and
postponement in an effective and responsible way.

When the Council refers a situation to the Court,
it must therefore be ready for the Court to effectively
fulfil its mandate. When the rule of law is not respected
and the Council does not prevent such a breach, the
rule of law is violated. The reluctance of the Council to
take further action or to follow up on matters before the
Court, limiting itself to receiving periodic reports from
the Prosecutor on specific country situations, shows its
indifference not only to upholding the rule of law and
to guaranteeing accountability in general, but also, in
particular, to ensuring the effective implementation of
its own decisions.

