Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): It is regrettable that the intransigence of the
Government of Iraq in complying with international
obligations imposed on it by the Security Council since
1991, as a consequence of its own unlawful actions,
which were an assault on the independence and
territorial integrity of a Member State of our
Organization, in flagrant violation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, has led
to the situation that we are now witnessing.

After 12 years, in the course of which the Iraqi
regime defied and failed to comply with the binding
decisions of the Security Council, the Council and the
international community gave it one final opportunity
to fully eliminate all its weapons of mass destruction,
failing which it would face serious consequences. It is
regrettable that even despite the intense international
pressure brought to bear, the Government of Iraq did
not demonstrate total, active and unconditional
cooperation reflecting a real political will to comply
with its obligations.

It is deplorable that the Government of Iraq did
not heed or fully accept all the appeals of Member
States to avoid armed conflict and the further suffering
of its people. It is a position and conduct that make it
directly responsible for the current situation in the
country.

In light of the reality of war, my delegation can
only hope that the conflict will end as soon as possible
to avoid greater material destruction and, especially,
the loss of human lives so that the United Nations and
the international community can devote their resources
and efforts to assisting reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Iraq.

While it is regrettable that the Security Council
has not maintained the consensus and unity that it
reached in adopting resolution 1441 (2002) on a
question of general concern, the current international
situation must serve as a basis for looking towards the
future.

Historical experience has taught us that after
profound crises and conflicts, societies re-emerge with
creativity through new and better initiatives that benefit
their peoples. One example of this is the origin and
creation of the United Nations.

We concur with statements that the immediate
challenge of the United Nations should be in the area
of efforts for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Iraq, through the adoption of a comprehensive
programme of humanitarian assistance. In addition,
Member States must take on the task, in a pragmatic
way, of rebuilding and strengthening unity and trust in
the United Nations system, especially the multilateral
mechanism for collective security. The actions of the
world Organization should not give rise to any doubt
about its effectiveness, impartiality or legality, through
a process of decision-making based on consensus and
the shared interests of all Member States.

I wish to conclude by expressing the importance
and urgency of continuing the oil for food programme,
and I offer our support for the Secretary-General in the
preparation of a programme responding to the needs of
the Iraqi people.

I believe that it is appropriate to reaffirm here
that the Government of El Salvador has, within its
possibilities, offered to participate in a multilateral
effort to assist in alleviating the humanitarian needs of
Iraq in the post-war period.

