Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zebari for his
statement.

On 1 June, the Iraqi interim Government was
formed and the temporary Governing Council
dissolved. Earlier, the Secretary-General briefed us on
the results of the mission to Iraq of his special envoy,
Mr. Brahimi. We look forward to the report of
Mr. Brahimi himself.

Russia has always advocated the prompt
restoration of the full sovereignty of Iraq. To do that, it
is very important that the Iraqi people recognize the
interim Government as the country's main political
force. In that regard, my delegation welcomes what the
Secretary-General has said in the Council's
consultations, that the Iraqis themselves will need to
judge their Government on the basis not of statements
but of the Government's specific actions. My
delegation also found another comment of the
Secretary-General to be of value, that security in the
country cannot be ensured by military means alone and
that we must try to ensure that the most vocal
Government critics are included in the upcoming
national dialogue.
We hope that the interim Government will be able
to make a significant contribution to establishing
national institutions and a system of government and to
meet challenges such as establishing internal stability,
restoring the economy and the social infrastructure and
establishing law and order. It is our view that the
international community, led by the United Nations,
must give as much assistance as possible to the people
of Iraq to achieve those goals.

The Security Council is working on a draft
resolution on Iraq. It is our job to ensure that the
people of Iraq are united and sovereign once again and
that there will be stability, democracy and economic
prosperity in the country. We must be sure that we are
acting in accordance with the views of the Iraqis and
that we are not imposing our will on them. In that
regard, we wish to hear from the interim Government
specific ideas with respect to international assistance
for Iraq, particularly in the political, economic, military
and humanitarian areas. We will take those
considerations into account in our future work on the
Council's draft resolution on Iraq.

We also recommend that the head of the interim
Government, with a number of ministers, come to New
York to meet with the members of the Security
Council. An alternative could be to hold a meeting in
the region, which would give Iraq's neighbours an
opportunity to participate actively in the dialogue with
the Iraqi leadership.

Now I wish to ask several questions. First, what
are the priority areas? According to which priorities
does the interim Government wish to receive
international assistance from the international
community? What role could the United Nations play
in that regard?

My second question concerns the situation
regarding the file on Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction, as no weapons of mass destruction have
been found. We believe that the draft resolution being
prepared by the Security Council on Iraq must clearly
answer the question of who will be responsible for
searching for traces of weapons of mass destruction
and for maintaining the safety of the sites and all
materials found under the monitoring of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Mission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). What does the Minister think
about the work of the IAEA and UNMOVIC being
resumed simultaneous to the transfer of power to the
interim Government in order to deploy in Iraq a long-
term disarmament monitoring system based on Security
Council resolutions?

My third question, which others delegations have
already asked about, has to do with the interaction
between the interim Government and the multinational
force. And the last question: does the Minister believe
it important to consider convening an international
conference, possibly in several stages, as an instrument
to provide a tool for the Iraqi settlement process? How
does the Minister feel about that idea?

