The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year, I
should like to extend my warm wishes on the occasion
of the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and the Secretariat.

In presiding over this first formal meeting of the
Council in 2016, I am happy to welcome the other new
members: Egypt, Japan, Senegal and Ukraine. We look
forward with interest to their participation in the work
of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
responsibilities.

I take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members, namely, Chad,
Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria, for their important
contributions to the work of the Council during their
terms in 2014 and 2015.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
also to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Samantha Power,
Permanent Representative of the United States, for her
service as President of the Council for the month of
December 2015. I am sure I speak for all members ofthe
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Power and her team for the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council's business last month.

At the same time, I will very briefly share with the
Council some thoughts from our side, since Uruguay
has returned to the Council after a 50-year absence and
is eager to work actively and closely with all members
and the wider membership of the United Nations to
achieve the objectives of our Organization.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Mali

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2015/1030)

Letter dated 5 January 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/8)


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Mali.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/1030, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. I wish also
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2016/8, which contains a letter dated 5 January 2016
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.


