Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland and commend
the Polish presidency of the Security Council this
month for convening today's open debate. We express
our warm appreciation to all of today's briefers for
their comprehensive reports. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's team,
UNICEF and the Department of Peace Operations
for their coordinated efforts to put an end to grave
violations against children. We also pay tribute to the
non-governmental organization (NGO) community,
which makes a sterling contribution to upholding
children's rights.

I will begin by expressing deep concern over the
scale, complexity and severity of the grave violations
committed against children in armed conflict in 2018,
especially over the highest-ever number of child
casualties, as outlined in the Secretary-General's latest
annual report (S/2019/509). At the same time, the
overall reduction in the number of incidents of child
recruitment and attacks on schools, as well as the strong
consensus among Member States on the importance of
this issue, indicates that positive change is achievable.

In that regard, Kazakhstan would like to propose
the following recommendations, aimed at mobilizing
our collective will to safeguard more 400 million
children affected by conflict.

First, we must promote full compliance with
international law and strengthen accountability for
grave violations against children. It is vital that all
Member States ratify and strictly implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and other relevant treaties. We also encourage
Governments to endorse the international tools related
to the protection of children in armed conflict, such as
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (Paris Principles),
the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and to
include child-protection provisions in peace processes,
especially with non-State armed groups. I am pleased to
note that my country has ratified all the relevant treaties
and endorsed all international initiatives related to the
protection of children.

Secondly, we need to prioritize preventive measures.
It is evident that children's access to education, health
care and basic services is a key element of conflict
prevention and the building of sustainable societies.
Therefore, investments in development and education,
providing better living conditions and meeting the
socioeconomic needs of children are critical to
preventing the recruitment of and grave violations
against children. Supporting capacity-building at the
local and regional levels and the promotion of tolerance
are equally important in this regard.

Thirdly, we must increase support for reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes for children affected by
armed conflict. Adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding must be provided to ensure the rehabilitation
of children on an immediate basis. Moreover, we must
rethink our approaches to reintegration and establish
long-term programmes that will help children more
effectively reintegrate into society. We therefore
supported the establishment of the Global Coalition
for the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers.
Together with France and Malta, we are co-chairing
the Coalition's Group of Friends of Reintegration.
We believe that the new approaches elaborated by our
Coalition will help children more effectively return to
normal life and not only succeed in their communities,
but also become catalysts and agents of change.

Lastly, we support the Secretary-General's call on
Member States to engage closely with the United Nations
to facilitate the return of children and women who are
actually or allegedly affiliated with terrorist groups,
with the best interests of the child in mind. Kazakhstan
has had the unique experience of bringing home safely
from Syria a total of almost 600 Kazakh citizens
previously involved with the Islamic State, including
more than 156 women and 406 children, during the
Zhusan humanitarian rescue operation. Government
agencies, in cooperation with NGOs, clergy members
and volunteers, took the measures necessary to provide
medical and psychological assistance to the victims and
are continuing their rehabilitation at specially created
regional centres.

I will conclude by reiterating Kazakhstan's
commitment to all collective and comprehensive
measures to ensure the safety and welfare of children,
our most precious resource and, at the same time, the
most vulnerable group in times of armed conflict.

