Mr. Mekdad (spoke in Arabic): As we are soon
to leave the Security Council as an elected member of
this important international body, it is my pleasure to
address the issue of Rwanda, an African country with
which the international community stood shoulder to
shoulder in order to return to it peace, stability and
security.

In speaking about Rwanda, it is necessary to
mention the Security Council's visit to the countries of
Central Africa several months ago. Through that
mission we were able to witness events on the ground,
to meet the different parties and to witness the plight of
the peoples of Rwanda and the other African countries
we visited, as well as to learn about their hopes and
aspirations.

I should like at this meeting to convey to the
Security Council the fact that the sanctions Committee
on Rwanda, which was created by resolution 918
(1994) did not hold formal meetings this year. That was
not due to a lack of desire on the part of the
Committee's Bureau to face any violations of
resolution 918 (1994). Instead, the reason was due to
the fact that the Committee did not receive any
information on violations of the resolution. The fact
that we received no complaints of possible violations
does not necessarily mean that no weapons reached
Rwanda illegally. However, it does illustrate the
international community's increasing awareness of the
need to avoid any violations of the resolution, as that
would have dire repercussions for the situation in both
Rwanda and the Central African region in general.

I would, however, like to emphasize that, in the
absence of a specific monitoring mechanism for the
effective implementation of the weapons embargo, the
Committee reiterates its previous comments stressing
the fact that it depends upon the cooperation of States
and organizations having any information concerning
potential or real violations of the arms embargo. Once
again I underscore the fact that the Committee received
no such indications or specific allegations of violations
last year. I should also like to add that, following the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 918 (1994)
imposing sanctions on Rwanda and the creation of a
committee to monitor implementation, another
resolution (1011 (1995)) was adopted lifting the
sanctions against the Government of Rwanda while
maintaining the embargo on non-governmental actors.

Central Africa in general, and Rwanda in
particular, are experiencing clear progress towards
stability and security. We believe that that should draw
the appropriate attention and concern from the Security
Council in the future. I would also add that all aspects
of weapons smuggling to this important region of the
world, including Rwanda, must be stopped
immediately. There is no justification whatever for
tolerating such smuggling, the repercussions of which
are always dire.

In that regard, allow me to pay tribute to the
complete cooperation that existed between Syria's
chairmanship of the Committee and the Security
Council secretariat. I should also like to thank the
Vice-Chairmen from Guinea and Spain for their efforts
in helping us to keep up with all the developments
pertaining to the implementation of resolutions 918
(1994) and 1011 (1995). I would also like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Rwanda to the United Nations
for its full cooperation with the Committee. I also
express my best wishes to the people and the
Government of Rwanda in overcoming all the
difficulties they have faced. We wish them every
success in rebuilding their country, as well as
development and well-being in Rwanda.

In this last statement, I should like to wish every
success to the members of the Council, permanent and
non-permanent alike, with whom we have cooperated
sincerely in addressing the challenges of our world,
particularly in eliminating the sources of tension that
continue to threaten international peace and security. I
also wish every success to our colleagues in the
delegations that will begin their service in the Security
Council in the new year. All the members of the
Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic, and I
personally, would like to convey our best wishes for
the coming holidays and new year to all members and
observers.

