Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their
briefings. Ms. Blakemore's statement brought the
voices of the victims of abuse and sexual exploitation
into the Chamber. Such testimonies cast a shadow over
peacekeeping operations - one of the most important
tools of the Organization in its quest for stability, peace
and security.

The regrettable actions of some individuals should
not prevent us from highlighting the key role played
by the military and police contingents, observers
and civilian personnel in the various missions. They
are the ones on the ground risking their lives every
day in an attempt to fulfil the tasks mandated by the
Security Council.

The persistent threats to international peace and
security posed by terrorist groups and transnational
crime have served to highlight the urgent need for a
major structural reform of peacekeeping operations to
enable them to provide a more efficient and effective
response to their respective environments to overcome
threats. In that regard, we believe that we should
consider the efficiency of each peacekeeping operation.
It is vital that each mission be supported by the country
or countries in which it is deployed. We reiterate that
it is impossible to think about a positive or favourable
outcome or that missions will fulfil their mandates if
they do not have the full consent of the Government
of the host State. In addition, for missions to enjoy
legitimacy, it is indispensable that they fulfil the
purposes for which they were conceived and comply
with the principles of peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, they must be impartial and serve only to
help build lasting peace. At no time should they be
seen or used as an intervention force. In all cases,
peacekeeping operations must respect the rule of law,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
each of the countries in which they operate. Similarly,
missions must always have a clear, measurable and
attainable mandate. To that end, the monitoring and
evaluation tools at our disposal should be used to verify
that mandate objectives are reached. For one reason or
another, those missions not meeting their objectives
must be evaluated and their mandates reconfigured. It
is not possible to continue with missions that extend
over several decades.

We believe that the performance of mission
personnel is an important element of mission success.
As we all know, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has requested the Secretary-General to
develop an integrated performance policy framework,
which should include a methodology for measuring and
managing the performance ofpeacekeeping forces. That
in turn will serve to improve the planning and evaluation
of all missions, while emphasizing accountability,
encouraging performance and recognizing outstanding
performance. In that regard, it is important to take into
account the multidimensional aspect of performance,
which is developed through the interaction of military,
police and civilian personnel.

The effective and adequate provision of economic,
human and material resources for missions requires
technical, logistical and, above all, realistic analysis.
We emphasize the fact that improving institutional
agility in deploying troops is a priority. Similarly,
international standards established by the Organization
must be respected. In addition, it is important to select
the best qualified and most specialized personnel to
respond to the asymmetrical and high-risk contexts
faced by missions, without exception. We also again
stress that providing adequate and proper equipment
and training for troops is not just the responsibility of
troop-contributing countries, but of the United Nations
as a whole.
Furthermore, we believe that cooperation with
regional and subregional partners should continue to
take place within an institutional framework in order to
strengthen the exchange of information, consultations,
coordination in early warning services, conflict analysis
and common strategies, as well as joint interventions
that take into account the needs of each region on the
basis of comparative advantages.

Last, but certainly not least, we believe that we
cannot expect to achieve certain objectives with budget
cuts that are not commensurate with the reality on the
ground and without consultations with the host country
and troop-contributing countries. That is especially
true considering that the mandates of most missions
include the protection of civilians and that, in most
cases, those countries with the capacity to contribute
more also have a historical debt to those countries in
which the missions are deployed.

