The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the African Union Bedializoun
Moussa Nebie and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro
Maio for their briefings.

We share the concern expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report on the Central African Republic
(S/2018/6ll) about the continuing unstable situation
in the country, especially on the security front. A
significant part of its territory is still controlled by
armed groups. Despite some positive progress on the
problem of expanding Government administrative
control, the local authorities are still not fully
functioning. The bloody inter-ethnic and interreligious
encounters continue, and the confrontations between
gangs are worsening. There are intense clashes between
armed groups over territory, resources and key trade
routes. The rhetoric of hate speech is a catalyst in this.
We want to emphasize that such behaviour should have
no place in a country whose citizens are striving for
peaceful coexistence.

We would like to express our sincere condolences
for the continuing losses among peacekeepers. The
courage of the Blue Helmets in the Central African
Republic cannot be overestimated. We fully support
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and of Mr. Onanga-Anyanga personally. We
realize that the Mission has a difficultjob, considering
the size of the country and the presence of so many
armed groups.

We are also concerned about the further
deterioration of the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation. We urge all the parties to the conflict to
ensure humanitarian access to the victims and the
authorities to continue to work to create conditions
conducive to the safe voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes.

There can be no question that one of the key
conditions for the long-term stabilization of the situation
in the Central African Republic is the implementation
of the programme for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of combatants. We hope
that future progress with that initiative, and with
involving the main armed groups in it, will help to
normalize the situation. The road map for a settlement
in the Central African Republic adopted through the
mediation of the African Union in Libreville on 17 July
2017 constitutes a good foundation for launching
an inclusive political dialogue. We share positive
assessment in the Secretary-General's report of the
progress made in implementing the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, for which the panel of facilitators conducted
two full-fledged rounds of meetings on the ground with
all the leaders of the main armed groups with the aim of
consolidating their demands for the holding of further
negotiations with the Government. In our View, it will
be crucial to ensure that all parties to the Libreville
agreements make additional efforts to implement the
relevant provisions as soon as possible.

We note the steps that Bangui is taking in the area of
security-sector reform with a view to restoring its control
throughout the country. That is needed to help normalize
the situation in the Central African Republic, including
with the support of the international community, and to
fulfil the national defence plan approved by President
Touadera in order to gradually transfer responsibility
for running the country to its lawful authorities. For
our part, we want to affirm that Russia will continue to
support the authorities of the Central African Republic
in reforming their national security sector. In 2017 our
instructors trained 200 Central Africans, and we plan
to hold similar training courses for 400 members of the
Central African armed forces in 2018. We also intend
to increase our humanitarian assistance, particularly
where providing the population with medical services
is concerned.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

