Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their valuable
briefings. We recognize the important work they are
both doing, in their respective capacities, to end a
conflict that has no military solution and to address
the largest humanitarian crisis in the world today. We
also welcome the appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha to head the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement.

Peru has been following developments in Yemen
with concern. While we welcome the recent meeting
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the
commitments made there, we would be remiss in not
stressing the extreme fragility of the current situation,
given the deep mistrust that prevails among the parties
and the rigidity of their positions.

We strongly condemn the drone attack on Saudi
Arabia's oil installations on Saturday, claimed by
the Houthis, which puts regional and world security
at high risk and is having unpredictable global
economic consequences. We join the Secretary-
General in calling on all parties involved to reduce
tensions and seek negotiated solutions, pursuant
to international law. Furthermore, we regret the
atrocities committed by the Houthi rebels and the
disproportionate responses thereto, such as the attack
on a detention centre, which show the parties' disdain
for international humanitarian law and human rights.
We are also concerned that the climate of violence is
now compounded by profound uncertainty in the south
of the country, with a real risk of Yemeni institutional
collapse. In that regard, we welcome the recent joint
statement by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates to help end confrontational rhetoric and
accusations among the various actors and to return to
diplomatic channels.

The delicate situation in the south, together with the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, reminds us of the
urgent need to act swiftly and pragmatically in order to
make greater progress in reaching a political solution,
as promoted by the United Nations. To that end, Peru
considers it essential that a new round of consultations
be convened as soon as possible and underscores that all
sectors of civil society and the country's regions must be
properly represented, including groups from the south,
provided that they commit to respecting the territorial
integrity of the country and agree that the use of force
is exclusively reserved for the State. We encourage
parallel efforts to continue, in critical areas - for
instance, the redeployment in Al-Hudaydah - the
exchange of detainees and the establishment of the joint
committee in Taiz.

However, the emphasis on the political process in
Yemen should in no way obviate the need to continue
addressing the humanitarian crisis there. We are
especially alarmed by the degree of food insecurity and
the deterioration of economic indicators that deepen the
suffering of the population.

One ofthe main issues of concern is the insufficient
fulfilment of the pledges made at February's donor
conference. We therefore welcome the announcement
of contributions from Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates to which Mr. Lowcock referred. We
encourage the countries concerned to take appropriate
measures so as not to prolong the severely adverse
impact on the roll-out of the humanitarian response
plan. Moreover, we note the urgency of continuing to
prioritize the containment of cholera, in the light of
the increase in the number of cases observed compared
to last year. In that regard, we commend the crucial
prevention and control work carried out by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its
humanitarian partners, which has prevented outbreaks
of the disease. We emphasize that the ports, airports
and roads in Yemen must remain open and operational,
in line with the Council's various statements. In
addition, humanitarian aid and the population's access
thereto cannot and should not be conditional on
strategic considerations.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that my delegation will
continue to work to build a sustainable peace in Yemen
that puts an end to the humanitarian disaster, promotes
regional stability, provides full respect for human rights
and guarantees accountability for the atrocious crimes
committed there.

