Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too would like to thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing and for his continuing
diplomatic efforts in Burma/Myanmar to promote and
encourage the process of national reconciliation and
democratization in that country. Slovakia strongly
supports his activities carried out within the framework
of the good offices mission of the Secretary-General.

We note Mr. Gambari's observation about certain
progress reached in the talks with the Myanmar
leadership, which we hope will lead to a meaningful,
substantive and time bound dialogue aimed at reform,
national reconciliation, democracy and full respect for
human rights in Burma. We join the Secretary-
General's call on the parties to redouble their efforts
towards that end. We believe that the military leaders
of Burma/Myanmar bear particular responsibility for
creating appropriate conditions for the dialogue.

In this regard, we remain concerned about the
continued violence used by the military leadership
against political opponents, including crackdowns on
peaceful demonstrations, arbitrary arrests and other
gross violations of human rights in Burma/Myanmar.
We are particularly concerned about the reports of
forcible recruitment of children and their deployment
in military actions by the Burmese army.

We welcome the return to Burma/Myanmar of
Special Rapporteur Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, in the
context of the mandate entrusted to him by the Human
Rights Council, and we hope that the Council will also
be briefed about the observations from this visit as
soon as possible.

In that context, my delegation reaffirms its call
on the regime of Myanmar to immediately stop the
human rights violations and address the concerns of the
international community, including through the
immediate release of political prisoners. We believe
that it is high time for the Government to embark on a
credible and fully participatory reform process leading
to a genuine democratic transition and national
reconciliation in order to avoid further loss of human
life and escalation of tensions with dire consequences
not only for Burma/Myanmar but for the entire region.

We welcome the engagement of countries of the
region with Burma/Myanmar in support of the
Secretary-General's good offices and their positive
pressure and influence on the Myanmar regime towards
changing its unacceptable policies and starting a
genuine process of democratization and national
reconciliation. We believe this engagement must also
be redoubled to achieve further and irreversible
progress towards democracy in Burma/Myanmar.

Finally, we also believe that the continued active
role of the Security Council is indispensable if the
current efforts are to bring further results.
