Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate on Afghanistan. I wish
also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing on the current situation in Afghanistan. Let me
also thank our good colleague Ambassador Tanin for
his encouraging statement.

Rwanda is encouraged, of course, by the positive
developments in Afghanistan, highlighted by the
Secretary-General, despite the challenges that the
Afghan Government is still facing. We appreciate the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in assisting the people and
Government of Afghanistan, and we are convinced
that resolution 2096 (2013), which was just adopted,
will somehow enable the Mission to better implement
its mandate, with a focus on the key priorities in
Afghanistan.

Resolution 2096 (2013) reaffirms the strong
commitment of the Council to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity
of Afghanistan. We therefore express our appreciation
to the International Security Assistance Force for the
work it has done in fighting against anti-Government
forces and in enhancing the capacity of the Afghan
security forces. We welcome the decision to draw down
the international forces comes 2014, which will open a
new era in the history of Afghanistan.

We take note of the decrease in the number of
incidents and civilian casualties for the first time in
six years, but we remain concerned about the terrorist
activities that are still being carried out in Afghanistan
and that undermine the authority of the political and
security institutions of that country. We particularly
condemn the use of human shields and children as suicide
bombers, and we call upon the Afghan authorities, with
the support of the international community, to combat
such terrorist activities.

Besides security, Rwanda also believes that
reconciliation and national unity, through an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned process, are of paramount
importance. We commend the efforts of the High Peace
Council to foster reconciliation in Afghanistan, and we
express our appreciation to UNAMA for supporting
that process. We believe that only a highly inclusive
dialogue can bring about lasting peace in Afghanistan.
We welcome the decision taken by some members of
the Taliban to renounce violence and terrorism and to
engage in a political and reconciliation process with
Kabul.

As we all know, reconciliation cannot be considered
in isolation from regional dynamics. We are encouraged
by the progress towards greater regional cooperation
that has beeen made in recent months. We support the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. In particular, we
commend neighbouring Pakistan on its support for
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, which it has
again demonstrated by releasing 26 Afghan Taliban in
February.

Rwanda welcomes the holding of presidential and
provincial council elections in April 2013. The elections
will be a cornerstone ofthe ongoing democratic process
in Afghanistan as the drawdown of international forces

is under way. We commend the Afghan Government
for what it has already achieved in preparing for the
elections. We request UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme to continue their support in
enhancing Afghanistan's electoral capacity.

However, we remain concerned about the human
rights situation in Afghanistan, in particular the
violence against women. In that regard, however, we
need to view the situation from a historical perspective
and to remember what was the condition of women
during the Taliban regime. We are encouraged by the
resolve of the Afghan Government in implementing
the Law on Elimination of Violence against Women in
Afghanistan. We call upon the international community
to continue its support in that regard.

Needless to say, the war in Afghanistan, following
a long period of Taliban obscurantism, had negative
effects on the economic and humanitarian situation
in the country. We deplore the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistant, where more than 3 million refugees have
been registered in neighbouring Iran and Pakistan, not
to mention the growing number of internally displaced
persons, whose situation is aggravated by natural
disasters and poverty. We welcome the July 2012
Tokyo Confererence, where donors pledged $16 billion
in development assistance. We urge all international
partners to materialize their support and pledges to
Afghanistan, including through the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.

Let me conclude by commending President
Hamid Karzai and his Government for the tremendous
achievements since 2001. We also commend the
International Security Assistance Force and UNAMA
troop-contributing countries for their sacrifice in the
cause of peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bob
Carr, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia. I would
like to commend him and our colleague Ambassador
Quinlan for the work well done.

