Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to welcome the
initiative of the presidency of the Security Council
to convene this debate on the situation in Haiti. I
also warmly welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honore, and thank her for her presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Haiti (S/2014/162).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, especially its recognition of
the important work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in ensuring the
stabilization and security of Haiti, as well as in
strengthening its democratic institutions and the rule
of law. We believe that this work remains essential to
providing the Haitian authorities with the security and
support needed to facilitate the process of democratic
consolidation in Haiti.

Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and
institutional strengthening in Haiti. My country has
therefore actively participated in MINUSTAH since
2004 with a military contingent of 372 troops, including
female field staff, as well as military officers in the
General Staff of the Mission.

Peru recognizes the significant progress made
towards the holding of the long-delayed legislative,
municipal and local by-elections. However, we are
concerned that a new postponement thereof could
generate a climate of political instability and a
governance vacuum in Haiti. Therefore, recognizing
the democratic vocation of the Haitian people , my
delegation reiterates its call on all Haitian political
forces to reach the agreements necessary to the timely
holding of these elections, which will strengthen
the functioning of key institutions of democratic
governance Haiti.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/162), the security situation in Haiti remains
relatively stable thanks to the crucial work of
MINUSTAH. However, there has been an increase
in protests, mainly linked to political tension,
socioeconomic problems and the lack of basic services.
This should remind us that the United Nations system
should provide cooperation in the three areas that
have direct impact on the ongoing process of Haitian
recovery and reconstruction: governance, security and
sustainable development.

In reiterating our appreciation for the work of the
military component of MINUSTAH to ensure stability
and security in Haiti, we wish to express our satisfaction
with the progress achieved in the implementation of the
five-year development plan for 2012-2016 of the Haitian
National Police, which will give that institution the
capacity necessary to maintain public order and security
throughout the country, as well as a firm institutional
foundation for promoting the strengthening of the rule
of law and respect for human rights.

The progress made by MINUSTAH in Haiti's
stabilization allows us to look to the future with
optimism, because we believe that the time has come
to for Haiti initiate a process of gradual transition
towards a phased, gradual and orderly second stage
of cooperation with the United Nations system. In this
regard, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the reconfiguration and consolidation plan for
MINUSTAH, aimed at consolidating the achievements
made to date and at laying the foundations for long-
term development programmes .

Regarding the various options provided by the
Secretary-General on the future of the Mission,
my delegation believes that a future reduction of
MINUSTAH personnel, or even a change in the nature
of the Mission, should be determined only after a
serious analysis of the situation on the ground. In this
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's intention
to conduct a strategic assessment of the desirability of
the various options set out in the report, and we hope
that he will duly consider the parameters and indicators
in the MINUSTAH reconfiguration and consolidation
plan.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
MINUSTAH'S major achievements to date should
not lead us to the false conclusion that the United
Nations task in Haiti is finished, or even close to it.
Experience has shown us the grave consequences in
certain countries when the Organization has decided to
withdraw its presence on the ground before it should
have, which is why we call upon the entire international
community to continue its ongoing support in Haiti.

