Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome His
Excellency President Boris Tadie of the Republic of
Serbia and His Excellency President Fatmir Sejdiu of
the Republic of Kosovo.

On 15 June, the constitution of the Republic of
Kosovo came into force. We congratulate the people of
Kosovo on having adopted one of the most progressive
of constitutions, one that contains the strongest
internationally recognized human rights protection
mechanisms and includes European best practices for
multi-ethnic protection. The constitution's adoption
and entry into force reaffirm Kosovo as a true country
in Europe and Kosovo as a truly European country. We
hope that the constitution's implementation and the
adherence to its most advanced provisions will be a
constant affirmation of this.

After long hardship and nine years of the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
we wish the people of Kosovo every success in
administering their own lives. We wish them stability,
security and prosperity, as well as quick integration
into the United Nations in due course and into other
international forums and, naturally, into the Euro-
Atlantic community. We have repeatedly reiterated our
strong conviction that all countries of South-Eastern
Europe belong to the European and Euro-Atlantic
family, and we stand ready to offer them our
experience and know-how as they travel their path.

However, the entry into force of the Kosovo
constitution effectively removes UNMIK's powers as
interim civil administration in Kosovo as of 15 June of
this year, and that is the main reason that we are
gathered in this Chamber today. Since 1999, the United
Nations, through its UNMIK presence in Kosovo, was
very successful at administering Kosovo for the benefit
of its inhabitants. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate everyone who was a part of
this effort and who put energy into building something
that today we can claim to be an overwhelmingly
positive United Nations legacy in Kosovo. In this
context, let me underline the role that the outgoing
Special Representative, Joachim Riicker, played in
Kosovo and to thank him for his work.

We commend the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat for displaying leadership, and especially for
bringing all sides together in order to find solutions,
which not everyone supports fully but can live with, all
in line with the United Nations status neutrality and
with resolution 1244 (1999).
We applaud the Secretary-General's vision in not
stopping the river of history from flowing, while
addressing the major worries of those concerned. We
fully support the plan he has presented in his report,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), which
enables him to do so.

The new reality in Kosovo and its future are
clear. We welcome the readiness of the United Nations
to carry out its residual tasks in Kosovo and offer our
support to the European Union (EU), which has
expressed its readiness to play an enhanced role in the
rule of law through its European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo). The prompt and
full establishment of EULEX in the entire territory of
Kosovo is the best guarantee that the successful United
Nations legacy in Kosovo will be preserved.

Finally, we call on the authorities both in
Belgrade and in Pristina - and, even more important,
all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnicity -
to continue cooperating with the United Nations and
the European Union in order to ensure the continued
stability and security of Kosovo, neighbouring
countries and the region. This is crucial if we are to see
the rest of the South-Eastern Europe fully integrated
into a stable and prosperous European future.

