Mr. De Mistura: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, I hope to soon welcome the adoption of a draft
resolution that will help all ofus address an issue that we
have been jointly working on for at least the past three
weeks. We have come a long way since the first meeting
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in
Vienna on 30 October 2015. Much has transpired since
I last briefed the Council on 5 February, the day that
I suspended the inter-Syrian talks in the light of the
positions articulated by the parties and the lack of
progress on the ground.

Three weeks later, and as a result of the heavy
lifting done by members of the ISSG, particularly of
the co-Chairs of the two task forces that were formed
in Munich on 12 February, aid has been delivered in the
past 10 days to almost 110,000 people, and 200 trucks
are moving inside Syria in order to reach six locations.
The first World Food Programme test air-drop in Deir
ez-Zour has also taken place in order to reach an area
where there are about 230,000 people under siege by
Daesh.

Perhaps most importantly, we have had a provisional
agreement on the terms of a cessation of hostilities in
Syria, as announced by the Russian and United States
co-Chairs at the beginning of this week. The cessation
of hostilities is in fact meant to come into effect about
an hour from now at midnight Damascus time. This

meeting therefore has a special significance on this
hopefully exceptional day and night for the Syrians.
Consequently, with your permission, Sir, I will give
the Council a rather unorthodox briefing. Rather than
walking Council members through the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2016), concerning which Council
members already have the Secretary-General's letter of
17 February (S/2016/152), I would rather focus on the
post-Munich developments, many unfolding almost in
real time.

As an outcome of the ISSG meeting in Munich, we
now have specific obligations for the ISSG members
and the Syrians to fulfil. There are now a mechanism
in place to that effect, an agreed set of actions and an
immediate timetable and timeline. Council members
have just deliberated on a draft resolution that, I hope,
that will endorse all those steps. Let me give them an
idea of the hard work that will have brought us to this
stage once the Council has adopted the draft resolution.

First, on the issue of sustained humanitarian
access and a humanitarian task force, the Council
is well aware of the detailed briefings on the overall
grave humanitarian situation in Syria. Over the past
month alone, the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/862); the report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Syria (A/HRC/30/48); as well as the letter of the
Secretary-General of 17 February have painted quite a
tragic and harrowing picture of the desperate conditions
of civilians - including many women, children and
sick persons - in communities across Syria that are
besieged by the Government, by the opposition or by
Daesh. To that, we should add the unprecedented level
of internal displacement and the growing number of
Syrians embarking on an often fatal journey across
land and sea to seek safety and asylum in Europe and
elsewhere.

Humanitarian issues have taken a centre stage in
the latest ISSG deliberations in Munich leading to the
establishment of the ISSG task force on humanitarian
access, which has already met three times since
12 February. My Office, including my Senior Adviser
on Humanitarian Issues, Jan Egeland, and the United
Nations country team in Damascus, led by United
Nations Resident Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo, have
worked hard, together with implementing partners
such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to generate
a humanitarian plan, as requested by ISSG. In the
first instance, urgently needed humanitarian aid was
delivered to the besieged areas identified in the Munich
statement: Madaya, Zabadani, Moadamiya, Kafr
Batna - which is part of eastern Ghouta - Kafraya
and Foah.

Thanks to the prompt operational response of our
World Food Programme colleagues and the generosity
of ISSG members such as Germany, the United States
and the Netherlands, as well as technical support
offered by the Russian Federation, we also witnessed
the first test-run of air drops in a difficult environment,
such as that of Deir ez-Zour. We believe that to date, the
task force members have lived up to the commitment
they made in Munich by using their influence with the
parties to ensure an increased flow of assistance - not
enough, but quite an increased flow.

Those remarkable efforts were not without
difficulties or ongoing serious delays. That is why the
task force is addressing those, and we will be working
on them. We are still waiting for the approval of an aid
delivery for an additional 170,000 people in the besieged
areas. The simplifcation of approval procedures by the
Government still has some way to go and has yet to
occur, but we are working on that matter. A constructive
meeting took place yesterday between Deputy Foreign
Minister Mikhdad and our own team on the issue. We
hope to see the results soon. I personally addressed
that issue with the Syrian Government myself during
my visit to Damascus last week. I will continue to
follow up on these matters very closely because they
are of vital importance and they are a follow-up to the
Munich commitments.

Regarding the cessation of hostilities in Syria and
the ISSG ceasefire task force, less than three hours
ago Ijoined the Russian Federation and United States
co-Chairs in the first meeting of the ISSG ceasefire
task force in this very room from which I am addressing
the Council. In the presence of the ISSG members,
the two co-Chairs, who have been working all week
with partners in reaching out to the other parties on
the ground, have outlined the terms for the cessation
of hostilities in Syria announced on 22 February in a
joint press release by the Russian Federation and the
United States. Today, the two co-Chairs today noted
that the principal Syrian parties have announced their
willingness to participate in the cessation of hostilities
beginning midnight Damascus time, which is basically
less than one hour from now.

Armed opposition groups have announced their
commitment to, first, fully implementing resolution 2254
(2015) and participating - I repeat, participating - in
the United Nations-facilitated political negotiations.
This time we want them to stay there and not to move
from there until we have gone through at least the first
phase of negotiations. Secondly, they will cease their
attacks with any weapons, including rockets, mortars
and anti-tank guided missiles, against the Syrian armed
forces and any forces associated with them. Thirdly,
they will refrain from acquiring or seeking to acquire
territory from other parties to the agreement. Fourthly,
they will allow humanitarian access. Fifthly, they
will use proportionate force, which means not unless
required to address an immediate threat and if and
when responding in self-defence.

At the same time, the Syrian armed forces and other
forces associated with them have committed to abiding
by exactly the same points. That means ceasing attacks
with any weapons, including aerial bombardment
by the Syrian Air Force or Russian aerospace forces
against the armed opposition groups that are party to
the cessation of hostilities.

The ceasefire task force will oversee the
cessation of hostilities under the co-chairship of
Russia and the United States. Its primary functions
will include, first, delineation of the territory held
by Da'esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other organizations
designated by the Security Council as terrorist that
are not part of the cessation of hostilities. Secondly,
it will issue communications to promote compliance
with the de-escalation of tensions. Thirdly, it will
assess the nature and credibility of incoming reports
of non-compliance in order to determine response
measures. Fourthly, it will determine and address
patterns of persistent non-compliance before referring
the matter to senior officials or a higher level.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the United Nations will support those
efforts in a secretariat capacity and through a so-called
permanent alert centre, better described as an operations
centre - a few metres from here, by the way - which
will be fielding and disseminating information to the
co-Chairs in the wider ISSG. In turn, we, the United
Nations, are not expected to characterize, assess and/
or de-conflict information received, a function that
will remain with the co-Chairs, which are the Russian
Federation and the United States, in consultation with
other ISSG members. The cessation of hostilities
agreement, preceded by lengthy and detailed
discussions in Geneva and the capitals and the outcome
of intense consultations and negotiations, including at
the highest level, is in itself a major achievement, and
I think the Security Council will recognize that. The
communication of the commitment on the part of the
Syrian parties, essential to ending the war, is also a
very important step.

In this room today, the task force members agreed
to reach out to their respective contacts among the
Syrian parties to explain the functioning of the task
force, ensure the confidentiality of the discussions
within the task force itself and refrain from making
public comments about non-compliance reports
under review, in order to give enough time for such
non-compliance to be addressed. My Office, as the
secretariat of the task force, will issue periodic public
briefings on the task force's behalf on the status of the
cessation of hostilities. Today's draft resolution also
sets clear reporting requirements. Other parts of the
United Nations system will obviously retain their own
ability to comment on the situation in Syria within their
own mandates, but the briefings will be done here.

The initial indication of consent by the parties to
the conflict is indeed encouraging, but what we need
now is for the parties to abide by the terms of the
agreement. We have much work ahead of us to ensure
the agreement's implementation, and the international
community, the ISSG and the Syrian parties must
remain steadfast in their own resolve. The draft
resolution that we hope will be adopted shortly is, we
hope, a further manifestation ofthe ISSG's commitment
to delivering the parties to the agreement. Tomorrow,
Saturday - starting at midnight tonight, in fact - will
be critical. There will undoubtedly be no shortage of
attempts to undermine the process. We are ready for
them. We should not be impressed or overly concerned
and should realize that this is part of any ceasefire and
certainly ofa cessation of hostilities.

The onus, however, remains with the co-Chairs,
the relevant members of the ceasefire task force and
all of us to work fast to defuse any tension that may
arise from potential crossed wires, disinformation or
incidents. The parties will have to show restraint in
cases where there are still discrepancies in information
on the presence and affiliation of groups. Daraya is a
case in point. For our part, we will do all we can to
support that important effort. My teams, both in Geneva
and Damascus, will be on a rotating duty as ofmidnight
tonight to follow up on it.

In adopting resolution 2254 (2015), the Council
made it abundantly clear that only a negotiated political
solution can bring an end to this horrible five-year
conflict. The resolution also acknowledged that there
is a close link between a nation-wide ceasefire and a
parallel political process, and confidence in a political
process will indeed increase the prospects ofa ceasefire.
We all know it, and the people of Syria have been
telling and reminding us about it. In turn, a reduction
in violence will help create conditions conducive to
negotations, and progress on a cessation of hostilities
will drastically improve the conditions on the ground,
which in turn will lead to a significant scaling up of
humanitarian deliveries across Syria. As the Secretary-
General concluded in his letter to the Council, the
agreement reached in Munich represents a precious
opportunity for a speedy and credible resumption of
intra-Syrian talks.

Assuming,therefore,that,Godwilling,the cessation
of hostilities largely holds and the humanitarian access
continues unabated, I intend to reconvene - based on
consultation with the Secretary-General and hopefully
with the Council's approval - the intra-Syrian talks
on Monday, 7 March, with the same representatives of
the Syrian Government in opposition, as well as the
groups of individuals associated with the Moscow and
Cairo meetings. As I told the parties at the outset of
the talks on 29 January, the agenda remains exactly
the same. It is based on resolution 2254 (2015), which
aims for a comprehensive political settlement through
negotiations on a political transition process pursuant
to the Geneva final communique (S/2012/523, annex).

It is therefore my intention to focus on the core
issues defined by the Council in resolution 2254
(2015): securing agreements on credible, inclusive,
non-sectarian governance, a schedule and process for
drafting a new constitution, and elements and a schedule
for holding fair and free parliamentary and presidential
elections on the basis of that new constitution. We
have to build on the momentum that has emerged since
Munich to help the parties reach an agreement on these
matters in the shortest possible time. I am counting on
the ISSG, but also the Security Council, to ensure that
the parties come to Geneva again, this time ready to
engage, to stay and to stay engaged on the substantive
issues. I hope that the draft resolution that the Council

may be adopting shortly will send a good signal in that
direction.

While the primary focus of the talks is governance,
I also intend to ensure that pressing confidence-building
aspects that matter most to the Syrian people will
continue to be addressed, including the release of any
arbitrarily detained people, in particular women and
children and individuals who have been kept hostage. I
am also bound by the resolution 2254 (2015) to ensure
the participation of the broadest spectrum of Syrians.
As I mentioned in my last briefing, in addition
to consulting with representatives of the Government
and the opposition, I have consulted and will continue
to consult with civil society representatives and
women - Syrian women. They make a remarkable
contribution and need to continue to make a remarkable
contribution to our work. I will continue this practice.
Since the recess of the talks, both the Civil Society
Support Room, which is a platform aimed at facilitating
the participation of civil society organizations in
Geneva, and the Syrian Women's Advisory Board have
continued their preparations. They will continue doing
so and help us - and help me to do my job. Furthermore,
UN Women, which has worked closely with us over
recent months, has seconded a gender adviser to my
office to support both my work and that of the Women's
Advisory Board.

In conclusion, we have so far, together, maintained
the ISSG momentum. It now needs to be sustained.
Both task forces are making progress - admittedly,
not enough - but progress that would have been
unimaginable just two months ago. The outcomes
from both are first good steps - a first step towards
sustained and unimpeded access throughout Syria in
terms of humanitarian aid, and a first step towards,
hopefully, a more durable nationwide ceasefire. I
cannot overemphasize how important, determined and
sustained political will is the good-faith implementation
of the cessation ofhostilities for making this agreement
fixed.

On the humanitarian issue, it is essential not to
lose focus. Our position remains clear - all sieges
must end. The United Nations and other humanitarian
partners must be granted unhindered and sustainable
humanitarian access without preconditions, and
civilians must be allowed freedom of movement.
The ongoing support of the ISSG and of the Security
Council remain therefore critical.

As for the cessation of hostilities, which we hope
will be respected, it will not only create conditions
conducive to the resumption of meaningful negotiations,
but it will also and above all send a long-awaited signal
of hope to the Syrian people that after five years of
conflict there may be an end and a hope of an end to
their suffering. These are all sentiments reinforced by
ISSG members in today's meeting and just endorsed, I
hope, by the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 2268 (2016).

On all these aspects, the United Nations is ready and
present to provide support. The Secretary-General has
confirmed it, and I reiterate it once again on his behalf.
Everyone should do his or her share; we will do ours.
Critical fault lines are being addressed now carefully
and cautiously, be it which groups will be participating
in the cessation of hostilities or which areas are being
opened to access and how and on what priority basis.
This will remain a complicated, painstaking process,
but we should not give up since nothing is impossible,
especially at this moment.

Going forward, I will continue to heavily count on
the ISSG to resolve any possible ambiguities related to
the talks as they arise and will keep the Council fully
informed on progress as I have done before. Resolution
2254 (2015) was a ray of hope and a moment of hope
that remains ongoing. It unanimously expressed
the international community's grave concern at the
continued suffering of the Syrians, the persistent and
brutal violence and the perverse impact of terrorist and
violent extremist ideology.

We are now at the crossroads and we have the
possibility of turning the page in the Syrian conflict
after almost six years of one of the bloodiest conflicts
in recent memory. It is potentially a historic juncture,
bringing an end to the killing and destruction and
giving new life with renewed hope to the Syrians.

