Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to say how
pleased I am to see you presiding over the Council. I
wish also to associate myself with the words of tribute
voiced by others to you and to the delegation of
Singapore. We feel sure that under your guidance the
work of the Council will proceed smoothly, and we will
do our utmost to assist you in that respect. I should like
also to thank all of those delegations that today
expressed kind words to the Russian delegation in
connection with our presidency of the Council last
month.

Once again we are considering the very serious
situation prevailing in the Middle East. Unfortunately,
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues. People are
dying and serious material damage is being done in the
Palestinian territories, where a humanitarian tragedy is
now unfolding.

In order to normalize the situation, a multifaceted
effort by the international community is needed. That
was the focus of the Washington meeting, held on 2
May, of the "quartet" of international mediators at the
ministerial level, in which the Secretary-General
participated.

The "quartet" came out strongly in favour of
specific, urgent and collective action to restore peace to
the region of the Middle East, on the basis of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002), and of the Saudi
Arabian initiative endorsed at the Arab summit in
Beirut.

Russia believes that all resolutions of the Security
Council must be fully implemented. Any double
standard in this respect would simply undermine the
authority of the Security Council and give rise to
doubts on the part of the international community as to
its ability to exercise its authority under the Charter of
the United Nations in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We see no justification for the Israeli
Government's refusal to accept the dispatch of a fact-
finding team to the Jenin refugee camp, as proposed by
the Secretary-General and endorsed in resolution 1405
(2002). We fully support the actions taken by the
Secretary-General in that connection. Unfortunately,
his efforts were not crowned with success, due to the
stance taken by Israel.

The main issues at this point are to resolve the
situation with respect to the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem; to take urgent measures to rebuild the
infrastructures of the Palestinian Authority; and to
address the humanitarian crisis.

Russia firmly believes that, along with these
diplomatic efforts, we must take practical steps in order
to find a way out of the Middle East tragedy on the
basis of a resumption of a political process aimed at a
settlement. That is the focus of the initiative to prepare
for a peace conference in the Middle East, which was
put forward on 2 May at the ministerial meeting of the
"quartet" in Washington. Russia, as a co-sponsor of the
peace process, will continue to be actively involved in
those efforts.

