Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): Allow me
on behalf of my delegation to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. May I also thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Mali, for his leadership during his presidency of the
Council last month. We wish to congratulate and
welcome the new Security Council members, two of
which, Cameroon and Guinea, are from Africa.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
subject of today's meeting, the situation in Africa, and
we are particularly pleased to see you, Mr. Minister,
personally in the Chair. That testifies to the importance
attached to the subject of the situation in Africa. It is
significant that the continental concerns of Africa
continue to be highlighted right at the beginning of the
year and early in the new millennium so that the
momentum to find solutions will not be lost.

My delegation expresses gratitude and
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his untiring personal commitment and his support
for African issues and for the enhancement of Africa's
well-being. We are happy to see that His Excellency
Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), is participating in this
meeting.

The dialogue between members of the Security
Council and African ministers on issues that concern
Africa is welcome because it demonstrates a
willingness on both sides to seek solutions, no matter
how hard and exacting they may be. This is very
encouraging because it goes to the very reason for
which the Security Council exists: to strive for peace
and security.

Africa still faces many problems, of which
HIV/AIDS, malaria and conflict are the most
devastating. Others are inadequacies in education, the
debt problem, trade imbalances, the persistence of
absolute poverty, the digital divide, African's
inadequate infrastructure and the shortage of
appropriate technologies. The list is long, but time is
short. Therefore, I shall limit this intervention to
questions of trade, regional unity and conflict.

Unity in Africa is progressing at a good pace. In
the Great Lakes region, the partner States of Uganda,
Kenya and Tanzania have moved with speed to form
the East African Community. I am pleased to inform
the Council that Uganda is in the forefront of
championing regional unity and integration in all their
aspects. The East African Assembly was recently
inaugurated at Kampala by His Excellency President
Yoweri Museveni; a court of appeal for Eastern Africa
has also been constituted, with judges from the three
countries. Trade barriers are being eliminated, and
there is absolute harmony among the member States.

On the issue of trade, my delegation believes that
Africa needs to be clear on what it wants. We Africans
must determine whether the continent should remain
backward, pre-industrial and concentrating only on
subsistence agriculture and the export of a few raw
materials. The challenge for Africa is to take bold steps
and opt for industrialization. Many African countries
are bigger in both size and population than countries in
Europe, but those African countries live in poverty
because they have not industrialized. Among the
problems that have hindered progress is that of
conflicts, which must be stopped.

Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that
many African countries are peaceful. Africa has thus
removed some of the impediments to investment and
has created the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, which, we hope, will serve as a vehicle
for a new relationship between Africa and the world.
Through that process of integration Africa will
continue to improve its infrastructure and its macro-
economic framework. Regional unity will eventually
overcome the excessive Balkanization of Africa's 53
States, through economic blocs such as the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the East African
Community itself.

What we do not generally hear about - and
certainly not so loudly - are the equally important
reforms that are needed in the developed countries to
ensure that their domestic economic policies are
consistent with their capacity to help Africa to help
itself by exporting to developed-country markets,
through making the markets of the developed countries
accessible. That refers not just to market access but
also to the issue of subsidies for domestic producers in
the developed countries, particularly subsidies for
agricultural production and the agricultural exports of
developed countries.

That situation means that however much Uganda,
for example, opens up its economy to the forces of
globalization, Uganda's - and Africa's - poor
farmers will have no chance to raise themselves out of
poverty because globally there is no level playing field
for agricultural production and agricultural trade. That
is true for all of Africa, as it is for all developing
countries.

We therefore call for an end to all protection,
especially in the countries of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. For that
reason, Africa welcomes the African Growth and
Opportunity Act; as President Museveni noted in his
address to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session, other developed countries should emulate the
United States here and should help African countries to
trade under terms of equality.

As regards conflict, as I have already pointed out,
many parts of the continent are peaceful. Where
conflicts exist, efforts are under way to resolve them.
In order to succeed in this endeavour, the Security
Council should play a more active role - for example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where it
should speed up the full implementation of phase III of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The peace process in Burundi is on track, thanks
to the determination of all parties under the
chairmanship of President Museveni and the
facilitation of President Mandela. We urge the Security
Council to provide assistance to the second track of the
Arusha peace and reconciliation process under the
guidance of President Bongo and Deputy President
Zuma, so that they can bring the remaining rebel
factions into the process.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Security Council is already involved, and
Uganda believes that the Lusaka Agreement contains
the solutions to the problems being experienced.
However, Uganda is keen to see the Security Council
continue to work with regional leaders to unblock the
inter-Congolese dialogue and accelerate the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation process.

Due to time constraints, I am going to cut my
statement short. This meeting of the Security Council
demonstrates the continuing interest of the
international community in Africa. My delegation
therefore appeals to the Council and to the international
community to remain seized of the matter, because
Africa still needs assistance to overcome its numerous
problems.

