Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating Malaysia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and by thanking you for your efforts in
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General;
his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings. We would
also like to express our gratitude to the United Nations
for its efforts in addressing this problem, which is a
tremendous challenge for the international community.

We are seeing a growing and alarming increase
in the suffering of civilians in armed conflict. We see
children deprived of their innocence and their right
to a dignified life. The Government of Kuwait is very
concerned about the practices of armed groups that
abuse, exploit and abduct children and subject them
to sexual violence and exploitation. The international
community must ensure that it addresses these dangers
and that these groups abide by international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.

Whenever we take up the issue of children in armed
conflict, we must consider in particular the situation of
children in Palestine, where Israel's violations persist.
Israel has been destroying schools and recreation
centres, and imposed constraints such as checkpoints
and the separation wall. We see how these measures
are exacerbating the humanitarian situation there and
deprive Palestinian children of their rights.

In that context, we must call on the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility to address these violations
and to ensure that these children are in a position to
hope that their legitimate rights will be defended.
Recently, during the twenty-seventh Summit of the
League of Arab States, His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah announced Kuwait's
intention of hosting an international conference to
address the issue of the suffering Palestinian children
face and Israeli practices, which are in breach of all
international conventions.

I should now like to turn to the crisis in Yemen. We
commend the Secretary-General's decision to remove
the Saudi Arabia-led coalition from the list of countries
that have committed violations. We are a member of
that coalition, and we support that decision because the
coalition seeks to restore the legitimate institutions of
Yemen and has been in compliance with international
law and international humanitarian law. We reiterate
our call on the United Nations to send a delegation to
Riyadh to familiarize itself with the measures that we
have taken to protect civilians and children.

We are devoted to the restoration of the peace,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen and
support the political process under way, in line with
resolution 2216 (2015). As the Council is aware, since
2016 Kuwait has served as the host for the peace talks
on Yemen. It is our hope that the parties will reach an
agreement that can restore peace and security in that
brother country so that it can redevelop and rebuild.

We see the situation in Syria deteriorating on a
daily basis. We deplore the number of victims in Syria,
where we note that more than 250,000 people, including
20,000 children, have died despite international efforts
to alleviate the suffering of civilians. I note that we
have hosted three donor pledging conferences. One
was also held in London in February. Despite all those
efforts, the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/360)
notes the indiscriminate targeting of residential areas
and air strikes that have led to the deaths of children.
Given this humanitarian disaster, the Security Council
must identify a solution that can put an end to these
serious violations of international law and international
humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I recall that wars and conflicts affect
all sectors of the population, but that children are the
most vulnerable and exposed and need our protection
most. We must not frustrate their hope.

