Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me begin by thanking Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his informative briefing. Let me also
welcome Somali Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim and
Environment Minister Hamza to the Security Council
and commend them for their dedication to the people
of Somalia. I would also like to welcome to the
Council Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, and express our
appreciation for the African Union's work in Somalia.

The United States continues to View the situation
in Somalia with deep concern. Somalia's stability
depends on effective governance based on a process of
inclusive political dialogue. As such, we underscore
our support for the Djibouti peace process. The United
States applauds the Transitional Federal Government
for its recent efforts to build political support and
cultivate stability, and we encourage the Transitional
Federal Government to redouble those efforts.

The Djibouti peace process should remain the
primary focus. We urge all groups interested in peace
to come to the table. The agreement with Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a is an important step towards this goal. We
welcome similar continued efforts to expand the
Transitional Federal Government's message of
stability, responsibility and inclusiveness. We also
welcome the recent memorandum of understanding
signed with the "Puntland" administration on counter-
piracy cooperation.

We are similarly encouraged by the Transitional
Federal Government's progress in drafting a new
constitution and its efforts to open new schools,
improve hospitals and renovate police stations. The
Transitional Federal Government must strive to make
even more progress on both its federal and transitional
agendas by providing basic social services, working to
build an integrated security force, extending a
consultative constitutional process, building alliances
and providing political support to regions. We hope it
will also focus on other important goals such as
expanding revenue collection, ensuring that salaries are
paid to its security forces and providing young people
with employment opportunities that offer viable
alternatives to extremism and militancy.

The United States supports the upcoming United
Nations development Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul in May with participation from the
Somali diaspora. We commend the Turkish
Government for its leadership on these critical issues,
and we hope that this Conference will lead to critical
investments in infrastructure and other projects that
will provide Somali-led employment and training
options for the Somali people.

With greater security, the Transitional Federal
Government could make even greater gains. Spoilers
continue to destabilize Somalia and risk its future.
Recently, the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia
listed several of these spoilers for targeted sanctions,
including Al-Shabaab and some of its leaders. We urge
all Member States to effectively implement the asset
freeze, the travel ban and the targeted arms embargo
against the listed individuals and Al-Shabaab. We also
urge all Member States to ensure that the territorial
arms embargo is being fully implemented.

Supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is central to our strategy to stabilize

Mogadishu and support the Somali peace process.
AMISOM. protects key installations in Mogadishu,
offers political space for a Somali-led reconciliation
process and provides security so that humanitarian
assistance can be delivered. We commend Uganda and
Burundi for their generous troop contributions to
AMISOM, including the recent addition of a fourth
Ugandan battalion; the Mission now has a force of
6,200, closer to its mandated strength of 8,000. We
encourage other nations to step forward with additional
contributions.

The United States strongly supports AMISOM
through funding for a logistical support package. Since
AMISOM. first deployed in 2007, the United States has
obligated $174 million for logistical support,
equipment and pre-deployment training to its forces.
Both the Transitional Federal Government security
forces and AMISOM. have urgent equipment and
training requirements that require donor support. The
international community can express its gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries by fulfilling the
commitments made at the Brussels donor conference,
including pledges to build the National Security
Forces, the Somalia police force and the national
security committee.

The United States is prepared to do its part by
providing pre-deployment training and equipment to
willing AMISOM. troop-contributing countries. The
United States also continues to support the
development of a professional, effective national
security force.

The international community must look for ways
to safely make a greater impact within Somalia. We
support the plans of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia to move towards a larger footprint in
Somalia, which we believe will help the Transitional
Federal Government make further progress.

Reports about the more frequent recruitment and
use of children as soldiers in Somalia are appalling and
a cause for great concern. The United States strongly
condemns the exploitation of children by these groups
to pursue violent agendas, and we call upon all parties
to immediately release the children within their ranks
and provide for their proper reintegration into civilian
life. Basic civil liberties such as freedom of speech
must be respected. The recent murder of Sheikh Nur
Mohamed Abkey, a 30-year veteran journalist killed in
Somalia this month is a tragic affront. The United
States condemns this crime in the strongest terms.

We also condemn Al-Shabaab's recent moves to
restrict freedom of speech by ordering radio stations to
stop broadcasting news and music. These moves
demonstrate the increasing isolation of Somalia's
spoilers, who know that transparent political dialogue
on the airwaves could eliminate their already meagre
support.

Somalia continues to face a dire humanitarian
situation. More than 3.2 million people need both food
and non-food assistance. Several factors - consecutive
seasons which have failed or poor rainfall, ongoing
conflict, rising inflation, displacement and outbreaks of
disease - have combined to severely worsen food
security and drive up rates of acute malnutrition. Lack
of security and stability further worsens the
humanitarian situation.

The United States is committed to meeting the
Somali people's humanitarian needs. We condemn the
obstruction of access to aid for more than 1 million
Somalis, by Al-Shabaab and other violent extremists.
The deteriorating security situation in southern and
central Somalia has steadily eroded areas in which
humanitarian groups can operate. Targeted attacks on
aid workers and on United Nations facilities as well as
kidnappings and extortion have hampered attempts to
provide life-saving humanitarian aid. We call upon all
parties to ensure the unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance. For our part, the United States
provide more than $150 million in food and non-food
emergency assistance in 2009 to help meet the health,
nutrition, protection, water, sanitation and hygiene
needs of the Somali population.

The United States is committed to seeing peace
and stability take hold in Somalia, for the Somali
people, the region and the world. We encourage the
Transitional Federal Government to keep up its
momentum and to continue to chart a steady course
towards the peaceful and prosperous future that
Somalia deserves.
