The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the ministers of Security Council
members and other representatives present in the
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

Under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Chad, Chile, Cote d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, the Philippines, Senegal, Slovakia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to participate in
this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-
Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2013/27, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l3/4, which contains a letter dated
1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Pakistan has convened this special debate in View
of the centrality of peacekeeping in the United Nations-
led efforts for the maintenance of international peace
and security. United Nations peacekeeping has an
impressive record of achievements in many conflict and
post-conflict situations. Indeed, Blue Helmets around
the globe have become a symbol of the United Nations
global quest for peace.

I hope that this meeting will enable us to
have a comprehensive view of United Nations
peacekeeping and its present and future role. Focus
will also be on the increasing nexus and interlinkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding that have
characterized the United Nations success in this field
in recent years. The overall objective is to bring our
collective contribution to making peacekeeping even
more effective and productive.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

