Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): As
we have stated in this Chamber on several occasions,
and most recently on 6 December when the Council
considered the follow-up to resolution 1269 (1999),
Canada attaches priority to the international fight
against terrorism. We believe that the Security Council
has an important role to play in eliminating terrorism,
and we welcome its continued determination to do so.

(spoke in English)

The Taliban's defiance of resolution 1267 (1999)
and its continued support for international terrorism are
simply unacceptable. We voted in favour of the
resolution before the Council today because of the
strong anti-terrorism message that it sends. The
resolution is also a clear signal that the Council is
serious about its demands and that the Taliban must
comply with its international obligations. It is in
everyone's interests, not least the United Nations
corporate interest, that sanctions the United Nations
imposes be respected.

With the inclusion of a number of important
provisions in this resolution, the Council is also
responding to the growing international consensus on
the need to ensure that measures imposed by the
Council are both carefully targeted and sensitive to
humanitarian considerations. We believe the resolution
could have been stronger on this score, but we
welcome the establishment of a committee of experts
to monitor and report on the implementation of the
sanctions and to provide an early assessment of
humanitarian impacts.

As Canada leaves the Security Council, we
remind those that will remain, and those that will join
them, that they have a heavy responsibility to
vigorously and objectively monitor the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, and to respond as necessary to
ensure that the civilian population does not suffer
needlessly as a result of these new sanctions. Failure to
do so could call into question the Council's
commitment to a smart, targeted sanctions policy and
could have grave human costs. The long-running
conflict in Afghanistan has taken a devastating toll on
civilians.

In April of this year, former Canadian Foreign
Minister Axworthy chaired a meeting of this body
devoted to Afghanistan and called for more determined
action by the Council to address the conflict itself. As
we have seen over the past months, violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law by
both parties to the conflict continue unabated. The
violation of the human rights of women and girls is
particularly deplorable.

Canada has suggested a number of steps that the
Council could take, including increased attention to the
issues of humanitarian access and respect for human
rights, and enhanced efforts by the United Nations in
the search for peace and reconciliation. We have also
called for Council measures to pressure the warring
factions to come to the negotiating table, and we
encourage the Council to give serious consideration to
widening the arms embargo to include all parties to the
conflict.

We encourage the Council to address the conflict
itself and to consider ways to hasten the end of the
interminable war and the desperate conditions endured
by the people of Afghanistan.

