Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
consider this discussion to be very useful, thanks to the
briefing provided by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) through Mr. Oshima.
From the information provided by Vice-Minister
Chikoti, we know that the humanitarian situation in
Angola is extremely alarming; hence the usefulness of
today's debate.

I do not wish to repeat everything that Mr.
Oshima said. However, when a third of the population
of a country is displaced, when a tenth survives only
because of humanitarian assistance and when hundreds
of thousands of people find themselves in a critical
situation, we must discuss the issue in such a way as to
enable everyone to act together. We are well aware of
the cause: it is conflict, the responsibility for which
falls mainly on UNITA. We must therefore keep up the
pressure on UNITA.

The international community and the Angolan
Government are searching for an appropriate response
to this humanitarian crisis. We welcome the new
commitments of the Angolan Government - the
significant increase in assistance to the population in
distress. We believe that the Government must make an
even greater commitment to the struggle for survival of
the people concerned. However, the modalities of the
new governmental programme must be clarified,
particularly as they relate to the time frame, and we
would be pleased to receive more information from
Vice-Minister Chikoti in this regard.

We would also welcome comments from
Mr. Oshima or Mr. De Mul on the recent initiatives
taken by the Angolan authorities with regard to
resettlement, demining and the opening up of areas,
initiatives taken on the basis of recommendations by
humanitarian organizations.

I have another question to ask Mr. Oshima. There
have been allegations about the forced movement of
the population, and I would be interested in receiving
further information from OCHA about those
allegations. Indeed, if people are forcibly displaced,
that clearly has disastrous humanitarian consequences.

Generally speaking, we would like to see greater
access to people in distress. Areas controlled by the
Angolan Government could be further opened up to
humanitarian organizations. In insecure areas,
assistance could be made more secure by the use of
strong military escorts provided by the Angolan
authorities, which would allow greater access to those
zones. Finally, there is a third part of the territory -
areas under UNITA control or very isolated and
dangerous areas. We believe that, as the representative
of Colombia said, we could consider the idea of
establishing humanitarian corridors.

I would like to ask Mr. Oshima about how
feasible such corridors would be. Of course, the
Government of Angola would need a guarantee that
such corridors would not be used by the rebels. On the
other hand, if the Government of Angola were to
accept the idea of humanitarian corridors, that would
obviously be a gesture of encouragement to the
population. It would also be in keeping with the current
efforts being undertaken by the Angolan Government
and by Mr. Gambari - efforts that France fully
supports - with a View to relaunching the Angolan
peace process on the basis of the Lusaka Protocol. In
that context, even an indirect discussion between the
two parties on the establishment of humanitarian
corridors would be a first step that could prove decisive
for the return to the peace process.

