Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your vision
in including this item on the agenda of the Security
Council. My country supports you whole-heartedly
in this matter, particularly given the close bilateral
cooperation between Senegal and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands in the area of water and water protection.

(spoke in English)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

In view of time constraints, I will read out a
shortened version of my statement. My full statement
will be available on Twitter.

We fully support the statement made by the
representative ofItaly, also in the light ofour cooperation
related to the upcoming split term with Italy in the
Security Council. During this split term, in 2017 and
2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with
Italy, as announced by our colleague earlier today,
will continue your sustained efforts, Mr. President, to
address climate and water issues in the context of the
peace and security agenda.

Our planet has sufficient water resources to provide
water security for all, but at the same time people around
the globe face situations where there is too much or too
little water, or where the water is too dirty.

Let me highlight three issues in this context: first,
water and the need for international cooperation;
secondly, water, climate change and migration; and,
thirdly, the need for water diplomacy.

First, on water and cooperation, the Prime Minister
of the Netherlands is honoured to be on the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, together with,
inter alia, President Macky Sall of Senegal. This United
Nations/World Bank-supported Panel will champion a
comprehensive approach to developing and managing
water resources. It will also focus on improving
water- and sanitation-related services. We commend
Singapore for its leadership on this issue. The Swiss-
Senegalese initiative of a panel on water, peace and
security is equally timely, and we look forward to
working together to ensure the appropriate connections
between the two panels, or may I say bridges, in today's
context. Furthermore, the capacity to prevent water-
related conflicts through mediation and other political
means needs to be strengthened. An excellent example
was given earlier today: the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization.

This brings me to my second theme: water and
migration issues.
People do not want to leave their homes unless they
are forced to do so. As our colleague from Palau just
said, climate change threatens the existence of people
in small island developing States. In the past year we
have seen the migration crisis soar, which has made
clear that we need to tackle the root causes of migration.
Water scarcity, climate change and food insecurity
are among these root causes. They can be connected
to social instability and potentially violent conflict.
We welcome the fact that climate-related factors were
acknowledged at the United Nations migration summit
last September. As we move forward, our policies and
funding will need to follow suit. In this regard, the
Dutch Government is identifying options to intensify
our cooperation on water issues with countries in the
Sahel region.

The third issue is the need for water diplomacy.

We must make sure that water unites us and does not
divide us. We therefore need to intensify effective water
diplomacy. As an example, last March we organized a
seminar in Khartoum for diplomats from the States of
the Nile basin, so as to prevent future water conflicts.
Furthermore, last year the Netherlands launched a
planetary security initiative, which is a global platform
to address security issues from a climate-change
perspective. The next conference is planned for 5 and
6 December, again, like last year, at the Peace Palace in
The Hague, the legal capital of the world.

In conclusion, I thank you once again, Mr. President,
for having put this issue on our agenda. Let us all work
together to address water issues in a comprehensive
manner, connecting all the pillars of the United Nations.
Let us work together to ensure that water is a cause
for cooperation and not conflict, and to ensure that
water contributes to peace, justice and development.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to be a
partner for that important purpose.

