Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like to thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for
his excellent briefing and tireless efforts. Through him,
I would like to pay tribute once again to the medical and
humanitarian personnel for the sacrifices they make for
the Syrian people, who are sorely tested at this time.

Senegal remains deeply concerned about the
devastating impact ofthe Syrian conflict. My delegation
would therefore like to reiterate its firm condemnation
of the terrorist attack that occurred on 15 April in
Al-Rashidin, in western Aleppo, during the evacuation
of Fo'ah and Kefraya. That attack, which was denounced
by the Security Council, killed 130 people, including 67
children and left hundreds injured. We believe that this
is yet another reason for giving as much priority as is
required to combating terrorism and violent extremism,
in particular the fight against Da'esh and the former
Al-Nusra Front, by employing a comprehensive
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and relevant Security Council resolutions.

The conflict also highlights the suffering of Syrian
children, in particular the fate of 2.4 million who
left their homes and another 280,000 who still live in
besieged areas. Their plight therefore deserves our
concerted attention.

In that regard, we reiterate the call made by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child for an investigation
of crimes against children, including through active
collaboration with existing mechanisms, such as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in Syria, the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/248.
My delegation accordingly renews its encouragement
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, in particular its Fact-Finding Mission, in its
efforts to shed light on the chemical-weapons attack in
Khan Shaykhun so as to bring to justice the perpetrators
of that despicable act, which resulted in many child
casualties among the victims.

Despite ongoing efforts, the cessation of hostilities
facilitated by Russia, Turkey and Iran * which we
welcome as part of the Astana process and once again
gave us cause for hope and optimism - has been
seriously put in question owing to the violence observed
throughout the country. Consequently, communities
such as Aleppo, Hama, Dar'a, Raqqa and Damascus
continue to record many civilian casualties and the
continued destruction of public infrastructure, such as
schools, health facilities and markets, all of which is in
violation of international humanitarian law.

The situation in eastern Ghouta, where approximately
400,000 people are besieged, remains of particular
concern. According to the World Health Organization,
the three public hospitals and the 17 health centres in

the locality are no longer functioning or accessible to
the population. Furthermore, the last United Nations
humanitarian convoy to reach that region was on
29 October 2016.

Nevertheless, despite extremely difficult conditions,
the United Nations and its partners have continued to
provide support to those in need among the population.
In that regard, my delegation commends the hardly
negligible progress made in late March involving
the assistance provided to 307,000 persons out of an
initial target of 787,500, within the framework of five
inter-agency convoys. That represents 39 per cent of
the target, as compared to 28 per cent for the previous
month of February. Given the Syrian authorities'
approval of 71.7 per cent of the United Nations requests
for April and May, we hope to see more progress in
successfully providing humanitarian assistance. We
nevertheless renew our call on those same Syrian
authorities to continue issuing the facilitation letters,
which are necessary for optimally carrying out the plans
conceptualized by the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners.

We remind all parties to the Syrian conflict oftheir
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law to ensure the population's access to
assistance, including medical care, in total security,
without any restriction, precondition or hindrance,
through the most direct means possible in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We hope that the technical meetings of the Astana
process, held in Tehran and to be held in Astana in early
May, will contribute to strengthening and consolidating
the ceasefire. Even better, it is important that the
truce be reflected in a clear improvement in providing
humanitarian assistance under the direction of the
United Nations. In that vein, we welcome the work of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria
Support Group, co-chaired by the United States and the
Russian Federation, which, despite major constraints on
the ground, is pursuing its efforts to ensure providing
humanitarian assistance, particularly in besieged areas
where access to aid is rendered virtually impossible.
All those efforts must be continued and strengthened
to cover all the civilians concerned, especially those
living in besieged and difficultly accessed areas.

In conclusion, we reiterate our conviction that the
only way to end the crisis and its most devastating
humanitarian consequences is through a negotiated
political solution based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), under
the auspices of the United Nations.
