Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on holding a debate on a subject that is so central to
the United Nations peace mission. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
remarks and to pay tribute to his personal commitment
to strengthening the rule of law in the service of the
values of peace and justice. Finally, I welcome the
participation of the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and of the representative of the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor, whom we thank for their
briefings.

Maintaining and strengthening peace, achieving
sustainable development and promoting human rights
are at the heart of the mission of the United Nations.
In our common quest for a multilateral response to
these fundamental and complex issues, we remain
thoroughly convinced of their universality and
indivisibility. Nevertheless, faced with the complexity
of conflict and post-conflict situations, it is difficult if
not delusional to attempt to offer societies affected by
conflict prefabricated solutions to finding peace again
and satisfying their desire for justice.

Strategies and measures aimed at redressing
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law must take into account the specific
context of every situation in order to prevent the
recurrence of crises, ensure social cohesion and promote
national reconciliation. Experience has shown that only
holistic approaches that address realities and are owned
by the populations concerned can ensure sustainable
peace. Peace and stability are sustainably maintained
if the structural causes of the conflict are investigated
and then dealt with by, inter alia, the establishment of
a credible, independent judicial system dedicated to the
primacy of the law.

In that context, the Charter of the United Nations
and other international legal standards must represent
our universal point of reference in our efforts to achieve
our shared goal of peace and justice. The principles of
sovereignty, equality and respect for the national unity
and territorial integrity of States must continue to
guide the activities of the United Nations, including the
Security Council and all the institutional mechanisms
we have created to help achieve our shared goal of
peace and justice.

National judicial systems should continue to be the
place of first resort for implementing the principle of
responsibility. Primary responsibility for prosecuting
the perpetrators of serious crimes affecting the
international community devolves on the States, while
the international community is there to help strengthen
their national capacities to bring those perpetrators to
trial. Nevertheless, when national systems are unable
or unwilling to prosecute such international criminals,
that is where the International Criminal Court comes
in. According to its Statute, it is the Court's task to help
the international community to fight impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and crimes of aggression,
based on the principle of complementarity.

We cannot forget the valuable contribution of
other mechanisms serving our shared cause of peace
and justice, particularly the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which continue to play a significant role in
strengthening peace and restoring the rule of law. Nor
must we forget the contribution of the so-called hybrid
mechanisms, which have made justice accessible to the
peoples concerned, rehabilitated the legitimacy of State
institutions, and strengthened national legal systems.
Finally, we cannot ignore the considerable contribution
that traditional judicial mechanisms have made to
assuring the right to justice, truth and compensation,
and to ensuring that crimes committed during a conflict
will not go unpunished.

In that context, we commend the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (resolution 67/1), held on 24 September, which
recognizes that justice is an indispensable factor of
sustainable peace in countries in conflict or post-
conflict situations. In that regard, we are pleased that
transitional justice programmes have been widely
integrated into United Nations work in the areas of the
rule of law and of strategic planning for post-conflict
situations.

In a demonstration of our commitment to the
international community in combating impunity for
serious crimes, article 23 ofMorocco's new Constitution,
adopted last year, states that genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and all serious and systematic
violations of human rights are punishable by law.
That commitment is part of the sweeping reforms my
country has recently introduced to strengthen the rule
of law and the independence of the judiciary, and we
will pursue it at the international level by reinforcing
our commitment to peacekeeping activities and to
maintaining security under the aegis of the United
Nations.

