Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The
establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) by today's draft resolution will
be extremely welcome. First, the mission will be only the
third peacekeeping operation to have been sent out by the
United Nations in over two years. Following the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) in March this
year, this sets an encouraging trend for greater United
Nations involvement in Africa.

 

As in the case of MINURCA, the mandate and shape
of the operation to be authorized today also reflects the
growing cooperation of the United Nations with regional
groupings or organizations and coalitions of States, as
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report on Africa
[S/1998/318]. UNOMSIL's mandate, which tasks United
Nations military observers with monitoring the
implementation of a national disarmament and
demobilization process, which is being conducted by a
regional peacekeeping force, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), is a good example of this.

Even more important, this mission is a crucial
opportunity for Sierra Leone. We missed a similar
opportunity early last year, and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) coup that followed set back
the cause of peace and reconstruction against the interests
of the country for over a year. Now we have a new chance
to contribute to a peaceful settlement of a crisis which has
lasted far too long.

The presence of United Nations observers in support
of ECOMOG's disarmament activities should help
guarantee the impartiality of the national disarmament and
demobilization plan and boost confidence in its successful
implementation, encouraging fighters to come out from the
bush, to give up their weapons and to be reintegrated into
national society.

The United Kingdom is glad to have been a strong
supporter of this draft resolution, of the people of Sierra
Leone and of their legitimate Government. But this draft
resolution and the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation are not enough. The Government of Sierra Leone
is doing its part, through continued progress to re-establish
effective administration and to reinforce democratic
institutions and the rule of law, and through steps to
promote national reconciliation and reconstruction.

We also commend ECOWAS and ECOMOG for what
they have achieved in Sierra Leone. We applaud their
efforts, at great cost in lives and resources, to restore
peaceful and secure conditions throughout the country, and
welcome their readiness to ensure the security of United
Nations personnel. ECOMOG deserves our gratitude.

But the Government of Sierra Leone, ECOMOG and
UNOMSIL need greater support from the international
community if this combined strategy for peace and
rehabilitation is to succeed. The United Kingdom has
donated £2 million to a United Nations Trust Fund for
peacekeeping in Sierra Leone. We have also supplied two
British military officers to assist the Special Envoy, Mr.
Okelo, and are now considering how we can provide
further support for UNOMSIL. The United Kingdom has
also provided significant emergency aid and longer-term
development aid to Sierra Leone.

In this context, we warmly welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative to hold a high-level special political
conference on Sierra Leone on 30 July to help mobilize
urgently needed support for ECOMOG and the Sierra
Leonean Government. The United Kingdom pledges its
full backing for this initiative; a British minister will
attend, and we hope that representatives of many other
Member States will do the same.

In the meantime, we urge other United Nations
Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund to provide
technical and logistical support to ECOMOG, and to
support the disarmament and demobilization programme
and other development activity in the country.

The intervention of ECOMOG, the creation of the
national disarmament and demobilization plan and the
forthcoming deployment of UNOMSIL have created the
conditions for a decisive change in Sierra Leone. The
international community should ensure, not only through
the present draft resolution, but through its material
support, that Sierra Leone can make the most of that
chance.

