I thank High Commissioner Grandi for his briefing today. The United States commends the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for its efforts to assist and empower millions of refugees and internally displaced and stateless people around the globe. Especially in times like these, we would be remiss not to acknowledge the thousands of aid workers in the field who are not only staying and delivering assistance to the most vulnerable, but are doing so at a very real risk to their own health and safety. I think it is very important that we reiterate in every statement we make our appreciation for those aid workers and the fact that they are risking their lives - and many times their families - in order to help others. So, to all those aid workers, including all of those in the High Commissioner's team, I want to express our sincere gratitude for being the front line. UNHCR's task of addressing multiple global crises, from Syria to Venezuela, Burma to South Sudan, while also responding to a global pandemic, is daunting. However, we are confident that, with sufficient burden-sharing by donors, refugee- hosting countries and the private sector, UNHCR can tackle that challenge. UNHCR is a key partner whose work complements United States humanitarian policy and assistance around the world. The United States Government is the largest single donor to UNHCR, providing nearly $1.7 billion in funding in fiscal year 2019. We support UNHCR's efforts to ensure that it is fit for purpose and as effective and efficient as possible. We appreciate how it has adapted its approaches through new initiatives that promote self-reliance and interim solutions, as well as how it has established new or expanded modes of assistance. UNHCR has pursued serious and comprehensive reform efforts over the past few years, and we expect that its internal transformation processes will indeed result in a more agile, accountable and innovative organization. UNHCR's work in response to coronavirus disease is helping to mitigate the spread of the virus among forcibly displaced persons, who remain at great risk while living closely in densely populated areas with poor sanitation and poor health care. While the peak of the coronavirus may still be weeks or months away in many regions, we have seen rapid and determined responses to flatten the curve in very challenging circumstances. Along with those responses, we must continue to be vigilant and ensure that contingency plans are in place to support and protect the most vulnerable amongst us. Before I conclude, I would like to ask High Commissioner Grandi a question. As we all seek to continue supporting principled humanitarian action from this platform, we wish to enhance international cooperation, galvanize support for more equitable and predictable burden- and responsibility-sharing and ensure principled, safe, voluntary, dignified and informed refugee returns. And I will say that again, because it is so important that we all speak to the refugees and let them know that we, as a Council, will be ensuring principled, safe, voluntary, dignified and informed refugee returns. So, I would like to know, as a Council member and as the United States, what can we do - what can I do - to advance those aims? Finally, once again, I want to thank UNHCR front-line workers for being out front to try and mitigate this virus.
