Ms. Malcorra: I am glad to be here today to
provide the Council with additional details regarding
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), following
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy's introduction.

I believe that the report before the Council
(S/2008/659) provides a full picture of the status of our
deployment efforts, the major challenges we are facing,
the steps we are taking to address those challenges and
our projections for the deployment of UNAMID in the
coming months. Given the thorough nature of the
report, I will to be very brief.

We believe that we have now put in place the
required systems and defined in detail the steps
required to achieve our targets of 60 per cent
deployment by the end of the year and 80 per cent by
the end of March 2009.

As the Council is aware, those new, revised
targets reflect a scaling-back of initial, extremely
ambitious projections. The new targets are still
ambitious but in our view can be achieved. The
objective has always been and will continue to be the
deployment of the maximum number of capable units
to the locations where they are required in the shortest
time possible.

Under-Secretary-General Le Roy has already
described the kind of collaboration that will be needed
to reach those goals. Troop and police contributors will
have to mobilize personnel and equipment. Donors will
have to fill resource gaps. The Government will have
to deliver on its commitment to support our
deployment efforts. And, of course, we at the United
Nations will have to be at the centre of those efforts by
coordinating the many moving parts of the complex
process, by pressing as hard as we can to move
personnel and equipment into the theatre, and by
ensuring that the required preparations are in place to
receive personnel and equipment when they arrive.

I can say with confidence that our plans are in
place and being implemented, but the task before us is
daunting. For example, there are approximately 6,000
sea containers, full of equipment required by UNAMID
and bound for Darfur, which are currently at the United
Nations logistics hub in El Obeid, which is in the
central Sudan. That is to say, those containers are 800
kilometres from El Fasher - 800 kilometres of dirt
track and narrow roads which were virtually
impassable for large trucks during the rainy season,
which ended only last month.

Getting this equipment to the Mission is central
to the success of our deployment plan. The report
before the Council describes the steps we are taking to
do so and I am pleased to inform members that we
have been making progress. Four new transport
companies have recently been brought on board to
increase the movement of containers out of El Obeid
and into Darfur.

That is in addition to an air bridge which we are
putting in place to lift high-priority equipment directly
from El Obeid into Darfur, and to our increasing use of
rail and, in some cases, the direct air-lifting of
equipment and personnel from troop-contributing
capitals all the way to Darfur. We have been doing
some useful work with the Friends of UNAMID in that
regard, and we thank them for that.

The other major pillar of our deployment plan
relates to engineering work. New camps must be
constructed, old camps must be expanded and critical
infrastructure must be put in place. The Secretary-
General's report describes the actions being taken to
ensure that we can meet the engineering demands of
starting up a massive operation in that remote location.

What I would like to stress here is that we must
be prepared to be flexible and creative as we continue
to implement our plans. We will, in particular, need our
military engineering units to show maximum flexibility
and to work throughout the Mission area on a wide
variety of tasks.

Finally, I would like to conclude my remarks by
informing the Council that I will be returning to
Khartoum next month for a second tripartite meeting
with the Government of the Sudan and the African
Union. The first meeting of the Tripartite Committee,
which took place on 7 October and which is reflected
in the Secretary-General's report, was extremely
useful.

Together with the African Union and our
Sudanese counterparts, we were able to identify critical
areas for cooperation and specific requests for
Government support. In many ways, the second
meeting will be even more important than the first,
since it will give us all an opportunity to evaluate
concrete progress against commitments. It will allow
us to put our ears to the ground.

In closing, I look forward to keeping the Council
apprised of the results of those very important
discussions.

