Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I too hope to follow the
rule that you have set, Mr. President. I will distribute a
longer written version of my statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's meeting, and I would like to express
our satisfaction at today's joint briefing by the Chairs
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the Al-
Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I thank
them very much for their precise and most informative
presentations of the work of their respective
Committees.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

Briefings such as today's reinforce interaction
and cooperation among the three Committees and their
groups of experts and provide information and
transparency with respect to their work, thus enhancing
the Security Council's legitimacy in the fields of
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.

Greece strongly supports the development of a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to combat
terrorism that ensures strict consistency with
international law, due process and human rights
standards and that addresses all factors that contribute
to terrorism. Furthermore, the adoption by the General
Assembly of a comprehensive convention against
terrorism that contains a definition of terrorism would
help worldwide efforts to combat terrorism in a most
effective manner. The General Assembly's adoption
this month of the Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290) is, in our View, a strong political
signal from Member States that the General Assembly
is the most appropriate forum for the elaboration of
consensual legal standards for the global fight against
terrorism.

The Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee has
recently made many efforts to improve the sanctions
regime, and we believe that Member States should
fully cooperate with the Committee and its Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, in particular
through the submission of reports and new names of
individuals and entities to be added to the Committee's
list. In our view, the names of individuals and entities
should be placed on the Committee's list only if they
are accompanied with identifying information and
background information demonstrating that those
individuals and entities are associated with Osama bin
Laden or with members of Al-Qaida or the Taliban, as
noted in resolution 1526 (2004).

Greece welcomes the new Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Loj, and wishes her every success in carrying out her
most demanding and difficult task. We also express our
gratitude to the previous Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Denisov, for the outstanding job he did
during his chairmanship.

Over the past three months, the CTC has carried
out some new activities aimed at improving
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by means of
an enhanced direct dialogue with Member States. On-
site visits have already been initiated by the CTC
Executive Directorate (CTED), pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1535 (2004), with the consent of the
States concerned. Those visits are an important way of
assessing the further needs of the visited State in its
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The first
such visit, to Morocco, was a most useful one. In that
respect, we are thankful to the Executive Director, Mr.
Ruperez, and to his team for all their work and efforts.
We would also like to thank the Moroccan authorities
for their openness and cooperation with the CTED.

Another positive development in recent months
has been the CTC's elaboration of new methods to
determine the technical assistance and other needs of
States in order to improve their counter-terrorism
capacity. We support the Committee's programme of
work for the next three months (S/2005/266) and the
priorities that it sets out.

The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) reinforces the non-proliferation
regime and aims at preventing non-State actors from
gaining access to nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.

We support the quarterly programme of work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the activities that it sets
out. In that respect, we welcome the recent recruitment
of four experts of the Committee, who will begin
examination of the first State reports.

