Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like
to express our strong condemnation of this morning's
terrorist attack on the Afghan Parliament and express
our solidarity with the people and Government of
Afghanistan at this hour. Madam President, we thank
your delegation for organizing this debate on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I would also like to thank the Secretary General for his
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2015/422),
his Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for their briefings earlier this
morning.

The President of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Ashraf
Ghani, paid a State visit to India from 27 to 29 April.
That visit further cemented the age-old historical,
cultural and geographical links between India and
Afghanistan. The leaders of our two countries
acknowledged that those links today provide the solid
foundation for our strategic partnership, which was in
turn forged on the two countries' common perception
of challenges and shared interests. Prime Minister Modi
of India assured the President of Afghanistan of India's
abiding support for Afghanistan's ongoing crucial
transitions - political, economic and security - for
the decade 2015-2024 and beyond.

I wish, however, to express our concern at the
security situation in Afghanistan, as set out in the
latest report of the Secretary-General, which mentions
that the number of armed clashes has risen by 45 per
cent since 2014. The report also highlights the fact
that 71 per cent of the violence has been concentrated
in the southern, south-eastern and eastern regions of
the country. Those statistics are a matter of concern
for India and the international community. They only
reinforce our view that terrorism, not tribal differences
or ethnic rivalries, is the main source of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan. That spurt in violence is
taking place at a time when Afghanistan is in the midst
of a sensitive and historic political transition under
the leadership of President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Given the critical phase
that the political transition is in, and the deteriorating
security situation, we feel that there is a strong case
for ensuring that the international community takes a
fresh look at the manner in which the drawdown of the
international military presence in Afghanistan is being
planned.

We have also noted with concern the Secretary-
General's reference to an Afghan Ministry of Interior
estimate that nearly 7,200 so-called foreign fighters
are now in Afghanistan. It is obvious that they could
not have entered Afghanistan or continued to sustain
their terror attacks there without support from beyond
the country's borders. President Ghani has taken
exceptional steps to launch a reconciliation process to
bring peace to his country. Sadly, those efforts are being
repeatedly rebuffed by the Taliban and its supporters.

India will continue to support a truly Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process within
the framework of the Afghan Constitution and the
internationally accepted red lines.

I would also like to once again reiterate the
importance that we attach to enhancing Afghanistan's
economic connectivity to markets in the region.
Afghanistan's unique location makes it a natural
land bridge for connecting the people and markets of
Central Asia to rapidly growing regions in South Asia
and beyond. India has been taking steps to help achieve
that connectivity. We have indicated our willingness to
join an expanded Pakistan, Afghanistan and Tajikistan
trade and transit agreement; we are working with the
Government of Iran to see how the port of Chabahar
in Iran could be used to provide Afghanistan with
another way of accessing a sea route; and we have
unilaterally offered Afghanistan access to the facilities
of the integrated checkpoint at Attari at the Wagah-
Attari border-crossing point on the international border
between India and Pakistan.

Finally, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community's
efforts to support Afghanistan's political and economic
transition. We are ready to be part of that process, and
we look forward to further discussions of UNAMA's
continued activities in Afghanistan.
