Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me to extend to you our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. Since your accession to
the presidency, you have demonstrated outstanding
skills and shown that your impartiality is
unquestionable. You stand by the values of right and
justice, which are qualities needed by the international
community to achieve and maintain international peace
and security. We commend you and wish you success.

By the same token, I would like to commend all
of the members of the Security Council who insisted
that resolution 2046 (2012) contain a condemnation of
the attack and aggression on Heglig and of the actions
of the South Sudanese armed forces, which were
described as an act of aggression, a violation of State
sovereignty and an encroachment upon its territorial
integrity, all of which run counter to the Charter of the
United Nations and to all of the international standards
that regulate relations among States. We also wish to
thank those members once again for having taken a
stand and rightly called for an investigation and fact-
finding mission with regard to the considerable
destruction caused by the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) in Heglig.

The delegation of the Sudan would like to
commend the role of the African Union (AU) in the
maintenance of regional peace and security. The efforts
it has made and the agreements reached at Abuja and at
Doha with regard to Darfur are a case in point. In that
connection, the statement made by the AU Peace and
Security Council can only strengthen confidence in the
ability of the AU High-level Implementation Panel,
under the chairmanship of President Mbeki, to settle
the outstanding issues between the Republic of the
Sudan and South Sudan. We are confident that the
Panel will continue to submit its reports to the AU
Commission, and we reiterate the need to keep the
process of conflict settlement within the African
continent and under the care and leadership of
Mr. Mbeki.

Against that background, our national
responsibility for ensuring that peace takes root in the
country and our regional and international
responsibility to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security require us to make the
following observations.

First, peace between the two Republics - the
Sudan and South Sudan - will be achieved only if
there is an end to all forms of support for, and the
sheltering of, proxy rebel and armed groups by South
Sudan. In that connection, it is noteworthy that
resolution 2046 (2012, which has just been adopted, does not specify a time frame for the resolution of this
issue, in contrast to the deadlines instituted in relation
to other issues, which we deem too narrow and
impracticable.

Secondly, it should be noted that the resolution
disregards the continuous acts of aggression
perpetrated by South Sudan against the Sudan. A case
in point involves the declarations made by senior
officials of South Sudan, who threaten to reoccupy
Heglig. The presence of the ninth and tenth battalions
of the SPLM-N inside the territory of the Sudan and
the two states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile are
a clear indication of an encroachment upon the
inviolability of the territorial integrity of the Sudan.

Thirdly, with regard to aerial bombardment, we
would like to recall the need for increased accuracy,
given the presence of armed forces from South Sudan
inside the territory of the Sudan, as we detailed in our
letter to the Council on 28 April.

In that connection, I should like also to state that
the Sudanese armed forces and air force did not bomb
any areas inside South Sudan, despite the fact that it is
our right to use all military means at our disposal
inside our territory to repulse any aggression, including
the use of aerial forces. No law bans the use of this
option to protect the territory of a country that is
endangered.

Fourthly, in conformity with the aforementioned
statement, we are of the view that security issues
between the two countries should be given paramount
priority in negotiations as a means to discuss other
relevant issues. Those issues must be discussed at the
start of negotiations.

Fifthly, we would like to state that the resolution
includes under Chapter VII the issue of the two states
of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, despite the fact
that the African Union Peace and Security Council did
not request that they be included under that Chapter
and even though the Peace and Security Council's
statement put them outside the road map whose
adoption was called for under Chapter VII.

(spoke in English)

The road map is contained in paragraph 13 of the
communique issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, which requested the Security Council
to endorse the road map.

(spoke in Arabic)

Finally, the resolution contains a threat of resort
to measures under Article 41 of the Charter. The AU
Peace and Security Council did not request that either;
we did not see that in its statement. Any oral allegation
should be verified, and the Security Council should
also verify the credibility of the party making such an
allegation. We therefore have reservations as concerns
all of the foregoing.

In conclusion, we would state once again that our
policy is based on respect for the sovereignty of States
and the non-violation of the sanctity of their territory.
12
