Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
First of all, allow me to join with others in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the lofty post of
President of the Security Council for October. I sincerely
wish you every success in this extremely complex task. I
would also like to thank the delegation of Guinea-Bissau
for having successfully guided the work of the Security
Council in September.

The new wave of armed conflict that engulfed
neighbouring Afghanistan in late September this year has
deeply worried and concerned the Republic of Tajikistan.

The larger scale and intensified armed confrontation;
the execution and shooting of people without trial or
investigation; raids on United Nations premises in Kabul;
the Taliban's brutal violence against the former President of
Afghanistan, Mr. Najibullah, and others; scandalous
violations of human rights, primarily those of women and
girls; vandalism; and the flood of refugees fleeing the
capital of the Islamic State of Afghanistan have all led to
understandable indignation and serious concern in Tajik
society.

The aggression of the Taliban and its resolve to move
the fighting to the northern areas of Afghanistan - towards
the southern borders of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) - would inevitably pose a real threat to peace
and stability throughout the Central and South Asian region.

 

As pointed out in the joint declaration of 4 October 1996
on events in Afghanistan by the leaders of Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, the flames of war pose

"a direct threat to the national interests and security
of these States and the Commonwealth as a whole,
and destabili[z]e the situation in the region and the
world." (S/l996/838, annex)

The present crisis in Afghanistan is extremely
serious. Moreover, it demonstrates the futility of attempts
to achieve national agreement and stability in the country
by military force alone. History has convincingly shown
us the truth of this more than once.
Given the gravity of the situation, Tajikistan attaches
particular importance to today's debate on this issue in
this formal meeting of the Security Council. Today's
meeting must mark an important step forward in our
search for ways to ensure a peaceful settlement of the
problems in Afghanistan and we are very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for convening it.

We believe that the international community must
prohibit external intervention in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and help the Afghan people find an
acceptable formula for agreement. The Government of
Tajikistan therefore urges all Afghan leaders to join in the
political dialogue designed to lead to national
reconciliation and to preserve the independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Afghan society. Particularly
important in this respect is cooperation between the
Afghan sides and the United Nations Special Mission in
Afghanistan. We attach key importance to the Mission's
work in terms of finding an early peaceful settlement.

Tajikistan, which is linked to the peoples of
Afghanistan by age-old historical, moral and spiritual ties,
does not conceal its vested interest in the destruction of
the vicious circle of confrontation and its replacement by
an all-Afghan political dialogue.

Our vested interest is quite understandable. It is
well-known that the Tajik-Afghan border is still an area
of particular tension. We are convinced that if we find a
comprehensive political settlement to the Afghan problem,
the situation on the southern borders of the CIS, and
particularly the Tajik stretch of its outer frontier, will
stabilize significantly.

 

We believe that all of this will then enable us firmly
to block bandit raids and the transit and sale of drugs
across Afghanistan's State borders and put an end to illegal
arms trafficking, which criminal elements and groups from
various regions in Afghanistan continue to pursue.

The situation that has developed in Afghanistan is
clearly a humanitarian tragedy of global dimensions. We
hope that Member States and international organizations
will support the United Nations efforts to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people.

We trust that the debate on the situation in
Afghanistan will help us find a way out of the situation that
has emerged and that the Security Council will give another
clear signal, which must be heeded by all parties to the
conflict, that work on a political settlement must begin.
