Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you for convening
this important meeting, Mr. President. The presence
here earlier today of the Secretary-General, Dr. David
Nabarro, and Ms. Margaret Chan reflects the high level
of political concern and commitment to addressing the
global outbreak of Ebola. Israel is proud to join with
other nations in sponsoring today's resolution 2177
(2014).

The Jewish philosopher and physician Maimonides
said that the physician should treat not only the disease
but also the patient who is suffering. The suffering in
West Africa is immense. The Ebola epidemic has killed
thousands of people and new cases are being reported
daily. We must never lose sight of the fact that behind
the startling figures and statistics there are people who
are suffering, with families that are suffering too. We
are witnessing a crisis for the countries affected, the
African continent and the international community.

Diseases do not respect nations or nationalities. A
health crisis in one country can easily spread to others in
the region and often well beyond. Unless we coordinate
our response and invest more resources in fighting this
disease, the Ebola outbreak will spread even further.
The epidemic already threatens to destabilize an already
fragile region. Schools and workplaces are closed, and
it is almost impossible to get any kind of medical care
because Ebola has crippled the system. As soon as a
new treatment facility opens, it immediately fills to
overflowing. Patients and families are lining up outside
begging for help. Health workers on the front lines are
becoming infected and dying. In many places fear and
misunderstanding have turned to anger, hostility and
even violence.

A global crisis requires a global response. We know
that this virus can be controlled. Ebola outbreaks have
occurred in Africa on more than two dozen occasions
over the past 40 years, and every time they have been
brought under control. The global community has the
tools and the know-how to save thousands of lives, but
the response from all of us so far has been inadequate.
The people of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone are
looking to us for help. They are counting on us for more
health-care workers, equipment and medical supplies.

Israel is proud to be playing its part. The Jewish
faith teaches tikkun 01am, the obligation of every person
to make the world a better place. Israel has taken this
message to heart and over the years has been one of the
first countries to respond when disaster strikes. From
Haiti to Ghana and, more recently, the Philippines,
Israel has lent a helping hand to dozens of countries.

Israel stands ready to join an international task
force to combat the Ebola outbreak. In the meantime,
we have sent emergency funding to Sierra Leone and
medical supplies to Ethiopia. We have also coordinated
with the World Health Organization and sent experts in
public health and infectious diseases to Cameroon. We
have trained dozens of doctors, nurses and other medical
staff from six different hospitals on how to prevent and
contain the disease. Israeli non-governmental agencies
are now preparing to send another team to Sierra Leone.

The time for global action is now. Tens ofthousands
of lives and the future of West Africa hang in the
balance. Every country, no matter how small, has a
role to play in combating the Ebola epidemic. We are
standing at a crossroads. In our generation, global health
and development goals that once seemed unattainable
are now within our reach. At the same time, we are
confronting global health challenges that threaten to
set us back decades. This must be the moment when we

replace apathy with ambition. This must be the moment
when we enable nations to become the architects of their
health-care systems rather than their victims. This must
be the moment when we unite to defeat this disease and
strengthen health-care systems around the world so that
this tragedy is never repeated.

