Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin colleagues around
the table in expressing my appreciation to the Chinese
presidency for convening this timely and important
meeting. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keating and Ambassador Tete
Antonio for their insightful briefings on the latest
developments in Somalia.

My delegation acknowledges and welcomes
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, President of Somalia, in the Chamber
this morning. President Mohamud's presence today
is a testament of his deep and abiding commitment
to returning Somalia to normalcy and restoring hope
for a better future for Somalia's people, who have
suffered far too long from conflict and deprivation. We
commend the steadily improving situation in Somalia
since 2012 under President Mohamud's leadership. Let
us hope that the Federal Government and the Federal
State Governments in Somalia will stay the course for
more significant progress on the political, social and
economic fronts, particularly in the crucial weeks and
months ahead.

The year 2016 is of particular significance for
Somalia. After more than two decades of brutal
conflict and the prolonged erosion of fundamental
democratic norms and practices, the country will
undertake a major and crucial step later this year in
making greater progress towards re-establishing itself
as a functioning State. To create the right enablers to
drive that transformation, the Security Council and
the international community must continue to remain
actively engaged in Somalia, particularly in supporting
the Federal and regional authorities in their efforts to
restore peace and security, as well as in bringing much-
needed socioeconomic development and progress to
the people.

On the political front, Malaysia welcomes
the strong regional support and engagement with
Somalia, particularly by the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We commend ongoing efforts by the Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional states in
seeking consensus on the electoral model. The IGAD
facilitation has led to recent announcement, on 3 April,
by Puntland authorities to assent to the 4.5 model for
the 2016 transition process. The successful outcome
and conclusions, earlier this month, at the third National
Leaders Forum, and the positive momentum created
should be seized by stakeholders in the Hiraan and
Middle Shabelle regions to put aside their differences
and work constructively with the Federal Government
in order to establish a sustainable regional authority
ahead of the scheduled electoral process.

Although elections based on one-person/one-vote
will not be possible this year, the inclusive process
leading to agreement on key principles of the electoral
process should pave the way for more representative
elections in 2020. In the same vein, the Federal
Government and the regional authorities should be
encouraged to expedite work in constituting the upper
House of the legislature and to ensure that women's
voices are adequately represented, particularly of the
inclusionist candidates for the upcoming elections.

On the development front, Malaysia welcomes and
supports the outcomes of the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development for Somalia,heldinlstanbul
in February, and commends the commitment of Federal
Government to implement the outcomes. In addition,
the recently concluded thirteenth Extraordinary
Summit of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), held in Istanbul last week, also welcomed the
transformation of the OIC Humanitarian Coordination
Office in Somalia into a development office, reflecting
the positive developments on the ground since 2011,
when the OIC Office was first established.

While noting the significant progress Somalia
has made in pursuing its development goals, the
humanitarian situation in the country continues to
be of concern. That includes chronic food insecurity,
malnutrition, poor access to water, sanitation and
hygiene, displacement, as well as the cyclical Violence
attributed chiefly to armed violence, including by
terrorist groups and through clan-based conflicts.
Compounding that is the ongoing El Nifio phenomenon.
All those elements threaten to exacerbate the already
precarious situation. A11 regional and international
actors and donors should step in to provide assistance
to the 5 million Somalis in dire need, which include
approximately 300,000 children. Unimpeded access
to humanitarian assistance must be secured from all
stakeholders in the country.

On the security front, Malaysiajoins other Council
members in welcoming the ongoing efforts aimed at
strengthening Somalia's security sector and institutions,
including the recently held African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) troop- and police-contributing
country summit held in Djibouti and the African
Union-United Nations Joint Task Force consultative
meetings held in late February and late March,
respectively. Malaysia fully supports the early roll-out
and implementation of stabilizing efforts in areas newly
liberated from Al-Shabaab, including through quick-
impact projects. Such initiatives will help to promote
local economies and form an important component of
the overall efforts of the Federal Government to win
the hearts and minds of local communities. In line with
the commitments made at the AMISOM. troop- and
police-contributors summit, all the parties concerned
should strengthen command and control for better
coordination, particularly with a View to degrade and
eradicate the threat posed by Al-Shabaab.

At a time when political tensions appear to be
increasing, and against the backdrop of increasing
intensity and frequency of complex attacks and
operations by Al-Sabaab, particularly against civilians
and civilian targets, the 20 per cent reduction of
AMISOM. troop allowances raises concerns. In that
regard, we welcome the AU-United Nations Joint Task
Force agreement to address the funding issue.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the tireless dedication and sacrifices made by all
security sector actors in Somalia, particularly the brave
men and women of the Somalia national security forces,
AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). In that regard, Malaysia
affirms its support for AMISOM, UNSOM, UNSOS and
the Federal Government's collective efforts to pave the
way for Somalia to secure its place in the community of
nations - a Somalia that is secure, stable and engaged
in pursuit of national development for a better future.

