Ms. Scott (Namibia): At the outset, we would like
to commend the Polish presidency for presiding over the
Security Council during the month of May and to thank
it for convening today's open debate, focused on the
maintenance of international law, peace and security.
We would also like to thank the briefers.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2018/417/ Rev.1, annex), the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations states that the United Nations seeks to
establish conditions under which justice and respect
for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained. For a
small country such as ours, in order to ensure equity
and justice, there are few options besides insisting on
the maintenance of international law. Article 96 of the
Namibian Constitution states that our international
relations foster respect for international law and
treaty obligations. As a child of the international
community and a product of the successful application
of international law, that is a fundamental aspect for the
implementation of our foreign policy.

Namibia's independence in 1990 came at a great
price and meant that families were split for many
years, resulting in deep divisions in our society. Yet
our policy of reconciliation, and the application of
international law in our own country and in the face
of tremendous odds, has resulted in both independence
and development, even when we have not always
agreed politically. For that reason, and in accordance
with our firm commitment to regional peace, when
Namibia and Botswana found ourselves in a territorial
dispute, our first reaction was to take the matter to the
International Court of Justice. We were committed to
accepting the outcome of that judgment. In addition,
our two Presidents, on 5 February, signed a boundary
treaty to reaffirm our common boundary and commit to
cooperation on transboundary issues. Namibia therefore
reaffirms its commitment to the promotion of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter as well as with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

It is our belief that international peace and security
must be sought and guaranteed through the multilateral
system. Since we joined the United Nations, Namibia
has actively and constructively engaged, supported
and participated in the various functions of the United
Nations system, including peacekeeping operations.
We will continue to do so. In that spirit, we call on
States to address abuses of human rights and violations
of treaties and protocols. We call on all States to respect
agreed-upon United Nations processes.

The reprehensible events in Gaza and Israel this
week have been a stark reminder of the need to uphold
international law as it pertains not only to territorial
disagreements but also to humanitarian law and human
rights law. Indeed, the application of international law
is a foundation for peaceful relations and coexistence.

Finally, I want to stress that, in order to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the United Nations
should continue to forge stronger relations with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly the
African Union. We welcome the enhanced cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations in
peacekeeping in Africa, and underscore the important
role of regional and subregional arrangements in
promoting international law and peace and security.

