I would like to start by congratulating the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month, and thanking the Niger for its successful presidency last month. I would also like to wish all participants a happy United Nations Day. On this seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the situation in the Middle East is fraught with conflict, challenges and a lack of a horizon for comprehensive and durable peace in the region. The principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations are challenged in every area of peace and security, there is no path for a sustainable future for its young populations, and the pandemic is stealing what progress was made over the last few decades in most areas, especially in education, poverty reduction, rights and equality. Some countries are doing better than the others, but the trajectory for the majority is alarming. My country, Lebanon, has been through an annus horribilis in every sense of the word since last October. The economic and financial crisis that wrecked the lives of the people and robbed them of their savings and financial security was accompanied by a pandemic, accompanied by a catastrophic explosion that destroyed the port of Beirut and a large part of the city. It also caused the death of 200 people and injured thousands. The explosion destroyed the heart of the city of Beirut and its business district, making the recovery more difficult. It also shattered the cultural and art districts, adding to the darkness that has overshadowed the lives of people and deprived them of even the pleasure of finding refuge in their cultural heritage. A sense of despair descended on the country and population, but the quick response of the United Nations and the international community was overwhelming and heartening. Support, sympathy and aid poured into the country, telling the Lebanese that they are not alone, making a difference and encouraging the Lebanese to stand up again and start the long journey of recovery. In this journey, Lebanon needs its friends and the international community today more than ever as it embarks on the reconstruction and rehabilitation phase of its recovery to build back better. We thank France and the United Nations for swiftly stepping in to help Lebanon by holding an international conference on 9 August to help Lebanon in response to the explosion and the humanitarian crisis. We also thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme for organizing briefings for member States to help with the response to the situation in Lebanon. These meetings are invaluable in garnering support and much needed assistance to help Lebanon mitigate the effects of the explosion in different areas. Sectors in dire need for assistance are education and health. The impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic is heavily concentrated in the education sector, where the deficit in technology penetration and Internet is threatening to produce a lost generation if students cannot go to school and have no access to virtual learning. Health is also a major challenge, with the sector facing problems of capacity and shortages of medicine and of medical equipment. All of these challenges are taking place in the midst of a political vacuum, in the absence of a new Government. The Lebanese people are seeking a glimmer of hope in the formation of a new Government and a new way of doing business in that Government. They hope that, after a period of political gridlock, the country will be back charting a path of economic, financial and political rehabilitation. A new Prime Minister, Mr. Saad Hariri, has been designated to form this new Government and, if this hope materializes with the formation of a new Government, Lebanon can start again on the road to finding solutions for its problems, and enact the reforms required by the international community, which will allow international support to flow again to the country. There is also movement on another front in Lebanon. The Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament announced on 1 October that a framework agreement was reached to start indirect technical negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations and with the mediation of the United States, to reach an agreement over the disputed land and maritime border between Lebanon and Israel. Once such an agreement on the delineation of the maritime and border is reached, the Speaker said it will be deposited with the United Nations, in accordance with international rules and practices. The framework agreement will be based on the Israel-Lebanon ceasefire understanding, of April 1996, and on resolution 1701 (2006). The first meeting between the Lebanese and the Israelis, under the auspices of the United Nations and in the presence representatives of the United States, was held on 14 October at Naqoura, and other meetings are expected to follow before the end of the month and in the coming months. A day before the start of the discussions, President Michel Aoun gave his instructions to the members of the Lebanese delegation, stressing that "these discussions are technical and are limited to the demarcation of the maritime borders" and aim to "defend internationally recognized Lebanese rights". Lebanon hopes that a border agreement will be reached soon that will allow Lebanon to recover its land and territorial waters, benefit from its natural resources, extend its sovereignty over all its land and water and help its economy. Last August, the Security Council adopted resolution 2539 (2020), extending the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) until 31 August 2021. By renewing the mandate of UNIFIL, the Security Council and its members voiced their strong and unified message of support to UNIFIL, preserving its badly needed strong capacity to preserve peace and security along the Blue Line. After the port explosion and in line with UNIFIL's mission mandate spelled out in resolution 2539 (2020), which authorizes it to take "temporary and special measures to provide support to Lebanon and its people", UNIFIL extended a helping hand to Lebanon in Beirut. At the request of the Government of Lebanon and in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNIFIL, on 27 September, deployed a multinational force detachment to Beirut in order to assist the Lebanese authorities with their efforts to deal with the aftermath of the explosion. Lebanon is extremely thankful to UNIFIL's leadership and staff for their relentless dedication, and commends the strong and steady cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Government. Let me also express my country's genuine gratitude to troop-contributing countries, for their longstanding support and unwavering commitment especially through these challenging times Lebanon is going through. Furthermore, Lebanon salutes the crew of the Bangladeshi ship who were badly hit by the explosion at the port, and the rest of the affected UNIFIL personnel for their courage and sacrifice. Lebanon reiterates its full commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety and calls on this organ to do everything in its power to make sure that Israel does the same and stops its daily violations by land, sea and air of Lebanese sovereignty. Palestinians have been suffering a strangling blockade and unliveable conditions in Gaza, and experiencing hardships and restrictions on their freedom of movement in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. This is coupled with the continued expansion of Israeli settlements and rise in settler violence, excessive use of force by Israeli security forces and increasing house demolitions by Israeli authorities, as documented by relevant Secretary Council reports. The Israeli plans for annexation of parts of the West Bank were supposedly suspended last August. They were not cancelled, just put on hold, and now we are witnessing unprecedented and record settlement activity by the Israeli authorities. Nearly 5,000 new settlement units are reported as being approved by the Israel High Planning Council in mid-October. There are reports that 12,159 settlement units have been approved so far in 2020. Peace Now reports that this is the highest total of settlement units advances in any year since it began tracking in 2012. These Israeli actions are in contravention of international law, the Geneva Conventions and Security Council resolutions on this matter. But, most importantly, they end any hope for an equitable settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and any chance for peace. Any solution to the Palestinian question must be just and comprehensive, based on international legality and rooted in relevant United Nations resolutions especially, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334 (2016). It must also be based on the formula of land-for-peace and the two-State solution, including a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Arab Peace Initiative remains a credible way forward for such a peace. Ignoring the rights and national aspirations of the Palestinian people will not lead to real peace.
