Mr. Gorita (Romania): Allow me first to
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
high responsibility of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. Your well-known
diplomatic skills give us full confidence for the success of
the Council's work this month.

I should also like to express our appreciation for the
way in which the Permanent Representative of China
conducted the work of the Council last month.

 

The draft resolution on security assurances to be
adopted today by the Security Council is an important
political initiative of particular relevance to the Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Indeed, progress in
the direction of effective international arrangements to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons will facilitate the further
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, paving the
way for an indefinite extension of the NPT and thus
contributing to international peace and security.

It is a matter of satisfaction that the search for a
solution to the problem of security assurances, which were
basically negotiated in the Conference on Disarmament, did
not set the United Nations, with its considerably enhanced
role and credibility in maintaining international peace and
security to one side. During the course of the negotiations
and consultations in the Conference on Disarmament and
other forums, Romania came out in favour of the idea of
the Security Council's confirming, on a broader basis, the
commitments originally undertaken by three nuclear-weapon
States in Security Council resolution 255 (1968).

The new geopolitical realities prevailing in Central and
Eastern Europe, especially in terms of what could now be
called the absence of a "nuclear umbrella", make us, like
other Central and Eastern European nations, particularly
sensitive to the idea of enlarged and consolidated security
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States. That is why we
particularly appreciated and encouraged last year's initiative
by the United States and other nuclear Powers to review
their policies on providing security assurances to non-
nuclear-weapon States for the purpose of reaching a
coordinated and common position on this important topic.

The draft resolution presented today to the Council for
adoption addresses concerns in the security assurances area
in terms of both negative and positive assurances for the
NPT's non-nuclear-weapon member States. It is an effort
towards a comprehensive and effective approach to a very
complex issue that deserves appropriate acknowledgement
and appreciation.

We consider that the Security Council draft resolution,
together with the declarations by the five nuclear-weapon
States circulated as official documents of the Council, bear
significant political weight. Such collective security
assurances, offered for the first time by all five nuclear-
weapon States permanent members of the Security Council,
are an important step in the right direction that cannot be
underestimated. By adopting the draft resolution before it,
the Security Council will offer additional incentives for
universal adherence to and compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and for a
decision in favour of an indefinite and unconditional
extension of the NPT.

Allow me to express our appreciation to the nuclear-
weapon States members of the Security Council for their
initiative. We hope that the draft resolution on security
assurances will be adopted by the Council unanimously.

