Mr. Davide (Philippines): The Philippines
commends the presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate on the important and urgent
need to address the problem of the proliferation and
illegal trafficking of small arms and light weapons.

Among the many types of armaments that are
available in today's global arms market, small arms
and light weapons, although not the most lethal and
destructive, because of the prevalence and openness of
their use throughout the world have killed and maimed
and struck fear into millions of people and will
continue to do so unless controlled. Those killings have
brought untold fear, suffering and misery to the
affected families and loved ones, as well as relatives
and friends.

Worse yet, so many small arms and light weapons
have been produced - and there seems to be no limit
or end to such production - by and/or in different
countries throughout the years. Since those weapons
can easily be transported and are less expensive, they
are bound to proliferate, especially since they can be
used in times of both peace and conflict, for good or
bad.

The Philippines recognizes the fear, suffering,
misery and pain brought upon innocent peoples by
small arms and light weapons. The harm they have
brought to entire populations is immeasurable. The
Philippines believes that it is imperative for all States
Members of the United Nations to account for their
stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and to
ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
irresponsible persons, such as criminals, or groups,
such as terrorists, that espouse a culture of death or
cause the aggravation of conflicts for the ascendancy
of their anti-social ends or causes.

Thus, the Philippines has complied with General
Assembly resolution 62/47 on the implementation of
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons and of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The Philippines considers the marking of firearms
with a unique identifier to be an essential element in
preventing their illegal transfer. All firearm
manufacturers in my country are required to mark their
products. Government authorities, such as the
Philippine National Police, the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and others, only use small arms and light
weapons that are properly marked.

By legislation through Presidential Decree 1866,
as amended by Republic Act 8294, the Philippines
requires licensed manufacturers of small arms and light
weapons to apply an appropriate and reliable marking
system on each weapon as an integral part of the
production process. The Philippines maintains
comprehensive records on the manufacture and
distribution of small arms and light weapons. The
Firearms and Explosives Division of the Philippine
National Police meticulously records all data on
confiscated, captured, surrendered and deposited small
arms and light weapons. That agency has upgraded its
firearm management information system, which allows
for the identification and verification of the routes and
destinations of small arms and light weapons.

On the other hand, the Philippines has thrown its
full might against illegal arms manufacturers in the
country, both through tighter laws that impose heavy
imprisonment penalties even for the manufacture of
parts only, and through new regulations and stricter
administrative procedures.
The Philippines has made progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. It
maintains appropriate partnerships with the local
firearms industry, private security providers, gun clubs
and civil society. The country has several laws to
prevent the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, such as Republic Act 8294, which codifies
the laws on the illegal and unlawful possession,
manufacture, dealership, acquisition or disposition of
firearms, ammunition or explosives. Based on our
national legislation, the term "firearms" is used in an
even stricter sense than the definition in the
Programme of Action. Also pending in the Philippine
Senate are SB No. 1615, entitled "Act to Prohibit
Certain Firearms Especially Useful to Terrorists", and
SB No. 837, entitled "An Act Defining the Crime of
Firearms Smuggling, Providing Penalties Therefor and
for Other Purposes", among others.

The Philippines observed Small Arms Destruction
Day in July 2007 by destroying thousands of
confiscated or surrendered firearms. It is reported that
over 50,000 more captured small arms and light
weapons are scheduled to be destroyed by the Armed
Forces of the Philippines at its supply units.

The Philippines submits that full and unrelenting
cooperation with the United Nations system on the
issue under consideration is of paramount importance.
Hence, in addition to what I have just stated, the
Philippines is undertaking appropriate measures to
prevent exports of small arms and light weapons that
would violate sanctions issued by the United Nations
or contravene bilateral, regional or multilateral
commitments on the non-proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. It shares information on illicit
transfers with like-minded States through international
instruments, such as the Agreement on Information
Exchange and Establishment of Communication
Procedures. On the export and import of small arms
and light weapons, the Philippines ensures that there is
control over the use of end-user certificates or letters of
intent. The Philippines also does not re-export or
retransfer previously imported small arms and light
weapons.

In conclusion, the Philippines will always be
prepared and ready to contribute to and join the global
fight against illicit transfers of small arms and light
weapons so as to save lives and reduce the human
misery and suffering caused by those weapons.
International cooperation and sharing of information
are key factors if we are to effectively combat and
eliminate that international problem. A nation acting
alone, without the cooperation, assistance and support
of others, particularly those with large stockpiles of
small arms and light weapons, would be helpless; its
efforts would be futile. All nations must work together
and remain in concord and solidarity to achieve
decisive, positive results in solving the problem. The
time to do so cannot be delayed a moment longer.

