Mr. Stuart (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely and important meeting on an
issue of deep interest and continuing concern to
Member States. We would like to use the opportunity
today to summarize for the Council Australia's own
efforts to strengthen our counter-terrorism capacity and
in particular our efforts to enhance our cooperation
with other countries, especially in our own region.

Before doing so, I wish to join many others today
in acknowledging and expressing our appreciation for
the sustained effort by the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat staff working with them to
establish the Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Sir Jeremy Greenstock deserves the many
accolades he has received for this, but we are also
keenly aware that many other colleagues have worked
hard and well to develop the important role that the
CTC is now playing in strengthening international
efforts against terrorism.

The 11 September terrorist attacks on the United
States demonstrated in stark, tragic terms the current
weaknesses in the international counter-terrorism
regime. They revealed that the existing counter-
terrorism instruments, for example, while enjoying
wide adherence, did not provide sufficient
accountability or verification of their implementation.
Other weaknesses included insufficient information
exchange and the lack of assistance for capacity-
building. It is heartening to hear, for example in
today's debate, many countries addressing these issues.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) has
provided a comprehensive framework for international
action against terrorism. It is a blueprint for addressing
these weaknesses, particularly in relation to
suppressing the financing of terrorism. A key aspect of
resolution 1373 (2001) is its requirement that all
Member States report on the national and regional
implementation of counter-terrorism efforts. Australia
joins others today in encouraging all Member States to
implement fully these and the other provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001).

Even before 11 September, Australia had in place
substantial measures to combat terrorism. As host to
the 2000 Olympics, we had recent experience in
addressing the terrorist threat. Since December 2001,
when we submitted Australia's first report to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Government of
Australia has introduced to Parliament comprehensive
new laws specifically directed to strengthen the capacity
of law enforcement to prevent, detect, investigate and
prosecute terrorist acts; strengthen measures to detect,
freeze and seize terrorist assets and eliminate terrorist
financing; and enable Australia to become a party to
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
These efforts reflect Australia's firm resolve to further
strengthen its domestic counter-terrorism laws and
practices.

But we realize that, as is outlined in resolution
1373 (2001), counter-terrorism activity cannot be
limited to efforts at the national level. Bilateral,
regional and international cooperation is essential to
effectively combat terrorism in all its forms and in all
its locations. At the bilateral level, Australia is pleased
to report that on 7 February 2002 we signed a
memorandum of understanding with Indonesia on
combating international terrorism.

The memorandum provides a framework for
bilateral cooperation to prevent, suppress and combat
international terrorism through the exchange and flow
of information and intelligence. It also provides for
cooperation between law- enforcement agencies and
the strengthening of capacity- building through
networking, training and education programmes, visits
and joint operations. We are currently considering a
number of initiatives to implement this memorandum.

In our own region, Australia is actively
contributing to promoting cooperation against
terrorism. From 25 to 27 March, together with the
United States, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands
Forum secretariat, Australia co-hosted a Pacific Islands
counter-terrorism workshop, which was held in
Honolulu. The workshop successfully raised awareness
among Pacific Island countries of the nature and threat
posed by international terrorism and of the measures
needed to combat it. It produced a report that will serve
as a guide to Pacific Island countries in giving effect to
resolution 1373 (2001) and in implementing the
counter-terrorism conventions. The workshop
emphasized the importance of preventing terrorist
financing, strengthening border controls, and
developing and implementing appropriate domestic
counter-terrorism legislative regimes, with a focus on
the particular regional environment for Pacific Island
countries.

Australia also participated in an Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum
workshop on financial measures against terrorism,
which was also held in Honolulu, from 24 to 26 March.
That workshop emphasized the need to coordinate
international measures to suppress the financing of
terrorism, as well as the role the ASEAN Regional
Forum and other regional groups can play in
developing mechanisms for information-sharing. In
short, Australia sees both the Pacific Islands Forum
and the ASEAN Regional Forum as regional bodies
with a significant contribution to make to counter-
terrorism.

Although we have been active at the national and
regional levels, we recognize that further steps and a
long-term committed effort are required. Later this
week, from 17 to 19 April in Bangkok, Australia will
co-host with Thailand a workshop of the ASEAN
Regional Forum on the prevention of terrorism. The
Bangkok workshop will enable Forum participants to
obtain a greater understanding of practical measures to
prevent terrorist activity, with a focus on border
control, security measures for international events,
measures to detect explosive materials, and aviation
security. More generally, the workshop will examine
means of preventing terrorism and enhancing security
through improved information flow and intelligence
exchange. It will be the second in what is developing
into a series of ASEAN Regional Forum workshops
focused on achieving concrete and practical outcomes
to improve security and regional cooperation in
counter-terrorism.

Australia strongly supports the work done in the
United Nations to ensure that there is a broad
international front against terrorism. As stressed by the
Prime Minister of Australia, the Honourable John
Howard, when he addressed the Council on 30 January
this year, in implementing the important resolutions
recently agreed in New York, Australia is looking to
the Council for an emphasis on action rather than on
rhetoric.

