Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank China
for convening today's important debate.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union
(EU).

I would like pay tribute to African nations'
contribution to peacekeeping in Africa in both African-
led and United Nations missions. Germany salutes the
courage of all the soldiers and police who participate in
what are often extremely dangerous missions, whether
in Somalia, the Lake Chad region, Central Africa or
the Sahel. With regard to the Sahel region, Germany
supports the initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to deploy ajoint task force in the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the progress that our African partners
have made in developing and implementing Africa's
peace and security architecture. We also support the
initiative of the African Union (AU) on increasing the
financial independence of its peace operations and
strengthening the financial basis of the African Peace
Fund. And we were pleased to see the United Nations
and AU sign the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. But it is clear that further strengthening the
African peace and security architecture and developing
the AU-United Nations partnership in the area of peace
and security will require great efforts on all sides. They
can count on Germany's support during that process.

I would like to focus briefly on a few areas
Where Germany supports its African partners in the
field of peace and security. First, for many years,
Germany - bilaterally, in the context of the EU and
through the United Nations - has supported African
partners in preparing military and police units for
peacekeeping tasks. We have worked with the AU and
other regional and subregional organizations to address
capacity shortages and have provided financial and
technical assistance. For instance, we offer training
to African peacekeepers through the Kofi Annan
Peacekeeping Training Centre, as well as through tailor-
made programmes in areas such as pre-deployment
training for specific missions.

Secondly, Germany has put a strategic focus on
crisis-prevention and stabilization measures aimed at
supporting political processes and resolving conflicts
by creating a secure environment and improving living
conditions. For instance, together with the countries of
the Lake Chad region and other partners, including the
United Nations, we have launched the Oslo Consultative
Group on Stabilization and Prevention, which will
identify priorities and coordinate stabilization
measures. Its first meeting at the senior official level
will take place in Berlin in September. Germany also
assists African partners in the areas of early warning,
prevention and mediation activities. We are an active
partner in mediation efforts conducted under the
umbrella of the African Union in, for example, Sudan
and South Sudan. We are happy to be supporting the
African Union's newly established mediation support
unit. In 2017, Germany will spend approximately
€100 million on prevention and stabilization measures
in Africa.

Thirdly, the African Union has shown strong
leadership in putting the agenda on women and peace
and security into action. Germany is proud to support
those efforts, including notably the recent establishment
of a network of African women leaders. The network's
launch in New York just a few weeks ago brought
together a large number of eminent women from
Africa's political and public sectors and civil society.
We are excited by the momentum that this initiative has
developed. We firmly believe that women's access to
political leadership, particularly their participation in
peace processes, leads to better results.

Fourthly, combating the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons is a vital ingredient in both national
and regional stabilization strategies and should be
integrated into United Nations peacekeeping missions
from the start. Among others, Germany has started a
Group of Seven initiative in the extended Sahel jointly
with the African Union, with the aim of promoting
comprehensive coordination in controlling small arms
and light weapons.

In conclusion, we remain committed to supporting
the African Union, other regional and subregional
organizations and our African partners in further
enhancing African capacities in the area of peace
and security.

