Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their remarks and the tireless efforts of
their teams.

Progress on the United Nations-led political process
is vital, but it faces obstacles from within Yemen and
from outside forces. The Security Council has seen
regional escalation by Iran, and we are alarmed about
the recent uptick in Houthi attacks, especially on Saudi
civilian airports. We must do everything we can to
prevent these attacks from undermining hard-earned
progress on the United Nations-led political track in
Yemen. We urge the parties to undertake de-escalatory
measures so as to show their commitment to a Yemeni-
led political resolution.

As part of that de-escalation, we call on the
Houthis to immediately cease unmanned aerial vehicle,
rocket and other attacks against their fellow citizens
and neighbours. Iran must cease supplying the Houthis
with the weapons and technology used in those attacks.
Since December, the Council has urged the Government
of Yemen and the Houthis to demonstrate their
commitment to a political settlement by taking good-
faith measures to de-escalate tensions and redeploy
from Al-Hudaydah, as agreed in Sweden.

We are encouraged by the progress at the recent
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC)
meeting and see it as proof of what can be achieved
when the parties work in good faith with Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and RCC Chair Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard. Yet harder work lies
ahead, as we have heard here today, and the parties
must make good on their commitments. That means
implementing redeployment and reaching consensus on
the contentious issues relating to local security forces,
while continuing to exercise restraint so that fighting
does not threaten the ceasefire. We welcome the recent
meeting between President Mansour Hadi Mansour and
Special Envoy Griffiths and we hope that this can pave
the way for further collaboration and towards finding a
political solution to the conflict.

The United States expresses its disappointment
over recent reports that Houthi authorities sentenced
30 activists to death in Sana'a and reminds the Houthis
of their commitment to an exchange of prisoners and
detainees per the Stockholm Agreement. Tangible
progress on the exchange of prisoners would indicate
the seriousness of the parties to build confidence
towards an agreement to end the conflict.

As the sobering briefings today reminded us, the
humanitarian situation in Yemen is dire. The United
States remains seriously concerned about the increasing
risk of famine in Yemen, in particular, as we have
heard today, among vulnerable populations. We were
heartened to learn that the World Food Programme
(WFP) was able to salvage a portion ofthe wheat stored
at the Red Sea Mills, which it recently reached despite
obstacles placed by the Houthis. We commend the
WFP's efforts in this regard.

We are also closely monitoring negotiations
between the WFP and the Houthis to enable the full
resumption of food aid. As long as the Houthis delay
their cooperation with the WFP, the Yemeni people
will continue to suffer. We hope for a resolution that
prioritizes the needs of vulnerable Yemenis and we
condemn Houthi efforts to undermine humanitarian
activities through the diversion of aid.

We must ensure that humanitarian assistance
continues to effectively reach the millions in need.
There is no excuse for the obstruction of United Nations
humanitarian assistance in Yemen. The United States
remains one of the largest humanitarian contributors
in the country. We join the call today for all donors to
step up assistance in Yemen and fulfil their financial
commitments pledged in Geneva in February.

The United States supports United Nations efforts
to uphold the integrity of its humanitarian assistance
programmes to ensure that life-saving aid directly
reaches those in need. Those who seek to defraud or
divert such assistance are in violation of internationally
recognized humanitarian principles and are directly and
intentionally contributing to Yemen's dire humanitarian
crisis. We continue to encourage all parties to respect
the humanitarian principles of independence, neutrality
and impartiality to avoid creating more precarious
situations for vulnerable populations in Yemen.

