Ms. King (Australia): We welcome your presence
here today, Mr. President. We also welcome the new
Permanent Representative of China. We congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore', for her appointment, and
we thank her for her first briefing on the situation in
Haiti. We commend personnel from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who have
worked tirelessly on the ground with the Government
and the people of Haiti to rebuild that country. Much of
that work has been done in the face of natural disasters
and an ongoing cholera epidemic. While there is still
much work to be done, there has been much encouraging
news, including in the latest report (S/2013/493) of the
Secretary-General.

Since the Security Council last discussed Haiti, in
March (see S/PV.6936), some necessary steps towards
holding long overdue elections have been taken. The
President's submission to Parliament of a draft electoral
law yesterday is the latest of those, and it is very
welcome. It remains, however, a matter of great concern
that elections continue to be delayed. It is critical to
Haiti's recovery, reconstruction and development that
free, fair, inclusive and credible elections be held as soon
as possible. We urge all political actors to work towards
building the political consensus required to establish
the legislation necessary for elections to be held and for
MINUSTAH to continue to provide electoral assistance
and logistical support for those elections.

Political stability and economic development in
Haiti are also closely linked. We welcome President
Martelly's emphasis on strengthening institutions
so as to facilitate foreign investment in support of
socioeconomic development. We note that efforts to
attract foreign investment have resulted in a significant
increase in economic partnerships. Integration
into the Caribbean region should also assist Haiti's
development. The Haitian President's engagement with
the region is welcome. For the first time, Haiti assumed
the six-month rotating chairmanship of the Caribbean
Community and hosted the Caribbean Community
and Common Market Heads of Government meeting.
While those are all welcome developments, real change
requires sustainable development, growth and regional
cooperation and consistent efforts to ensure that the
ongoing risk of political instability, as outlined by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
jeopardize progress.

An emphasis by MINUSTAH on building the
capacity of the Haitian National Police continues to
show results, as demonstrated by increased policing, a
responsibility assumed by the local authorities. Close
cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police has shown results in combating
violence and crime. On that basis and conditioned
by the realities on the ground, we agree with the
Secretary-General's proposal for a further reduction in
the military component of MINUSTAH.

We commend the Secretary-General's ongoing
efforts to eliminate cholera in Haiti. Funding and
coordinating the activities of the various stakeholders
are, however, still a main challenge. To eradicate that
disease, coordination among Haitian national agencies,
multilateral organizations and other partners is crucial.

We remain deeply concerned by sexual and gender-
based violence, including against minors. We are also
deeply concerned by the recent increase in homophobic
violence in Haiti.

We commend MINUSTAH for its swift response in
issuing a press release on 16 August calling for tolerance
amongt all Haitians. We urge the Haitian Government
to continue to work with MINUSTAH to increase
efforts to support the prevention of further incidents,

promote respect for human rights and strengthen the
judicial process.

We appreciate the inclusion in the
Secretary-General's report of a progress report
on MINUSTAH's consolidation plan and note the
establishment of a joint Government-MINUSTAH
working group to monitor the gradual and orderly
transfer of responsibilities to the Government. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's intention,
in his next report, to present options for the involvement
of the United Nations in Haiti beyond 2016. We look
forward to engaging with Haiti and other Member
States on the best way for Haiti to transition away from
United Nations support, to strengthen institutions and
governance, which provide security, justice and jobs,
and to break the cycle of poverty and Violence.
