Mr. Lacroix: I believe there was a question on the
performance assessment tool that we have rolled out
from the representative of Belgium.

(spoke in French)

Regarding the performance assessment tools,
there are two relevant categories. The first is the
comprehensive performance assessment system, which
covers all relevant aspects for evaluating mandate
implementation. The assessment system is already
being implemented in six missions. It will be rolled out
in four more missions by next spring. It is a holistic
evaluation. That is to say, based on various evaluation
elements, it allows us to assess the way in which the
mission is discharging its mandate. With respect to
the police component, the tool allows us to evaluate
the performance of the different units in terms of the
entire mandate. In other words, it is a comprehensive
tool that illustrates the outcomes of each of the mission
components in the overall implementation of the
mandate. That is the first thing.
Despite the fact that this tool has been deployed
within missions relatively recently, it allows each of the
mission's stakeholders to have a more overall picture
of the criteria that allow us to evaluate whether the
mission is fulfilling its mandate and to what extent and
to develop a common vision of the main goals and the
main assessment criteria.

We now have a second tool that has been developed
and implemented for police units more specifically.
That also exists for military units. It is a specific tool
for evaluating police units. It allows us to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of each unit and, following
that assessment, to have a dialogue with the troop-
and police-contributing countries to overcome any
shortcomings or possible weaknesses.

Following the implementation of those tools, I
think that first we are now able to have a very clear
picture of the situation regarding the different units and
to increase the efforts of troop- and police-contributing
countries in terms of training, both of the leadership of
the units and of their personnel.

We have also seen an improvement in our
equipment levels, although more progress is needed in
that regard. We must also improve our ability to protect
our personnel and further raise awareness of personnel
behaviour and discipline, which has led to a reduction
in allegations made against police and in the number
of victims of hostile actions. There is still work to be
done in several important areas: review of standard
operating procedures, review of specific policies and
guidelines on bolstering the security and safety of units.
More generally, we are in the process of organizing a
workshop next month in Entebbe in order to take stock
of our efforts with regard to the effectiveness of our
police units.

(spoke in English)

There was a question about our efforts with
regard to women. I think that there is now greater
awareness among police-contributing countries
regarding the importance of providing us with more
women peacekeepers. Most of our police-contributing
countries are gradually increasing the number of
women formed police units. We have a number of heads
of police components who are women. There is already
awareness of the issue. What is important now is to
continue to encourage the police-contributing countries
to maintain those efforts and to make sure that there is
adequate training, not only for female police officers
and senior leadership, but also to make people aware
of the importance of having a female-friendly work
environment and to include women in our police and
military contingents.

There was another question regarding the gender
perspective. I think this has to do with training and
analysis. We are making ongoing efforts to enhance
gender-sensitive training, which I mentioned previously,
and have gender advisers and other staff in our mission
who are engaged in gender-sensitive conflict analysis.

The representative of the United States asked
a question about major shortcomings we still find in
units we wish to deploy. I will mention a few. First of
all, I think it is fair to say that we still have equipment
deficits. There was a reference to the shortcomings of
some units with regard to key protective equipment,
including, in some cases, mine-protected vehicles. On
that issue, the percentage of units with severe equipment
deficits has decreased globally, but we still have to
continue in that direction. As the Council knows, we
are promoting all kinds of innovative ways of filling
those gaps, including with the concept of equipment-
contributing countries or any kind of partnership.

I would also mention two important areas. I
already mentioned the first area - the importance of
continuing our efforts to increase the number of women
in our units. The second deficit we are facing has to do
with language. We are too often confronted with not
enough formed police units and, particularly police
officers, with adequate skills in the languages that
are common in the areas where we have peacekeeping
operations deployed. In that regard, I would mention
French and Arabic. We do encourage our troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially those where
neither French nor Arabic is commonly spoken, to make
a specific effort to train at least some of their officers
in those languages. Of course, having additional skills
in local languages is also very important. I think
the question of language is generally important in
our peace operations, but it is even more so when it
comes to police, and we are strongly encouraging our
police-contributing countries to continue their language
efforts. Moreover, this area lends itself to partnerships.

