Mr. Daratzikis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union firmly believes that the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa constitutes one of the major
challenges of the international community at the dawn
of the twenty-first century. In this regard, we recognize
the importance of the report of the Secretary-General
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa.

The management of the intra-State and inter-State
conflicts that still plague significant parts of the
African continent and assistance to African countries
emerging from such conflict situations, should, in our
view, be among the highest priorities of the United
Nations system. In that connection, the European
Union strongly supports the action taken by the United
Nations, in particular by the Security Council, in the
fields of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building.

The establishment by the Security Council of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa and the Economic and Social
Council's establishment of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on African Countries Emerging from Conflict, together
with the adoption by the General Assembly of the
resolution on the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, have provided useful mechanisms to
address the multiple needs of those countries. At the
same time, those actions indicate that there is an
interactive relationship between security and
development, as both are indispensable for the
achievement of peace and sustainable development.
The European Union welcomes the continued
involvement of the international financial institutions
in this process. They have an essential role to play in
consolidating peace in countries emerging from
conflict and in supporting efforts towards long-term
growth and development.

Identifying and addressing the multidimensional
root causes of conflicts in Africa is another important
element in the long fight for peace and stability in the
region. Dealing with issues such as socio-economic
inequities and inequalities, systematic ethnic
discrimination, the denial of human rights, disputes
over political participation or long-standing grievances
over land, the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, the plight of refugees and internally
displaced persons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources is of critical importance in the process of
moving from conflict management to prevention and
final resolution. In our View, the existence of
appropriate and effective mechanisms and institutions,
including good governance and rule of law, as well as
respect for human rights and addressing fundamental
inequities, are of great importance for the early
prevention of conflicts and a durable peace in the
continent.

The European Union believes that a
comprehensive approach to the root causes of conflicts
in Africa would also benefit from enhanced
cooperation between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. In that regard, we look forward
to having a fruitful discussion at the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, where item 40 (b) of
the preliminary agenda provides the appropriate
framework for further inputs to emerge.

The European Union considers that the two
upcoming Security Council missions to the region will
serve as a pointed reminder of the acute interest and
engagement of the international community in Africa,
especially at a time when conflicts in certain parts
seem to be intensifying and even spreading to
neighbouring countries. The missions will also
contribute to the Council's better understanding of the
complex situations at hand and offer a valuable
opportunity for interaction with the various players on
the ground.

Within the framework of the Europe-Africa
dialogue, we have been working together to develop
common approaches to this issue. The Cairo Summit's
follow-up has indeed been showing our mutual
commitment to this endeavour.

The European Union has been constant in its
support of the efforts for regional and subregional
cooperation and has been actively engaged in various
relevant initiatives aimed at enhancing peacekeeping
capacities in Africa. We encourage a close relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations, inter alia, the Economic
Community of West African States, and we commend
the recent efforts of those organizations in the area of
peacekeeping operations in Africa.

The European Union also welcomes the efforts of
the Secretariat's Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to work closely with all relevant actors in
Africa at the regional, subregional and national levels,
in particular for the enhancement of the capabilities of
troop contributors and in capacity-building for regional
and subregional organizations. We welcome an active
role for the United Nations, specifically in the areas of
information-sharing, promoting transparency,
mobilizing support and stimulating contacts between
recipients and donors of assistance, for example, in
training, equipment and logistics.

The establishment of the African Union was a
particularly important development for the African
continent. It has created new opportunities for
strengthened economic cooperation, political
partnership and cultural exchange between our two
continents.

The European Union strongly welcomes the firm
commitment of the African Union to peace and
security. The decision taken at the African Union
summit in Durban in July 2002 to establish an African
Peace and Security Council and an African standby
force for conducting peace support operations is a
decisive and forward-looking step. The European
Union considers that its implementation, including the
swift ratification of the protocol relating to the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council in
order to ensure its timely entry into force, would be a
major achievement by the African Union member
States. The European Union stands ready to continue
its support geared towards strengthening African
conflict prevention and resolution capabilities, in
particular at the continental and regional levels.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in an
emerging new age of political and economic
development in Africa, the European Union will
continue to contribute to Africa in as many sectors as
possible and in every possible way, including through
improved cooperation here at the United Nations,
where the issue of promoting peace and security in
Africa must continue to receive the highest level of
priority and urgency.

