Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I wish to
assure you of the full cooperation and support of the
Jamaican delegation as you seek to carry out your
onerous tasks.

I wish also to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for his briefing on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for introducing the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/200l/l 132).

When we last discussed this issue in the Council,
the High Representative reminded us that the work of
the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was predicated on empowering the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and on bringing the
country even closer to the European mainstream. For
its part, the Security Council has been guided by the
intent and the provisions of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, and we have used the timelines of the
peace implementation plan as an indicator of progress.
We have received regular updates on the incremental
progress being made in police and judicial reform,
training law enforcement personnel, economic
reconstruction, the return of refugees and reconciliation
efforts. All of these are necessary for completing a
programme of work that will need to see further
progress if the core mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is to
be completed by December 2002.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for the systematic
approach that has been taken, which has resulted in the
completion of 43 of the 66 projects into which the
mandate implementation plan had been refined.
Judicial and police reform have received priority. Steps
have been taken to ensure ethnically diverse
recruitment of police and appointment of police
commissioners, and to ensure adequate training of the
police in democratic policing methods.

We are pleased with the continued progress in the
work of the State Border Service, which now monitors
75 per cent of the borders and which is expected to be
fully deployed by September 2002. The creation of a
police service independent of UNMIBH and the
lowering of cross-border crime by December 2002 are
also examples of the strides which we hope will be
made. These achievements, which are discussed in
paragraph 32 of the Secretary-General's report, are
worthy of commendation. We also commend Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Ethiopia and Eritrea and in
East Timor.

With regard to the judiciary, we are aware that
UNMIBH has had an uphill task, although
improvements have been made. Problems still exist,
however, including in the fight against corruption and
judicial misconduct. We are particularly concerned
that, as stated in paragraph 15 of the Secretary-
General's report, judicial misconduct has compromised
prosecutions of perpetrators of ethnic violence, police
misconduct and trafficking in human beings. We
encourage the continued focus of the Independent
Judicial Commission on overhauling the judiciary.

Political cohesion and neutrality remain elusive,
and overall process is stifled by the continued
promotion of national and ethnic differences.
Nationalist actions eat away at progress, and the
problems in the Republika Srpska have weakened the
political framework. We continue to urge the parties to
work together in a spirit of national unity. We also
believe that priority should continue to be given to
lessening the reliance of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
donor support and to the prevailing high rate of
unemployment and lack of investment. We recognize
that economic activity has been affected by other
problems, such as political corruption, and by a lack of
clear and transparent policies among political
authorities. Indeed, resolution 1357 (2001), which we
adopted earlier this year, reminds us that

"the continued willingness of the international
community and major donors to assume the
political, military and economic burden of
implementation and reconstruction efforts will be
determined by the compliance and active
participation by all the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in implementing the Peace
Agreement and rebuilding a civil society".

(para. 2)

In the short term, a certain level of economic
viability is needed to encourage the return of refugees,
for future access to the European mainstream and to
stimulate long-term growth, leading to economic
sustainability. We therefore call on the political
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate in
the creation of a climate conducive to economic
growth. Fundamental economic reform must go hand in
hand with improvements to the political framework.

The Secretary-General has called for an early
decision on a follow-up police mission in the territory
to ensure timely planning and a smooth transition. We
look forward to receiving detailed plans for
streamlining the international presence and for this
follow-up mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, bearing
in mind the progress already made and the challenges
ahead.

It is a measure of UNMIBH's success that the
Secretary-General believes that, after December 2002,
the police mission could be approximately one quarter
of the present strength of UNMIBH.

As we continue to examine the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is important that a regional
perspective be maintained if there is to be a
comprehensive and lasting peace. Coordination on
common problems and goals such as reconciliation and
the creation of a multi-ethnic society must continue to
be pursued.

In this regard, we are pleased with the recent
cooperation of police at the regional level and the
approval, on 12 September, of a regional strategy to
combat illegal migration, organized crime and
terrorism. The Special Trafficking Operations
Programme (STOP), which has been hampered in
Bosnia and Herzegovina by weaknesses in the legal
system, must be an integral part of this regional
cooperation.

We would also like to reiterate the importance we
attach to the pledged commitment of the parties to
cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia.

In closing, we wish to commend the work of the
High Representative and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and their efforts to place greater
emphasis on judicial and police reform, economic
growth, the increase in refugee return, the promotion of
reconciliation and on preparing Bosnia and
Herzegovina for entry into the European mainstream.

