Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond
Mulet, for his briefing, and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for participating in
this debate by videoconference, which is a welcome
practice at this time of budgetary constraints. I also
welcome the presence here in the Chamber of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo.
We begin this year in the hope that a dynamic of
commitment will follow in the wake of the recent
period of increased tensions. We have reason to be
optimistic. The dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, launched about a year ago and facilitated by
the European Union, has yielded positive results. The
authorities of Serbia and Kosovo have established a
regular channel for communication; and they have
concluded several agreements, aimed at improving the
daily lives of the population, whose effects are
beginning to be felt. Nonetheless, much remains to be
done.

These first efforts towards the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo are steps in the
right direction. We encourage Belgrade and Pristina to
constructively and pragmatically continue the dialogue
by reaching agreement on pending issues. We are
convinced in particular that agreement is possible on
the participation of Kosovo in regional forums.

Political courage will definitely be required on
the part of both sides. The parties must not succumb to
the temptation to turn inward that can arise in a
difficult economic and social context. They must
continue to work towards the compromises required for
the two countries to achieve regional reconciliation and
European rapprochement. The stability of the Balkans
as a whole is at stake.

The Secretary-General rightly highlights in his
report (S/2012/72) the positive rhetoric used by leaders
in Pristina and Belgrade, which we welcome. In that
context, it is important for Prime Minister Thaci to
convince the Kosovo Serbs that Serbians and Albanians
have a shared future and common interests in northern
Kosovo. We call on the Kosovo government to act in
order to ensure the peaceful integration of northern
Kosovo by inviting its authorities to come to the table
to discuss the issue. The autonomy of northern Kosovo
within the legal framework of Kosovo is in the
interests of Kosovo, its stability and its regional and
European integration, because the primary goal of the
two countries is to rejoin their European family. Those
who continue to use ethnic nationalism as a political
platform are in the wrong century.

We have also noted the recent statements made
by President Tadie. We welcome with interest his four-
point proposal calling for the implementation of
decentralization, guarantees for the Kosovo Serbs,
status for the Serbian Orthodox Church and its holy
sites, and the settlement of property issues. Those
proposals will open the way to a lasting reconciliation
between Kosovo Serbs and Albanians without bringing
into question the independence and territorial integrity
of Kosovo. The Ahtisaari Plan offers a solid basis on
which the parties can build to establish broad
autonomy for Serbs in the north, consolidate the rights
of minorities and protect their religious heritage.

Let me turn now to the situation on the ground in
northern Kosovo. We hope that the agreements reached
in Brussels will make it possible, if not to reduce
tensions, at least to ease the daily lives of its
inhabitants, who are the primary victims of those on
both sides who have an interest in triggering incidents
and allowing for the emergence of a lawless zone
conducive to all types of trafficking.

Our substantive position remains unchanged. The
police officers and soldiers deployed in the framework
of NATO and the European Union cannot be seen as
parties to the conflict. Any attack on them is
unacceptable, as is any obstacle to their freedom of
movement. The international community is present in
Kosovo to maintain security and stability on the
ground, including by ensuring respect for freedom of
movement and enhancing the rule of law, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council.

We welcomed the call made by the President of
Serbia to lift the barricades in northern Kosovo. Once
again, we call on Belgrade to bring to bear all of its
influence to re-establish freedom of movement there
and to fully implement all of the agreements already
reached, in particular the agreement on the integrated
management of crossing points. We also call on the
Serbian authorities to cooperate fully with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission. Our requests
and expectations are, of course, the same with respect
to Pristina.

I should like to say one last word on the current
investigation into the allegations of organ trafficking
contained in the Marty report. In the light of the
seriousness of those allegations, France would like the
truth to be known, and, if the allegations are found to
be true, for those responsible to be brought to justice.

That is why we supported the creation of the
l9-member Special Investigative Task Force of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the appointment of a very experienced
individual, Clint Williamson, as its Lead Prosecutor.
His actions throughout his career are well known in
this Chamber. His impartiality is unquestionable. We
expect the Task Force to conduct its investigation in
Kosovo and beyond its borders, which it can do in
cases involving crimes committed by citizens of
Kosovo. I note that the States of the region have
expressed their confidence in Mr. Williamson and
assured him of their full cooperation on the political
and legal levels.

We are particularly encouraged by the
commitments made in that regard by the Prime
Minister of Albania, as confirmed in the letter from the

Albanian authorities addressed to the President of the
Security Council on 6 February. I am also pleased to
note that the Lead Prosecutor will rely in part on the
work already carried out by some institutions, in
particular the Council of Europe. Finally, I should like
to emphasize that, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Williamson will also
investigate allegations of mistreatment, detentions,
abductions and killings during the reporting period.

In our view, EULEX has the resources, the will
and the ability to complete this complex investigation
in an impartial and independent manner, provided that
it can work without political interference and in respect
for the basic rules of confidentiality applicable to such
matters. Naturally, EULEX must be able to guarantee
witness protection. In that regard, we also expect it to
provide the Security Council with periodic updates
containing the most accurate possible information on
the steps taken to pursue the investigation. Those
updates can be included in the quarterly reports of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

