Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The draft resolution (S/20lS/1005) presented today
for adoption in the area of international justice
encompasses two central aspects of the work of the ad
hoc tribunals and the Residual Mechanism. The first
pertains to the extension of the mandates of judges
and the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, which is absolutely necessary
in the context of the completion strategy. The second
has to do with the launching and conclusion of the
first review process of the Mechanism, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010). Having taken on the
unprecedented task of leading the first review process
of the Residual Mechanism, allow me to refer to the
various stages of the process, which will conclude
today with the adoption of this draft resolution.

Following several meetings ofthe Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, on 16 November
the Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/20lS/2l. That statement constitutes a veritable
road map towards meeting the provisions of resolution
1966 (2010). A special report was then prepared by
the Mechanism itself, as well as one by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services. The Informal Working
Group took up both reports at a special meeting held
in December. On that ocassion, the first in series
of comments and questions were transmitted to the
Mechanism's officials for their prompt response.

At the last formal meeting of the Informal Working
Group, on 7 December, Mechanism President Theodor
Meron and Prosecutor Hassan Jallow comprehensively
answered the questions raised by the various members.
Following the meeting, the Chair of the Group raised the
possibility of submitting additional written questions
without need for further consultations.

Finally, taking into account the exchange of views
concerning the operation of the Mechanism in its
first few years of existence, members of the Informal
Working Group considered it important that the
text of the draft resolution on this issue refer to the
recommendations that emerged from that dialogue. The
text of the draft resolution before us reflects the views
and recommendations expressed by the Working Group
during the review process.

This draft resolution will likely mark the end of
Chile's term as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals for the period 2014 to 2015.
It was with great pleasure that we attended the closure
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We also noted the progress made and the ongoing
challenges in contributing to the fight against impunity
on the part of both the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the Mechanism. My country is
convinced that cooperation on the completion strategy
represents one of the most direct ways of contributing
to international justice in cases of crimes against
humanity. Our commitment therefore remains intact.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our
appreciation to all who have contributed to the
functioning of the Tribunals and the Mechanism,
with a special mention of the constant support of the
Secretariat and the Office of the Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs. Our gratitude also goes
out to the leadership of those offices, as well as to
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares and Mr. Stephen Mathias
and his colleagues Mr. Paul Oertly, Ms. Ana Peyros,
Ms. Tiyanjana Mphepo and Ms. Philomena Cleobury.

