Mr. Garcia de Viedma (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): As other delegations have done, may I first
convey the sadness and condolences of the Spanish
delegation at the death of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, a symbol of the
identity and aspirations of the Palestinian people. He
showed the way towards the attainment of those
national aspirations, which we hope can be achieved
peacefully in the near future thanks to the efforts of all.

Spain also fully supports the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of the Netherlands
on behalf of the European Union.

I thank High Representative Lord Ashdown for
the excellent report that he has just introduced to the
Council and that summarizes the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We also appreciate the statement made by
the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Ivanic'.

Lord Ashdown's statement paints a reasonably
optimistic picture. Nine years after the Dayton
Agreement, we have advanced considerably towards
the implementation of its provisions. The enormous
task entrusted to the High Representative - involving
no less than helping to launch an entire country on a
new start and to adopt effective domestic measures and
reliable foreign policies - is yielding fruit.

In its two-fold capacity as a member of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European
Union, Spain emphasizes the importance of the
publication of two documents to which the High
Representative refers in his report. First is the
European Commission Feasibility Study of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's readiness to begin negotiations on a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union, which identifies 16 general
conditions for opening those negotiations; second is
NATO's publication of reform benchmarks to be
implemented by Bosnia and Herzegovina for entry in
the Partnership for Peace. The issuance of those
documents is in itself a sign that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving towards integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures. They have also
had a direct impact on the country's situation, because
they act as a strong stimulus to the reform process.

We note the enactment of highly important
legislation for the establishment of the rule of law,
such as the creation of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council and the State Investigation and
Protection Agency. We should also stress the
strengthening of economic rules, such as through the
adoption of the Law on Public Enterprises, the Law on
Investment of Public Funds and the Law on Public
Procurement. Progress made in institution-building
through the restructuring of the police and public
administration, as well as the creation and organization
of the Ministry of Defence and of intelligence services,
is also encouraging.

The explicit recognition by the Republika Srpska
authorities of the atrocities perpetrated in Srebrenica in
1995 is also significant, although further cooperation is
required with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Spain is following ongoing events in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with great interest, especially at this
important time on the eve of the transfer of the tasks of
NATO's Stabilization Force to a European Union
mission with a military component. We are convinced
that the transfer, once endorsed by the Security
Council, will be carried out with the utmost order and
efficiency and that it will confirm the hopes and
aspirations of all, starting with Bosnian citizens of all
communities, who are the ones most directly interested
in a European future for their country.

One symbolic achievement of recent months was
the opening on 23 July of the reconstructed Old Bridge
in Mostar. Although grave problems persist in that city,
the opening was itself a milestone in the normalization
of a city that was particularly hard hit by the conflict.
As a member of the European Union and NATO, Spain
is firmly committed to building bridges in order fully
to implement the Peace Agreement and to achieve the
steady integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into
Euro-Atlantic structures.

