Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for today's briefing.

Implementing the mandate of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is an incredibly challenging task. A
large part of that mandate - with a force of more than
12,000 personnel in a country the size of Mali - takes
the right leader, and MINUSMA found that leader in
Major General Jean-Paul Deconinck. He completed
his command on 2 October, and we are grateful for his
leadership during his time as Force Commander. We
welcome the new Force Commander of MINUSMA,
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre, and thank
him for his commitment in taking on such a challenging
assignment. Most importantly, we want to thank the
soldiers, police and civilians of MINUSMA, who risk
their lives every day to support the Mission in Mali.
That includes the latest troop-contributing countries,
Canada and Jordan. The United States is grateful to all
troop contributors to the Mission, and we honour their
collective commitments and sacrifices to the effort to
stabilize Mali. We also commend MINUSMA'S efforts
this past summer in supporting the presidential elections.

We are concerned, however, by reports of some
troop-contributing countries not being deployed with
all the equipment that they had committed to bringing.
That heightens the risk to their units and to the overall
Mission, and we call on troop-contributing countries
to follow through on their equipment commitments.
We share the Secretary-General's view regarding the
political progress made in Mali since MINUSMA's
mandate renewal in June. The pact for peace, which was
finalized this week, the completion of the presidential
elections and the establishment of President Keita's
Government provide cause for some cautious optimism
in reinvigorating the peace process. But the work must
not stop here. The Government of Mali and the signatory
parties must use that momentum to make clear and
swift gains in implementing the key provisions of the
road map.
Increased reports of violent extremist attacks
against MINUSMA peacekeepers, Malian and
international security forces, and especially civilians,
as well as the growing humanitarian crisis in the centre
of Mali, are extremely unsettling. The heartbreaking
story this week from the village of Telly that gunmen
had killed approximately a dozen civilians reminds
us of the urgency of finding an enduring solution.
This year's mandate asked MINUSMA to continue
to support the Government of Mali in stabilizing key
population centres in the north, centre and other areas
where civilians are at risk. We call on the Government
and the Mission to protect civilians and strengthen
community outreach mechanisms so as to end the
intercommunal violence that is propagated by self-
proclaimed self-defence groups. We also call on the
Malian forces to respect human rights and comply with
applicable international law in all aspects of operations,
and we urge the Government to continue to pursue
accountability for those responsible for past human
rights violations and abuses.

Council resolution 2423 (2018) is clear - signatory
parties must show significant progress or face changes to
MINUSMA after the expiration of its current mandate.
We implore all parties to take that timeline seriously
and show the world their commitment to a peaceful
and stable Mali through the rapid implementation of
the key provisions of the road map stipulated in this
year's mandate.

