Mr. Berml'ldez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank Ambassadors Rycroft, Seek and Delattre, as well
as Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, for
their briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the Deputy Secretary-General and wish her
every success in her new functions.

The situation in the Lake Chad basin is alarming.
We are talking about approximately 10 million people
who urgently need humanitarian aid. Unfortunately,
this crisis does not get much traction in the media,
and the international community does not know much
about it.

The multidimensional nature of the humanitarian
crisis in the Lake Chad basin has a number of causes
and serious consequences. As we said in the briefing
on 12 January (see S/PV.7861), the situation has become
what it is because of many aggravating factors, such as
the grievous security situation, undermined primarily
by Boko Haram's terrorist acts, and the lack of food and
other basic necessities for those populations.

In order to verify the seriousness of the
crisis and get a first-hand account from the most
relevant actors - leaders, United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations, displaced persons,
refugees and the military - a Security Council mission
was organized to visit Cameroon, Chad, the Niger
and Nigeria. The information we obtained was valuable,
as were many of the testimonies collected, despite
the fact that they described sad, even heartbreaking
personal experiences.

For many years now the Lake Chad basin has been
witnessing a multifaceted, structural crisis, which
demands the development of activities that promote
stability, mitigate the threat of terrorism and feed the
population. We are well aware that this is an insecure
region with very high population growth rates, and one
that has suffered from the effects of climate change,
poverty and low levels of social investment. It is therefore
essential and urgent to ensure that the Governments of
the four countries concerned implement public policies
that prioritize the allocation of resources to education,
health services and job creation. Only then will they
be able to tackle the terrible living conditions. To
make matters worse, Boko Haram has been terrorizing
civilians in many communities, resulting in a flood of
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons and
refugees. The international community should spare no
effort to provide the region with the right tools.

Uruguay considers it important to recognize the
work ofthe specialized United Nations agencies and the
donor countries that have made good on their pledges,
most recently at the Oslo Conference, atopic that we went
into in detail during the mission with representatives
of the donor countries. We also commend the work of
the Multinational Joint Task Force and the progress it
has made in combating Boko Haram, in a clear example
of how crucial such coordinated regional efforts are
in these kinds of crises, when those who undermine
stability do not recognize borders or countries and,
worse still, violate the fundamental human rights of
entire communities, where women and children suffer
the most.

Based on this mission, in which we participated- and
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of the Security Council - the Council has
now committed to continuing to address the root causes
that have produced this long-ignored crisis.

