Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is a pleasure for me to welcome the
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr.
Ghafoorzai, to this Chamber today.

Although a month has already passed since the
Secretary-General submitted his report on Afghanistan to
the Security Council and to the General Assembly, the
situation in that country continues to retain its alarming
momentum. The military situation is deteriorating, and
efforts towards a political settlement are at a standstill.
Human rights violations continue, in particular
discrimination against women. Afghanistan remains a
source of the illegal spread of drugs and of international
terrorism. Thus, the situation in that country continues to
represent a threat to international peace and security in
the region, and is fraught with the danger of a large-scale
humanitarian catastrophe.
Russia is deeply concerned over this course of
events. Unfortunately, the warring factions in Afghanistan
have not heeded numerous appeals, inter alia from the
Security Council and the General Assembly, regarding the
need to renounce attempts to resolve the conflict by
military means.

We are particularly alarmed by the fact that the
Taliban movement continues to try to press ahead with its
military effort. Moreover, as is well known, because of
the Taliban position, there has been absolutely no result
from the meetings of the Intra-Afghan Working Group,
held under the auspices of the United Nations Special
Mission. After those meetings, the Head of the Special
Mission, Mr. Holl, undertook efforts to convene a
political meeting of the Afghan parties, but these too have
so far yielded no results.

We call upon all of the Afghan parties - and first
and foremost the Taliban movement - to implement
United Nations decisions, to cooperate fully with the
United Nations Special Mission and to embark seriously
on the path of negotiations. Only thus, and not through a
build-up of military pressure, will it be possible to
achieve a lasting peace in Afghanistan. A solution to the
problem of achieving national reconciliation and a stable
political settlement to this conflict, which has gone on for
many years, is possible through the establishment of a
fully representative and broad-based transitional

 

government. For this purpose, the Afghan parties must
immediately cease hostilities, renounce the use of force and
put aside their differences in the name of the higher interest
of the Afghan people.

The Russian Federation fully supports the activities of
the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan, headed
by Mr. H011, and is ready to continue to render the
necessary assistance. The United Nations must play a
central role in Afghan affairs, inter alia in ensuring the
proper coordination of international efforts aimed at
supporting a settlement and in exerting pressure on the
Afghan parties. We believe indeed that the United Nations,
and in particular the Special Mission, has every opportunity
to enhance its role.

It is difficult to agree with the assertion that the
dreadful conflict in Afghanistan seems somehow to have
remained on the sidelines of the Security Council's
attention. In our View, in carrying out its functions under
the Charter, the Council must continue constantly to follow
the development of the situation in Afghanistan and to react
adequately to it through the adoption of appropriate
measures. The Council's previous decisions contain a good
basis for searching for means to settle the conflict. These
decisions must be implemented. One of these is that
supplying weapons to the warring factions and rendering
them other types of military and technical assistance must
cease.

States with an influence on Afghan affairs must make
every effort to move the situation to political channels. We
hope that the meeting to be convened by the Secretary-
General, the second meeting of concerned countries on
Afghanistan, will provide an additional impetus for reaching
agreement on approaches to an Afghan settlement.

The complex humanitarian situation also requires
further measures to ease the suffering of the Afghan people.
We are deeply convinced that humanitarian assistance must
not be used as a bargaining chip in this struggle among the
factions to win over to their side the population of one or
another region of the country. We believe it is important
that humanitarian organizations should render assistance to
all those who are in need, throughout the entire territory of
Afghanistan.

The Russian Federation is making maximum efforts to
promote the cause of a settlement in Afghanistan. In close
consultations with its Central Asian partners in the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) - Kazakstan,
Kyrgyztan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan - Russia is carefully
following the situation and is taking steps aimed at
promoting political dialogue and preventing the Afghan
crisis from having a negative impact on the entire region
of Central Asia.

At the same time, we are maintaining our useful and
extremely productive contacts on Afghanistan with other
States of the region, in particular India, Iran and Pakistan.
We believe that the coordinated efforts of all concerned
States will help in reaching a formula acceptable to all for
a settlement in Afghanistan.

The Russian delegation believes that the Security
Council will be dealing with Afghan issues in the future.
We believe that, following the results of today's
discussion of the situation in Afghanistan, it will be
necessary for the Security Council to adopt a presidential
statement, that once again clearly reaffirms the basic
approach of the United Nations to a settlement in
Afghanistan.

