Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): For over four years now the
Liberian people have been at the mercy of factional leaders
and parties whose desire for power, as well as the allure of
high office, would appear to have blinded them to the need
for a negotiated settlement to their political differences. The
months immediately preceding December last year marked
such a deterioration in the political and security situation in
Liberia that the number of military observers of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) had to be
drastically reduced, the humanitarian situation worsened,
and the area controlled by the Military Observer Group of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG) effectively became limited to no more than 15
per cent of the country.

Against that background, my Government and other
member States of ECOWAS welcome the recent agreement
brokered in Accra by the current Chairman of ECOWAS,
which builds upon the Yamoussoukro, Cotonou and
Akosombo agreements and includes a timetable for the
implementation of a programme leading to a cease-fire and
to elections.

Taking into account the chain of broken promises and
the bad faith so far exhibited by the parties and factions in
Liberia in relation to previous commitments, one would be
justified in being pessimistic about, if not outright
dismissive of, the possibilities and prospects of this latest
agreement. As if to justify this pessimism, we have since
learned that the latest attempt in Accra to agree on the
composition of a transitional Council for Liberia has
aborted. We regret this outcome and hope that the great
expectations that were only beginning to gain momentum
are not permanently lost.

However, because the ultimate solution to the
Liberian conflict must rest with the Liberians, one cannot
but hope that the parties will seize the opportunity of the
moment, however sad it might seem to be, in the
realization that it is futile to continue along the
destructive path of a fratricidal war whose main victims
are innocent civilians, particularly women and children.

The draft resolution before us attests to the
continuing interest of the international community in
helping the Liberians solve their own problems. My
delegation would have favoured an extension of
UNOMIL's mandate for a six-month period, to allow
sufficient time for the initial and critical stage of the
military aspects of the Accra Agreement to commence
and be observed before the Secretary-General presented
his report to the Council. Because of the three-month
duration of the present mandate, such a report by the
Secretary-General would, of necessity, be tentative and
could give the wrong impression of the prospects for
implementing the relevant aspects of the Agreement.

My delegation has always underlined - and this has
also been recently highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace" - that
ECOMOG's operation in Liberia presents a classical
example of cooperation between a regional organization
and the United Nations in peacemaking and peace-
keeping. In this connection, the international community
has a responsibility to continue to assist the process.
Otherwise, the burden on ECOWAS countries, which is
already a matter of great concern to most Governments of
the subregion, will become even more unbearable for
their fragile economies. We look forward with particular
interest to the Secretary-General's forthcoming report -
referred to in operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution
before us - on the assistance needed by ECOWAS
member States in order to maintain their troops in
ECOMOG.

A very important element in the current draft
resolution relates to the continuing flow of weapons into
Liberia in violation of the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 788 (1992). This proliferation of weapons not
only complicates the prospects for disarmament but also
compounds the problems of security and jeopardizes the
safety of ECOMOG and UNOMIL personnel in the
country. It is important, as the current draft resolution
reminds us, that all Member States abide by and comply
with the embargo on deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to Liberia.

 

The Nigerian Government and people continue to
expend enormous human and financial resources on the
ECOMOG operations aimed at restoring peace to the war-
torn country. We are doing so because we are convinced
that Liberia and Liberians should not be left to their own
devices in their moment of travail. What is more, the crisis
in Liberia has implications not only for that country but
also for the stability of the entire subregion of West Africa.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
continuing interest and involvement in the search for a
solution to the crisis in Liberia. We also thank those
Member States and organizations that have provided
financial, logistic and other forms of support to the peace-
keeping operation. We appeal to all Member States for
additional support so that Liberians may soon be able to
resume normal lives and pursue their economic
development and well-being.

