Mr. Nacerodien (South Africa): My delegation
appreciates this opportunity to share our views with the
Security Council at this important debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. The United Nations has made great strides in the
global fight against terrorism. We would like to thank
Ambassador Arias of Spain for his briefing this
morning and for the exemplary manner in which he has
chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

The recent attack on the headquarters of the
United Nations in Baghdad demonstrated the
vulnerability of the Organization, which is above all
else dedicated to promoting peace and security in a
non-partisan manner. It is my Government's view that
to direct an attack against the United Nations is to
combat the collective efforts of the international
community aimed at promoting peace and improving
the living conditions of the most unfortunate.

The death of three United States diplomats in
Gaza two days ago is a regrettable reminder of how
unsafe and unruly the world can become. If the
international community is going to succeed in
maintaining global peace and security, we will need to
adopt a comprehensive approach to dealing with
conflict situations.

In dealing with global terrorism, the international
community will need to address the conditions that
make it possible for terrorism to thrive. We cannot
hope to make progress so long as we ignore factors
such as poverty, human rights abuses and foreign
occupation, which prompt irrational acts of violence
and self-destruction.

No Government can hope to defeat terrorism on
its own, because terrorists now operate on a global
scale, virtually oblivious to State boundaries and
equipped with the latest technologies that allow them
to operate international networks. In combating
terrorism it is equally important that our national and
multilateral efforts respect international law, human
rights and global norms regarding the protection of
civil liberties. We believe that international law and
human rights should constitute the bedrock of our
collective efforts to eradicate the scourge of terrorism,
because it distinguishes us, as law-abiding people,
from those who target innocent civilians for political
gain.

My delegation believes that no legislative
measures and no amount of police action, intelligence-
gathering or military force can ever guarantee our
safety while millions of disaffected and marginalized
people across the world continue to suffer the threat of
hunger and debilitating poverty. If continuously
overlooked, the insecurity derived from lack of food,
shelter and other basic human and social needs can
become a serious cause of instability and conflict.

It is essential to bear in mind that combating
terrorism is one of the number of often interrelated
priority tasks of the Organization. In Southern Africa,
as in many other parts of the world, a central challenge
remains the eradication of poverty and
underdevelopment, which constitute a serious threat to
peace and security. To that end, the campaign against
terrorism should also take into account the poor of the
world, who require resources to extricate themselves
from their condition of poverty and underdevelopment.

Terrorists take advantage of the sense of despair
and frustration that arises when people are forced to
live without hope and without freedom. Terrorists also
capitalize on situations where States violate human
rights during their counter-terrorism operations.
Whenever States resort to making arbitrary arrests,
detaining people without trial, subjecting suspects to
cruel or degrading treatment or singling out certain
ethnic or religious groups, terrorists are given new
recruitment opportunities. It is our belief that objective
criteria need to be developed by the Security Council
when drawing up lists of names of individuals and
entities committing terrorist acts, taking care not to
single out certain cultures, religions or countries.

We need to be aware of the fact that there are still
people living under foreign occupation, who are
entitled under international law to resist such
occupation. We also need to be cautious when we
regulate or monitor cultural practices such as informal
donations to charitable causes, in order to uphold civil
liberties. Although charities may be exploited by
terrorists, we should avoid frustrating the noble
objectives that such charities were created to serve, in
the process further alienating entire communities.

An issue that remains of concern to South Africa
relates to perceptions that are created by
unsubstantiated travel advisories by other Governments
and the media regarding the potential for terrorist
activities in third countries. Due to the negative impact
of those advisories on the economies of the affected
countries, it is imperative that credible intelligence
concerning potential terrorist attacks be shared with the
relevant foreign authorities so that preventive action
may be taken.

South Africa remains fully committed to the
struggle against terrorism. Efforts to enhance our
counter-terrorism capabilities under the auspices of the
United Nations are complemented by the collective
actions of our African partners through multilateral
organizations such as the African Union, the
Commonwealth and the Southern African Development
Community. My delegation continues to value South
Africa's close working relationship with the CTC's
counter-terrorism experts, especially at a time when
our Government is in the process of preparing our
fourth national report on counter-terrorism.

