Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, let me congratulate the newly elected members of the Security Council and wish them every success. In particular, I congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month. We are confident that it will lead the work of the Council wisely and competently. I would like also to convey the greetings of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Sameh Shokry, to his Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam. We thank him for his kind invitation to let us participate in this important discussion. Our Minister was unable to attend this meeting owing to an urgent prior engagement. This meeting comes at a critical time, as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the adoption of the Charter. We are proud that Egypt was one of the States that contributed to the drafting of the Charter. This critical moment requires us to scrutinize the successes of and the challenges facing the Charter, while seeking the means to ensure that the United Nations and the Charter meet present and future needs. We should like to address those points in this statement. With regard to successes, Egypt believes that the Charter is well established due to its principles, which represent firm international rules of coexistence that cannot be undone or questioned. The Charter stresses the principles of sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of others, good-neighbourliness, the non-use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes, all of which serve as the foundations for stable relations among States. Without them, international systems cannot function properly, as evidenced by the many crises that are plaguing our world owing to non-respect for the principles of the Charter. Concerning the challenges, there are internal ones emanating from the Charter and obstructing its implementation, and there are external emerging challenges, owing to the fact that it was adopted 75 years ago. With regard to the emerging challenges, the Charter faces a new and different reality from that of the time of its adoption in the aftermath of the Second World War. Our world today faces challenges of terrorism and extremism that do not differentiate between religions and races while supported and financed by certain States for political purposes. We are also faced by other challenges as some work to dismantle State institutions and plunge others into a morass of identity conflicts. Regrettably, the situation in the Middle East is a case in point reflecting these two challenges, and in particular the situations in Syria, Libya and Yemen. We also face challenges related to climate change, water scarcity and cooperation on the use of transboundary water resources. Addressing such issues requires cooperation and coordination among all States, as they have serious negative repercussions on various regions and must be dealt with. In that context, we are currently working to reach an agreement on the rules of operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, and we appreciate the role of the United States and the World Bank in negotiations to that end. With regard to the internal challenges facing the Charter, we can encapsulate them in the following related and overlapping points. The first relates to the commitment of States to implementing the Charter, its principles and the international resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. Egypt has had an excellent track record of commitment to such resolutions over 75 years, which demonstrates that we uphold our obligations under the Charter. That is not, however, the case for everyone. In the Middle East, we see the systematic violation by some of internationally recognized resolutions. The most recent example involves the two memorandums of understanding signed between the Government of Turkey and the Head of the Government of National Accord in Tripoli on 27 November 2019. That is an obvious violation of internationally recognized resolutions, in particular resolution 1970 (2011). Secondly, the use of double standards prevails inside the Organization, in particular with regard to the Palestinian question. Egypt stresses that this question is at the root of all the turbulence in the Middle East. Finding a just and lasting settlement to the Palestinian question, based on international resolutions, would address the main reasons underlying instability in the Middle East. Thirdly, the Security Council rushes to use Chapter VII instead of Chapter VI of the Charter, which calls for taking pre-emptive and preventive diplomatic steps and for activating the role of the International Court of Justice, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 36, on the referral of disputes of a legal nature to the Court, in addition to Article 96, on requesting an advisory opinion from the Court. Fourthly, there is a contradiction in the use of the Charter. On the one hand, it stresses the principle of equality among all States, while on the other hand it affords only five States the right of veto, thereby creating a fundamental imbalance in the effectiveness and credibility of the Council and the United Nations in many situations. Fifthly, we need to review the effectiveness of certain weak implementation tools, particularly those pertaining to sustainable development and the comprehensive concepts of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, while respecting the sovereignty of States. In the light of all those challenges, in order to prevent the United Nations from serving as "a crisis baby-sitter", in the words of the Secretary-General during the debate on this issue in February 2018 (S/PV.8185, p. 3), Egypt stresses the following. First, the Security Council and other United Nations entities need to shoulder their responsibilities, stand firmly against violations of international resolutions and refuse to tolerate States that sponsor terrorism and violate international resolutions. We cannot continue to stand idly by and watch events of external intervention unfold in Libya and Syria without taking action. In that regard, I underscore what the Secretary-General said earlier in his statement with regard to the commitments of States under Article 25 of the Charter. Secondly, States should cooperate in accordance with the principles of the Charter pertaining to good neighbourliness, the peaceful settlement of disputes, mediation with sincere intentions and mediation encouraged by the international community in various disputes. Thirdly, international coordination must _ be enhanced through United Nations frameworks in the fight against terrorism, as well as intelligence-sharing in that regard, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. Fourthly, serious steps should be taken to achieve sustainable development and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The capabilities of developing countries have to be boosted in order to access funds from the private sector. Underdevelopment remains the main driver of conflicts. Addressing disputes requires an approach to manage different stages of conflict, from peacebuilding to sustaining peace. Serious steps must be taken to prevent proliferation and achieve nuclear disarmament. Fifthly, relations between the Security Council and regional organizations must be strengthened in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In that regard, during its current presidency of the African Union, Egypt has worked to enhance the relationship between the African Union and the United Nations regarding peace and security while building on the comparative advantages of each of them. Sixthly, a genuine reform of the Security Council cannot be based on piecemeal or phased solutions; rather, it should work to end the historic injustice against the African continent. Egypt adheres to the Ezulwini Consensus, which calls for the abolishment of the veto or bestowing that right on new permanent members of the Council to address the structural imbalance in the work of the Council. In conclusion, Egypt understands that the United Nations and its Charter are at a critical crossroads. Hence, we emphasize the importance of taking practical steps to ensure that the role played by our Organization continues to be effective and to keep the Organization as a collective forum for the maintenance of peace and security for humankind while meeting the needs of our people for a decent life.
