Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Rwanda on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for its great efforts to preside over the Council's
business. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for
agreeing to convene twice at the request of my country
to discuss the recent developments in Iraq. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well
as his team, in Baghdad and New York, especially in
the difficult circumstances our country is experiencing.

Moreover, I wish to welcome tomorrow's upcoming
visit by the Secretary-General and his team to Iraq at
this delicate stage for my country, as a gesture of his
ongoing support and the support of United Nations
bodies for the political operation and to foster the
establishment of democratic institutions and the
formation of a new Government of national unity.

Notwithstanding the recent terrorist threats in Iraq,
in accordance with the Constitution, the political effort
is fully under way. The third parliamentary elections
in Iraq took place on time and, by every international
standard, they were a success. More than 13 million
Iraqis came out to defy terrorist groups and security
difficulties to vote. The Supreme Court confirmed
those results on 16 June. The first meeting of the
Iraqi Parliament took place on 1 July. The Speaker of
Parliament and his two deputies were chosen on 15 July.
This week, the Parliament will elect the President of
the Republic, who will have the task of nominating
the Prime Minister and forming a new Government
within 30 days. Thereafter, that will be voted on and
achieve support from the entire Iraqi peple, including
all factions.
In our statements before the Council, we
have repeatedly emphasized the importance of
cooperation between States and combating terrorism
as an internationl scourge. Any reluctance to combat
terrorism, whatever the pretext, is a grave error that
will inevitably lead to strengthening international
terrorist organizations, with spillover effects in the
countries of the region. We have therefore continued
to work on the consequences of the continuation of the
conflict in Syria, especially with the establishment of
terrorist organizations such as Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). What we have
warned about is precisely what has happened.

A stream of armed terrorist groups have crossed
the border from Syria into Iraq. Early last month, with
the growth in the strength of ISIS, which enjoys full
logistical, financial and military support from external
sources, ISIS launched a broad attack in areas in the
north and west of our countries, involving a number
of major cities. As a result, Iraqi security forces had
to withdraw. In areas controlled by the terrorist ISIS
organization there have been abductions of diplomats
and the perpetration of massacres against civilians,
as well as mass executions - all of which constitute
war crimes, as United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Navi Pillay has stated.

Terrorist attacks in Iraqi governorates have led to
a mass exodous that has affected more than 1 million
people, who have fled to the Kurdistan region and to
other parts in central and southern Iraq in order to
escape ISIS oppression. Refugees are enduring harsh
conditions during the hot summer, which coincides
with the fast during the holy month of Ramada. The
Government of Iraq, in cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the relevant
United Nations agencies operating in Iraq, is attempting
to mitigate the suffering as much as possible so that the
security forces can regain control over Iraqi territory.

ISIS has established a caliphate State in the
territories it controls, changing its name to the Islamic
State. In recent weeks, as part of an organized and
systematic effort, it has targeted religious facilities and
destroyed holy sites of both Christians and Muslims. It is
also undertaking so-called sexjihad. The terrorist ISIS
organization has issued a decree to compel Christians
to pay heavy penalties or convert to Islam, be murdered
or leave the city of Mosul. As a result, that city is
now devoid of Christians. In that regard, we would
like to express our gratitude to the Security Council
for issuing a statement on Monday 21 July in which it
strongly condemned the persecution of minorities in
Iraq by the terrorist ISIS organization. The most recent
report issued by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human rights, of 18 July, confirms
what the Iraqi Government had asserted, namely, that
the flagrant violations perpetrated by ISIS last month
were crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Iraqi security forces are currently working with
volunteers and tribes in order to confront terrorism
and gradually to restore control. They are doing so
while respecting international humanitarian law and
attempting to avoid civialian casualties as much as
possible, in line with the Iraqi Constitution, which
provides that no one can be arrested or detained without
a warrant and that prisoners have a right to defend
themselves at every stage of an investigation.

Iraq is implementing a balanced international policy
aimed at establishing cooperation with neighbouring
countries and the rest of the world. We have enhanced
our relations with the fraternal State of Kuwait through
a number of agreements. Diplomatic relations are being
restored through the opening of new Consulates in
various Iraqi cities. Iraq is also making every effort to
find the remains of missing Kuwaitis and that country's
national archive. In cooperation with other Government
authorities, the Ministry for Human Rights is carrying
out excavations and investigations in the governorates
of Karbala and Al-Muthanna. Although no remains
have yet been found, Iraq is determined to achieve
tangible results in that regard. Moreover, cooperation
with the Arab Republic of Egypt has been enhanced, as
have relations with Iran, through the signing of bilateral
economic and legal cooperation agreements.

Iraq continues to protect the residents of Camp
Hurriya in Baghdad and to provide them with all of the
necessary humanitarian assistance, even though they
belong to the Mujaheddin e Khalq terrorist group. In
that respect, we commend the efforts of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
in her efforts to relocate the residents of that camp to
other countries and thereby end their illegal status in
Iraq, a situation which has been ongoing for more than
two decades.

We call on the international community to fulfil its
obligations to the residents of that camp and to move
them to third countries, especially given that my country
has fulfilled all ofits international commitments in that
respect.

The Iraqi political leadership is aware that the
national unity Government must take decisive steps to
protect the stability of Iraq as a homogeneous State.
Iraq can overcome the status quo by resolving problems
related to national unity, participation and citizenship.

Moreover, the stability of Iraq is pivotal to the
stability of the region as a whole, but no Government
could possibly ensure political stability in the absence
of security. The terrorist acts that are taking place in
Iraq must be countered strictly through international
and regional cooperation, so that Iraq can restore peace
and security. Hence last month, the Iraqi Government,
in two letters addressed to the Security Council,
stressed the importance of the cooperation of Member
States with Iraq in the joint fight against terrorism. It
specified its logistical requirements and what it needs
Council members and other States Members of the
United Nations to do.

The support of the Security Council for the efforts
of the Iraqi Government to fight terrorism, as reflected
in its resolutions, will remain ineffective as long as
Member States do not implement such resolutions,
especially as concerns cooperation between the
countries of the region, with a view to dismantling
terrorist networks and working together to address
the sources of terrorism, imposing sanctions and
prohibiting activities that encourage Wahhabi thinking.

Failing that, we would warn once again that
allowing an extension of the influence of the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq would undermine the security and
stability of the region as a whole and hence international
peace and security. We therefore seek the Council's
constructive assistance in putting an end to its spread.
Yes, the Council is capable of doing this. The Council is
the principal international organ capable of putting into
effect binding resolutions in order to force countries to
fight terrorism in all its forms.

I would like to stress our Government's desire
to see the mission of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) extended for another year,
as stated in the letter from His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs addressed to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon dated 20 July 2014, in accordance with the
applicable standards stated in resolution 1770 (2007).

In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Mission in providing assistance to the Iraqi Government,
especially humanitarian assistance to refugees and
persons displaced as a result of terrorist attacks, such
as the distribution of tents in order to allow children
to continue to study and cooperation with respect to
starting the polio vaccination campaign.

My delegation praises the visit of Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, to Baghdad and Kurdistan from 15 to 18 July.
In that respect, we reiterate our appreciation and thanks
to Mr. Mladenov and his team for their dedication and
hope that they will continue their efforts to assist Iraq.

