The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

I too would like to thank all three chairmen for
their leadership in our counter-terrorism efforts. Their
hard work and dedication, along with that of their
Committees' staffs, are essential to the success of the
Council's effort to combat terrorism. The Council must
remain focused and resolute in combating the threat of
terrorism, while adapting flexibly to new challenges.
The Council's three Committees must be proactive and
action-oriented, keeping in mind always the
importance of achieving concrete results in the fight
against terrorism.

Today's presentations provide various examples
of initiatives these Committees and their staff bodies
are pursuing, often in collaboration with one another.
Expanding such collaboration is essential. We applaud
the joint initiative to rationalize the reporting that the
three Committees request from States. We also
commend the work of the three staff bodies to
coordinate joint visits and outreach to States and urge
them to do more. All three presentations note efforts to
enhance cooperation with other international and
regional organizations. We urge the Committees and
their staffs to collaborate to ensure that these important
efforts reinforce each other.

Above all, these Committees play an essential
role in monitoring States' implementation of the
counter-terrorism obligations the Council has
established. As they proceed, all three Committees
should examine the important issue of non-compliance.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) should develop concrete standards for
measuring States' efforts to implement resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1540 (2004). The 1267
Committee should develop standards for measuring
States' implementation and enforcement of the
sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999).

Finally, we encourage both the 1267 Committee
and the CTC to devote more attention to the elements
of the resolutions under which they operate that do not
relate to terrorism financing. Resolution 1624 (2005)
contains important language concerning the need for
States to deny terrorists safe haven. It is important for
both bodies to focus more intensively on the provisions
of the resolutions relating to terrorist travel, safe
havens and arms bans.

I should now like to comment specifically on
each presentation. Chairman Loj, the United States
appreciates your effective leadership and welcomes
your report. The CTC and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) play an essential role in ensuring that States
implement their obligations under resolution 1373
(2001), and we welcome your proposals for ways in
which the CTC and its CTED can achieve concrete
results. We look forward to working closely with you
on the important task of identifying best practices
relevant to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). These best practices can be an important way
to give States a better sense of the steps the CTC
expects them to take to implement resolution 1373
(2001).

We welcome the CTC's work to develop a more
pragmatic, focused approach for linking States that
need assistance to enhance their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). As not all needs can be met,
we think that the CTC and CTED can play an
important role in identifying priority needs for
assistance and in conveying that information to donors.
Above all, as the CTED implements the CTC's new
policy on technical assistance, the CTC must strike the
right balance between facilitating the delivery of
technical assistance and monitoring the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC should keep in
mind that work to facilitate technical assistance must
occur in the context of monitoring States'
implementation of their binding obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001).

I appreciate the comments of members regarding
the Committee's work to facilitate States'
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The United
States will endeavour soon to provide the Committee
with information about our efforts to implement that
new resolution.

To Ambassador Mayoral I say that the 1267
Committee has made important strides in the past 120
days. The United States commends that work. We
welcome the Committee's successful cooperation with
Interpol and the concrete results we have seen from
that initiative. The new measures Ambassador Mayoral
described in his briefing will provide important tools to
law enforcement officials around the world and will
strengthen the sanctions regime, especially the travel
ban. The United States hopes that the 1267 Committee
will continue its robust dialogue with other
international and regional organizations, in an effort to
replicate the successes with Interpol. We also hope that
the CTC and the 1540 Committee can use the 1267
Committee's initiative as a model to pursue
comparable efforts.

In his briefing, Ambassador Mayoral spoke about
the 1267 Committee's important work with
Afghanistan and about the Afghan Government's
reconciliation process. The United States fully supports
the reconciliation process. We are pleased that the
Committee is strengthening its dialogue with
Afghanistan on that matter.

I should note that the Monitoring Team is an
invaluable resource for the Committee. The United
States appreciates the Team's professional and high-
quality analysis in all aspects of its 1267 sanctions
regime. We look forward to the Committee's discussion
of the Monitoring Team's fourth report.

I also wish to thank Chairman Burian for his
presentation and for his accomplishments since he
assumed his position in January. Resolution 1540
(2004) is a significant tool for addressing the threat to
international peace and security posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials. We applaud
the Committee's efforts to monitor and promote the
implementation of the resolution. In particular, we
appreciate the Committee's work to examine the
additional information States have provided regarding
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We look forward to the Committee's report to the
Council regarding the results of the former's evaluation
of States' reports. We share Ambassador Burian's
concern that nearly 70 Member States have yet to
report to the Committee. We welcome his proposals to
reach out those States in order to encourage them to
report.

We agree that the Committee's mandate should be
continued, and we are carefully considering what its
future mandate should entail. We look forward to
participating actively in discussions on this issue in the
near future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Pursuant to rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I now give the floor to Ambassador
Pfanzelter of Austria.

