Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I congratulate the Russian Federation
on the way in which it has led the deliberations of the
Security Council this month.

After having carefully listened to our excellent
briefers today, I will pick up on the eloquent comment
made by the Ambassador of Angola: "Enough is
enough." That was very eloquent. The conclusion I have
drawn from the briefers today is that Yemen is facing
a threefold collapse on the humanitarian, political and
economic and financial fronts.

As far as the humanitarian collapse is concerned,
today we have heard a whole slue of figures. I first
would like to pay tribute to the 10,000 victims and then
I would to like to particularly focus on the plight of
the 10 million children suffering from malnutrition
and at risk of losing an entire generation. That goes
hand in hand with the enormous difficulties we are
experiencing in our efforts to provide humanitarian aid
to Yemen. I believe that Samantha Power has urged us
all to do our part to facilitate access to humanitarian
aid in Yemen. We stand committed to her appeal
and join her in calling on all parties. We also have a
humanitarian plan that, regrettably, has been financed
only to 26 per cent so far.

The second crisis that is upon Yemen is a political
collapse. It is political because, on the one hand,
the road map, which in our view is a reasonable and
balanced, has been rejected; and on the other, because
we are seeing indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population. To that end, I align myselfwith the eloquent
statement made by the Ambassador of Uruguay. As far
as the road map is concerned, Mr. Ould Sheikh Ahmed
can rest assured that he has our full support. I know
that he will be returning shortly with a view to crafting
an agreement around the road map, and in those efforts
he will have the full backing of the Spanish delegation.
Regarding the indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, we of course uphold the idea that
said crimes cannot go unpunished.
The third collapse in Yemen is economic and
financial. Before arriving to today's meeting, I had
intended to ask our briefers about the situation of the
Central Bank reserves. Well, we have such excellent
briefers that the economic and financial situation in
Yemen could not be clearer. The situation is critical;
they are going to have to stop paying salaries, which
will further exacerbate the political and humanitarian
collapse. What will happen if salaries go unpaid? The
result will be bleak for future of Yemen. It will mean
that administration and all institutions will collapse and
the process of reconstruction will become extremely
difficult - almost impossible. Economic support
for Yemen in the current circumstances is therefore
absolutely essential.

What is the message that I would like to convey to
my fellow members of the Council? It is very simple. I
listened very carefully to the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom, who very clearly outlined the elements of a
draft resolution that I believe will bring change to the
situation in Yemen. The elements of said draft resolution
are, first, an immediate cessation of hostilities; it is
quite clear that there can be no military solution to
the crisis in Yemen. The resumption of negotiations is
the second element - I again reiterate my support our
Special Envoy - followed, thirdly, by accountability
for the violations of international humanitarian law,
and fourthly, unhindered access to humanitarian aid.

I would like to conclude by striking a positive note,
echoing what the French Ambassador had to say so
clearly, which is that consensus in Yemen is possible.
We trust that that is the case. Let us rally around the
United Kingdom's draft resolution to truly bring about
a change to this currently desperate situation.

