Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): As this is my
first opportunity to speak in the Security Council this
year, I would like to congratulate Lithuania on it having
being elected to serve on this body and to express our
appreciation for the organization of this important
debate in a format in which we all can contribute.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for the
report before us today (S/2013/341) and for his strong
commitment to strengthening and mainstreaming
United Nations support for the rule of law in all
areas of its activities, in this particular instance in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
including in peacekeeping operations. I would also
like to commend the increased United Nations
attention to the rule of law and justice through high-
level meetings on the topic, during discussions in the
General Assembly and the Security Council and in
consultations on the connection between the rule of law
and conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding
and on the sustainable development goals, as well as in
various other activities in the United Nations system.
The recent changes in many parts of the world and the
new threats and challenges to international peace and
security further strengthen the idea that all aspects of
the rule oflaw, ranging from citizen security to respect
for the rights and freedoms of the people, should be
ever present on the United Nations agenda.

The Republic of Moldova aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union, delivered earlier
today.

During open debates on the sustainable
development goals, the rule of law and conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding, we have
already drawn attention to the fact that one aspect of
the process is often overlooked - the need to promote
and strengthen the rule of law in areas affected by
protracted conflicts, which has not been adequately
addressed in previous debates. Nevertheless, that, too,
requires our full attention, and I will mention it further
on in my statement.

The security environment in our world is constantly
changing and the proliferation and diversification
of the risks and threats are an ongoing cause of
concern. Issues such as international terrorism, good
governance, internal conflicts and cybersecurity are
being discussed by the international community more
than before. Hence, respect for the rule of law at the
international and national levels remains as important
as ever.

From the international point of view, the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs of a State remain valid and
pertinent. My country's experience is clear proof of
that.
As I have already stated, we align ourselves with
the statement of the European Union, in which today's
main hotspots at the international level were mentioned.
The Government of the Republic of Moldova is also
watching, and continues to follow with deep concern,
the situation in Ukraine. We are extremely saddened
by the loss of life there. Our sincere sympathy goes to
the relatives of the deceased, along with our wishes to
the injured for their speedy recovery. The Government
further urges the parties to refrain from violent actions,
to defuse the situation and to establish an open dialogue
that leads to reconciliation and identifies ways to
overcome the political crisis. All differences in that
neighbouring and friendly country are critical to the
stability of the region as a whole. We are therefore
watching for a way to solve those differences to be
found exclusively by peaceful means, in accordance
with democratic norms, as violence is never a solution.

Returning to the matter of the rule of law at the
national level, from our perspective, the rule of law
has several implications, one of which is that it is a
precondition for better development. We believe that
the security of the State starts from the security of the
citizen. In a State governed by the rule of law, people
need to at least have ajudicial system as a guarantor of
their security. A State that genuinely strives for the rule
of law creates greater trust among the population, even
in conflict-affected areas, as well as in the conflict
resolution process. Moreover, we can do more to
uphold international law through our national systems
by the effective implementation of the international
conventions upon which we have agreed.

We should also acknowledge the need for a
framework of institutions aimed at supporting
international law and peace and security. Peacekeeping
therefore remains an important mechanism in assisting
countries through the difficult transition from conflict
to peace and is a collective effort supported by us all. In
that regard, Moldova contributes to the United Nations
and NATO peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo with a
military contingent. That means that every country
can contribute to such a process. That is an important
message for us all.

Let me also refer to the situation in my own
country, the Republic of Moldova, which has continued
to be affected by the unresolved Transnistria conflict
for more than 20 years. A peacekeeping mechanism to
deal, inter alia, with incidents in the conflict zone was
created after the cessation ofmilitary hostilities in 1992.
But today, the incidents that we are dealing with in the
former conflict zone are no longer related to military
security. They are usually breaches of public order. In
that context, we believe that a civilian peacekeeping
mission that meets United Nations principles and
standards, in line with the rule of law concept for the
purposes of durable and just peace and security, would
be much more relevant.

Not to overlook a more grassroots level, one should
mention that confidence-building measures (CBMs) are
also very important, in particular in conflict prevention
and often in peacekeeping efforts. By way of example, a
number of CBMs. are being implemented in our country,
the Republic of Moldova, as part of the Transnistria
conflict resolution process. CBM. programmes in the
case of Moldova cover matters related to rebuilding and
reconnecting infrastructure, freedom of movement,
education, ecology and socioeconomic activities.
Such CBMs. will also be essential for post-conflict
rehabilitation and reconstruction and are again valid for
many other conflict resolution processes.

Another element that is increasingly linked to the
rule of law is security sector reform, along with the
potential post-conflict disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of military and paramilitary elements,
whose successful reintegration may, in some cases,
be closely related to the sustainability of the peace.
Such topics can and should be the focus of both the
Government and the United Nations or United Nations-
mandated organizations, since regional cooperation is
also important in that context, as I have already said.

We should also mention the important role of both
national contributions to rule of law efforts and to
the justice institutions that we support. The Republic
of Moldova has been present, with our lawyers and
judges, at the highest level in Timor-Leste, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Kosovo. At the same time, we have
demonstrated our clear support for the International
Court of Justice in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and, in our capacity as a State party to the Rome
Statute, for the importance and increased role of the
International Criminal Court, which complements
national jurisdictions in fighting impunity for the
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes in conflict and post-conflict situations.

As such examples show, we remain deeply
committed to our general aim of upholding and
developing an international order based on the rule
of law, where international law, including human
rights, is fully respected and implemented and where
accountability is important for maintaining a sense of
responsibility for all. Hence, either through national
participation or international support, every State has
an opportunity to contribute to the rule of law and
international peace and security, as I mentioned earlier.

With regard to human rights, which my delegation
mentioned earlier in the context of conflict resolution
efforts, we would recall that, among many factors, it
is also important to have free, independent, pluralistic
and responsible media. In a globalized world, such
media could serve as a window for dialogue, peace
and reconciliation, as well as a conduit for a correct
or balanced understanding of development and conflict
resolution matters. Concerning the situation concerning
the freedom of the media in the Transnistrian region
of the Republic of Moldova, we must acknowledge that
media outlets in that region are fully controlled by or
experience significant pressure from the administrating
authorities there, and that is not a positive factor in the
overall context of conflict resolution anywhere.

We will probably again sound similar to our
European Union colleague, who spoke in October 2013
at a meeting of the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly regarding agenda item 85, when we say that
the rule of law presumes full respect for human rights,
which, our own experience shows, is particularly
important for societies in conflict areas.

The "Rights up front" initiative, recently launched
at the United Nations, designates human rights
violations as indictors ofpotential conflict and ongoing
violations of human rights in conflict areas as conflict
aggravators. In that respect, the need for the United
Nations to monitor human rights situations has been
stressed, along with the idea that promoting respect for
human rights may reduce existing problems in conflict
areas.

In that context, we again invoke the example of my
country, where the unfortunate reality is that we have
a conflict situation. United Nations expert Thomas
Hammarberg, former Human Rights Commissioner
of the Council of Europe, conducted, at the request of
the Moldovan Government, a human rights survey in
2012 in that conflict area, where, unfortunately, the
human rights situation, in particular with regard to
children's right to education, has worsened. The need
to respect human rights, given our concrete experience
in the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova,
raises another valid point, namely, that respect for
human rights is essential from the View of both the
humanitarian perspective and conflict resolution as a
whole.

That is in line with an idea already voiced in the
Council, namely, that the promotion of the rule of law
and universal human rights constitute fundamental
requirements for achieving sustainable peace. In that
regard, we commend the Security Council for its
increasing attention to the promotion of justice and
the rule of law in the context of sustainable peace and
security.

While the rule of law presumes respect for human
rights and freedoms, it is also important for the
purposes of conflict resolution to understand that the
involvement of various State and non-State actors in
mediation, conflict resolution and development efforts
has to take into account the fact that a conflict is in
itself an extremely sensitive situation, and hence needs
a coordinated approach.

In conclusion, I refer once again to the High-
level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels and the Declaration unanimously
adopted by all Member States (General Assembly resolution 67/ 1), which strengthens the links between the
rule of law and the three pillars of the United Nations,
that is, peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. The Republic of Moldova remains
directly interested and committed to continuing to
actively participate in all efforts aimed at promoting
and strengthening the rule of law at the international
and national levels for the purpose of ensuring peace
and security.

