The Secretary-General: I am very pleased to join
you today for this important debate dedicated to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I wish to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Canada and to express
my appreciation for his commitment to making this issue
a priority for the entire United Nations system. I also
wish to welcome the new President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Jakob
Kellenberger, to this meeting.

The first debate on civilians in armed conflict last
year laid the groundwork for today's vital effort to
transform our words of commitment into a better, safer
reality for the most vulnerable of our world. I am pleased
to say that both the Security Council and the General
Assembly followed up last year's debate with concrete
steps. The General Assembly has focused its efforts on
strengthening legal protections: the adoption of a text by

 

the working group on an optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the expansion
of efforts to strengthen and extend the Protocol to the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. The Security Council has also taken action to
provide enhanced protection for civilians. These efforts
have found most concrete expression in establishment of
the peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, East Timor
and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) made specific
provision for the protection of civilians, and the mandates
of UNAMSIL and the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MON UC)
provided for support for the protection of children through
the deployment of Child Protection Advisors.

The efforts within the Council and the General
Assembly have been supported in a variety of ways by the
Secretariat and United Nations agencies, as well as by
non-govemmental organizations, our valued partners. We
have sought to strengthen the protection of internally
displaced persons, most recently in February of this year,
when my Representative on Internally Displaced Persons
undertook a mission to Burundi to urge the Government to
dismantle the regroupment camps.

Elsewhere in Africa, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
implementing programmes for prevention and response to
sexual violence in Tanzania, Kenya, Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. Working with representatives in the field, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health
Organization and my Special Representative for Children in
Armed Conflict have negotiated "days of tranquility",
making arrangements in Angola, East Timor, Sierra Leone
and Sri Lanka in order to permit immunization and
vaccination campaigns.

My report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict contained a number of recommendations. Today, I
wish to draw particular attention to three of them and urge
the Council to give greater consideration to their
implementation. Perhaps the most far-reaching of the
recommendations related to the creation of a rapid
deployment force. During the very same week that I urged
this step, events in East Timor offered the clearest evidence
of the need for such a capacity. In that case, thankfully, the
Australian Government, supported by other Council
members, stepped in to fill the vacuum.

Nevertheless, the crisis underscored the importance
of having a more systematic rapid-reaction capacity in the
United Nations. I urge the Council to support these efforts
and to consider taking further steps towards this
fundamental strengthening of the Organization's ability to
protect civilians in armed conflict.

The second recommendation I wish to mention
relates to cases where there has been sufficient warning
of impending attacks or an escalation of conflict and
where the Council has in some instances made use of
preventive deployments.

In February this year, we successfully concluded
such a mission in the Central African Republic. The
positive impact of preventive measures continues to be
proved also by the role of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Prevlaka as a stabilizing force in the
Prevlaka peninsula. I welcome the Council's willingness
to consider the future establishment of preventive
missions, including the dispatch of monitors and
fact-finding missions, when we know that they can truly
make the difference between the peaceful settlement of
disputes and violent conflict.

Where a conflict has already led to a mass exodus of
a civilian population, a critical element in enhancing their
protection lies in improving the security of the refugee
camps. This was the focus of the third recommendation
I wish to note today. Since the introduction of my report,
UNHCR and others have taken a number of initiatives in
relation to the security, civilian and humanitarian
character of the camps and settlements. Such efforts have
included the provision of material support to local
security services in Kenya and Tanzania and an
arrangement in the refugee camps in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia that enabled Swedish police
officers to work in partnership with the local police.

Efforts have also been made to relocate a number of
refugees away from borders in Albania, Guinea, Liberia,
Chad, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Zambia, on the border to
Angola, UN HCR cooperates closely with the International
Organization for Migration and the World Food
Programme to move refugees to other locations either
through airlifts or by road.

In future conflict situations, it may be necessary to
consider temporary security zones and safe corridors for
the protection of civilians and I welcome the Council's
readiness to consider the feasibility of such measures.

 

However, I must emphasize that, in situations where the
consent of the parties is not forthcoming, such security
zones require the presence of a credible force.

This open debate of the Council bears vivid testimony
to a growing recognition that our first duty in any conflict
is to protect innocent civilians, who have no part in the
fighting, who have nothing to gain from its persistence and
who have no choice but to rely on the international
community to help them in their most desperate hour of
need. To answer their call is our most important obligation
under the Charter, and it is my hope that this debate will
give further impetus to our efforts to do so.

