Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly thank Italy for having
convened today's debate on an extremely topical
issue that touches all of our consciences. We also
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your tireless efforts
that allowed us to unanimously adopt resolution 2388
(2017). France also thanks the Secretary-General
for his exemplary leadership on this issue, and
Ms. Giammarinaro, Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Chergui for
their informative briefings.

France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I shall focus my statement on three points.

First, with respect to an analysis of the situation,
trafficking in human beings remains one of the most
profitable and widespread activities in the world. It
assumes numerous forms of exploitation: forced labour,
sexual servitude, kidnapping for forced prostitution and
rape, to give but a few examples. Tragically, recourse to
such atrocities, which are abominable and dehumanizing
by their very nature, is no longer the exception to the
rule in conflict and post-conflict situations. Armed
groups, be they terrorists and criminals, use human
trafficking not only as a means of sewing terror among
civilian populations, but also as a source of financing
and even as a recruitment tool.

We must make the chilling observation that
trafficking has become a key and a nefarious component
of many conflict situations. In Iraq and Syria, it is
women and children who have suffered and continue
to suffer the worst atrocities committed by Da'esh. In
West Africa, and more particularly in Nigeria, Boko
Haram tortures, rapes and holds hundreds of women
and children captive. In Libya, migrants are subjected
to inhuman treatment and violence by criminal groups
and militias who see them as nothing but a source
of income.

The second point that I want to emphasize concerns
the obligation to act collectively in the face of acts that
are not only morally intolerable, but also constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and even crimes
of genocide. Their perpetrators must be brought to
justice for their actions. Thus, in the case of Libya,
France welcomes the activities of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in pursuing her
investigation into the alleged crimes against migrants
transiting through Libya. Faced of such crimes, we
have a duty to act to protect not only civilians, but also
international humanitarian law and our principles. We
must also work tirelessly to settle by political means
conflicts that cause people to flee and suffer.

In View of our determined commitment to
multilateralism on this issue, France is also heavily
involved at the national level in the fight against
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
France has a highly developed legal arsenal and a
national action plan to counter that scourge. We
encourage all States to equip themselves with robust
national arrangements in the framework established by
the United Nations Convention Against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.

France is involved in many bilateral and regional
cooperation efforts to assist the most vulnerable States
to address this scourge. We participate actively in the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime capacity-
building programmes, particularly in West Africa,
and contributes to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, since it was established in 2010.

The third element that I shall highlight, as have
previous speakers, is the fact that our common fight
against trafficking in human beings requires the
commitment of all States and heightened international
cooperation. States we must forge a global response
based on respect for human rights and oriented on three
main objectives: prevention, protection and punishment.
The Security Council has a special responsibility in the
fight against this scourge in conflict situations. Today,
we cannot deny that trafficking in persons by armed or
terrorist groups in conflict or post-conflict situations
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

Following the adoption in December 2015
of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25 and in
December 2016 of resolution 2331 (2016), resolution
2388 (2017), which we have adopted today, is a new
step forward in our common fight against trafficking
in and exploitation of human beings. It will, inter
alia, strengthen the action of States, with the support
of the United Nations, in two main areas: first, the
identification of victims and vulnerable persons, with
special attention to women and children; and secondly,
the ability to dismantle networks, in particular criminal
and terrorist networks, that deal in trafficking.

In the face of such horrendous crimes, we have a
collective responsibility to stop them and to prosecute
those responsible for such acts. The Security Council
may rest assured of the full commitment of France to
that fight.

