Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Philippine presidency for the
opportunity to discuss the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/431) and are particularly
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Egeland for
introducing it; we congratulate him on the work of his
Office aimed at improving the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Since the first report of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/1999/957), five years ago, there has
been progress in the institutional sphere and in the
coordination of the Organization's protection efforts. In
its resolutions the Security Council has taken great care
to identify key issues related to the protection of
civilians, with a view to finding solutions. The
promotion of what has been called a culture of
protection has been reflected in many activities of the
United Nations system aimed at enhancing the physical
and legal protection of civilians. Spain, to be sure, has
supported this process in the framework of
international and national legislation and has supported
the 10-point platform presented here by Mr. Egeland in
December 2003, which continues to be our basic
reference point.

Yet all those efforts have not yet met the real
needs with respect to the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict. The growing number of
conflicts poses a vast protection challenge. At the same
time, as the report of the Secretary-General notes, the
increased number of humanitarian actors is a new
factor highlighting the need to bolster United Nations
system activities to protect civilians.

We reaffirm the general principles that are basic
to the protection of civilians: providing humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations, the denial of which
has devastating effects, as in the case of Darfur;
separating civilians from combatants; restoring the rule
of law; ensuring that justice prevails; and achieving
reconciliation.

All the actions proposed in the report, if they are
undertaken in an effective way, would be of great
importance in improving the protection of civilians.
But, in the light of the brief time at our disposal, my
delegation wishes to highlight three elements that we
think are of particular importance.

First, we must stress the need for cross-cutting
integration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict into all United Nations activities. I am not
speaking only of the need to improve the coordination
process; improvement has begun to occur and, as
noted, is yielding positive results. Such coordination
also requires an effort to ensure that the protection of
civilians is not viewed as an isolated issue that lies
within the sole purview of the humanitarian sector.
Protecting civilians means not only ensuring their
survival, but also ensuring that they fully enjoy their
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Attaining that
objective requires an endeavour that cuts across the
entire system.

In addition to actors in conflicts, United Nations
civilian and military personnel have a special
responsibility. I wish to emphasize the importance of
the plan of action adopted by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee - which established six basic
principles as the minimal norms of conduct for United
Nations civilian personnel - and the need for its fuller
implementation. At the same time, ensuring the
security of humanitarian personnel must continue to be
a priority, because acts against them are simply an
indirect and grave way of preventing assistance and of
jeopardizing the protection of civilians in conflicts. In
that connection, we unreservedly support the swift
adoption of provisions to supplement the 1991
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

Secondly, we must focus efforts on protecting the
most vulnerable of the vulnerable - that is, women
and children - particularly against sexual exploitation
and abuse. Regrettably, the efforts made in recent years
have not had all the desired effects. The participation
and utilization of children in armed conflict are
alarming. More than 300,000 children under the age of
18 are directly involved in conflicts, in addition to
those recruited to transport weapons or to act in
collaboration with adult soldiers. In that connection, it
is more than necessary that we integrate experts into
peacekeeping operations to ensure genuine protection
of women and children.

But such a measure is not sufficient either. We
must improve the specific tools to ensure that the
protection of women and children is a priority,
including in the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation.
Demobilization and reintegration are impossible
without disarmament. Therefore, the Security Council
must continue to seriously consider more dynamic
disarmament measures aimed at limiting violence
against civilians - particularly the most vulnerable -
in post-conflict phases. Moreover, during transitions to
post-conflict normalization, we must swiftly restore
services for public order - such as police, courts and
prisons - to help civilians return to a degree of normal
life and to prevent abuses against the civilian
population. That could prevent many such cases once
the conflict has ended.

Thirdly and finally, it is imperative that we put an
end to impunity. It is the responsibility of all States to
implement the commitments they undertake with the
ratification of international instruments. In that
connection, my delegation fully supports the appeal
made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2004/431) to ratify or adhere to the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and to treaties on
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including refugee rights. We support the ongoing work of
the various international criminal tribunals established by
the Security Council. However - and perhaps more
important for us - the primary and fundamental
responsibility of pursuing and prosecuting criminals
belongs to the States in whose territories crimes against
civilians are committed. That is why we believe national
criminal justice systems must be improved. A special
effort must be made to guarantee respect for those norms
by groups of non-State actors and to ensure humanitarian
access, which is regarded as a fundamental right of
civilians in conflict situations. Furthermore, we
strongly support the Security Council's decision to
appoint a Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and other particularly grave crimes.

In short, cross-cutting consideration of the
problem of the protection of civilians, special
protection of the most vulnerable - women and
children - and putting an end to impunity are essential
elements of developing a culture of protection -
elements to which the United Nations must continue to
devote particular attention.

