Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank you, Madam, for
convening this meeting of the Council to consider the
human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Mr. Ramcharan, the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for their briefings on
the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We have now returned from our mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
intended to strengthen the peace process and to
convince all of the parties, local and international alike,
of the need to comply with the Lusaka and Pretoria
Agreements on the establishment of peace. The mission
did indeed deal with these matters and, through
Ambassador De La Sabliere at the head of the mission
and during the course of meetings with various factions
and leaders, also sent the message that the massacres in
Ituri will not go unpunished. We also noted that
massacres, murders, abductions, rapes and the
displacement of civilian populations and families are
crimes which the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, simply cannot tolerate.

Syria welcomes the establishment of the
transitional Government incorporating the various
factions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under the All-Inclusive Agreement. It is our hope that
this will prove to be an important step towards ending
all the human rights violations in that country. We hope
that the National Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and the National Observatory for Human Rights will be
able to begin their work and make it possible to put an
end to such violations.

The reports introduced to us today on the crimes
committed during the events in Mambasa evoke
outrage and horror of those who could perpetrate such
crimes.

1 should like to ask Mr. Ramcharan a question.
What are the local and international mechanisms and
structures that might be deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to bring to justice human rights
violators and the perpetrators of the massacres
described in the reports before us, in light of the
establishment of the National Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the National Observatory for Human
Rights?

