The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

At the outset, I wish to point out that Germany fully
supports the statement made by the representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

The situation in Burundi remains a matter of deep
concern to us. We remain, in particular, deeply disturbed
by reports of massacres of civilians, which seem to
continue unabated in Burundi. The violence in Burundi
must stop. We are also concerned with regard to the
implications of the internal crisis in Burundi for peace
and security in the already troubled Great Lakes region.

The Secretary-General stresses in his recent report
that the conflict in Burundi is not susceptible to a military
solution. We share this view. We have taken note with
interest of recent indications that political and faction
leaders in Burundi might have expressed themselves
accordingly.

Germany considers it essential that a dialogue be
organized without delay that would bring together all of
Burundi's political forces without exception, including
representatives of civil society, in order to find a
negotiated consensus solution to the crisis in Burundi,
ensuring security for all.

In this context, we wish to express our support for
the efforts of the regional leaders, and in particular for
those of former President Julius Nyerere, to facilitate the
search for a political solution to the crisis in Burundi. We

 

specifically support their call on the Bujumbura regime to
immediately restore the National Assembly, lift the ban on
political parties and undertake negotiations with all the
parties to the conflict.

We also wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the
importance we attach to the prompt and satisfactory
resolution of the situation of those who have sought
protection in our and other foreign missions in Bujumbura.

The sanctions imposed by the regional leaders should
not, as the Secretary-General rightly mentioned, be seen as
an instrument of punishment. They are a means to an end.
On the other hand, they should not be allowed to add to the
hardship of the suffering people in Burundi. We therefore
welcome the efforts to formulate specific exemptions to the
sanctions regime for humanitarian purposes.

We welcome the recent publication of the final report
of the International Commission of Inquiry concerning the
assassination of the President of Burundi on 21 October
1993 and the massacres that followed. We hope that this
can be a contribution to overcoming the present state of
impunity in Burundi, which has been described in the latest
report of the Secretary-General as poisoning human
relations and paralysing all initiatives to lift the country out
of chaos. I also wish to reiterate the importance we attach
to the renewed deployment throughout the country, as soon
as possible, of human rights observers, which have so far
been funded by the European Commission.

Germany has in the past significantly contributed, at
both the bilateral and multilateral levels, to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Burundi and
that of the Burundian refugees in the Great Lakes region.
It stands ready to support further Burundi's recovery
efforts, once the necessary national reconciliation is
embarked upon.

The Security Council is currently seized of the
situation in Burundi. The German delegation will continue
to contribute constructively to the drafting of a Security
Council resolution on Burundi. It is our hope that the
discussion on the imposition of further measures by the
Security Council will become obsolete as we see progress
in the development of the situation on the ground.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.

I understand that the representative of Burundi has
asked to speak, and I now call on him.

 

