Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands, His Excellency Mr. Mark
Rutte, to today's meeting and thank the presidency
for convening today's important meeting. We also
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres;
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and the civil society
representative, in her capacity as Director of the Groupe
de recherche, d'etude et de formation femme-action,
Ms. Fatimata Toure, for their briefings.

My delegation would like to begin by paying
its most sincere tribute to all men and women in
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping missions
around the world, who spare no effort in discharging
their duties and mandate. We thank the countries that
contribute troops, police, observers and civilians for
their generosity, solidarity and commitment to the
United Nations system and to countries that are plagued
by the effects of conflict and instability.

There is no doubt that the international landscape
is not static; it is undergoing tremendous change.
Persistent threats to international peace and security
from terrorist groups and transnational crime have
revealed the imperative need for peacekeeping
operations to undergo profound structural reform that
allows them to adapt more efficiently and effectively to
their respective environments.

The United Nations has received important inputs
and information and recommendation instruments to
advocate a change and improve the performance of
deployed missions and optimize the various levels of
the system's internal decision-making and planning. We
refer to the Brahimi report (S/2000/ 809) and to the report
and recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), which
examined various options, mechanisms and tasks, as
well as challenges facing peace operations now.

On the other hand, the report on improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, better known
as the Cruz report, is a relevant tool that makes a
considerable contribution to issues relating to the
security of peacekeepers and to the structural issues of
peacekeeping operations, such as leadership, mindset,
equipment, and training and capability of troops.

The approaches included in the aforementioned
reports enable us to pinpoint the various priorities of
peacekeeping operations. They also identify ways to
strengthen them in order to develop a coherent and
adapable system for meeting new conflict and post-
conflict situations. Operations will be guided by clear,
specific and achievable mandates that are developed
in accordance with the reality on the ground, specific
action plans that avoid operational complications.

As a State that champions dialogue and mechanisms
for peaceful resolution of conflicts and disputes, Bolivia
believes that political measures are the drivers of the
new design and implementation of peace missions.
Such measures should be used to find political
solutions that will lead to sustainable and lasting peace.
Political dialogue implies learning; it requires thinking
and acknowledgement of the differences, but also of
agreements. It facilitates recovery from a crisis and can
avert the escalation of violence.

We underscore that a preventive approach,
within the framework of an in-depth, case-by-case
study, is indispensable to an appropriate design and
understanding of mandates, whatever their nature, with
regard to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the States, promoting national ownership
and without using that approach as an intervention tool.
A technical, logistic and, above all, realistic analysis
is required to effectively and adecuately determine the
economic, human and material resources missions need
In that regard, we underscore the pressing need to
improve the institutional agility of troop deployment, as
well as in selecting the best trained and most specialized
troops to respond to the asymmetric contexts, which we
mentioned earlier. It should be noted that appropriate
levels of equipment and training for troops is not the
responsibility only of contributing countries, but also
of the Organization in general.

The constant attacks against members of
peacekeeping forces and the regrettable tolls they
take demonstrate the need to strengthen the key parts
of missions, principally those related to situational
knowledge on the ground and the capacity of units to
mobilize and react quickly, and above all to reinforce
the defence and protection measures of the camps and
the personnel themselves.

In that regard, we must take into account all
possible modalities of support for the financing of
peace operations in a sustained, predictable and flexible
manner. Those modalities must be assessed and revised
in such a way that they allow better autonomy for the
United Nations vis-a-vis countries that provide greater
support to missions, since the financial element could be
against the very purpose and objective of the missions.

It is worth noting that no peacekeeping mission
can succeed if it does not have the host country's
support. Ongoing and fluid coordination, the exchange
of information and confidence-building mechanisms
between missions and local authorities are essential.

Finally, given that this is the last open debate in
March, I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf
of my delegation, to congratulate the delegation of the
Netherlands for the successful and efficient leadership
of the work of the Security Council during this month.

