Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, Iwould like
to thank the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
for convening this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

This year marks several important anniversaries
in the protection of civilians, namely, the adoption
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions - a cornerstone
of international humanitarian law - the holding
by the Security Council of its first open debate on
the topic in February 1999 (see S/PV.3978), with
presidential statement S/PRS/1999/6 as its outcome,
the subsequent adoption of the first Security Council
resolution - resolution 1265 (1999) - on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the authorization,
through resolution 1270 (1999), of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation with the explicit mandate to
protect civilians under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.
However, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict.
A defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still
the failure of the parties to respect and ensure respect
for their obligations to protect civilians. Indeed, as the
concept note (S/2019/385, annex) points out, ensuring
the implementation of international humanitarian law
constitutes the central challenges of today, and should
be the key priority of Member States for the years ahead.

Fundamental to enhancing respect for international
law is the need to ensure accountability for wrongdoing.
It is critical that under no pretext peace efforts
encourage, accept or tolerate situations achieved by the
unlawful use of force and other egregious violations of
general international law, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity, ethnic cleansing and genocide.
Azerbaijan supports the increased focus on the problem
of forced displacement as a result of armed conflict.
There is a need for strengthened effort to prevent,
address and resolve the challenges of such displacement,
particularly by supporting the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons in safety and dignity.

Among the pressing issues requiring urgent action
is that of civilians taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict. We continue our
consistent effort to raise awareness of the problem
at the international level and further develop rules-
based guidance to that effect, including through the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Commission on the Status of Women, of which
Azerbaijan is a main sponsor.

The issue that we are discussing today is of the
utmost importance for the Security Council, the entire
international community and my country in particular.
The forcible deportation of some 250,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 1980s
was accompanied by killings, enforced disappearances,
the destruction of property and pillaging. At the end
of 1991 and the beginning of 1992, full-scale war was
unleashed against Azerbaijan, which claimed the lives
of tens of thousands of people and caused considerable
destruction of civilian infrastructure, property and
livelihoods in my country.

A significant part of the territory of Azerbaijan,
including the Nagorno Karabakh region, the seven
adjacent districts and some exclaves, was seized by
Armenia and remain under its occupation in Violation
of international law and resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993). The occupied
territories were ethnically cleansed of all Azerbaijanis.
As a result, my country has one of the largest displaced
populations in the world, as has been stated by various
representatives of the Secretary-General on the human
rights of internally displaced persons.

Moreover, purposeful measures are being
undertaken by the Armenian side to prevent Azerbaijani
internally displaced persons from returning to their
homes and properties. Such measures include the
implantation of settlers in the occupied territories,
infrastructure changes and the destruction and
desecration of historical and cultural heritage. Those
activities undermine the rights and freedoms of
hundreds of thousands of people uprooted from their
homes and pose an imminent threat to peace, security
and stability in the region.

Furthermore, as of 1 May, 3,888 citizens of
Azerbaijan were registered missing in connection with
the conflict. Among them are 718 civilians, including
71 children, 266 women and 326 elderly persons. As the
Secretary-General points out in his report,

"It is incumbent on parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law
as it relates to missing persons [and in particular]
to take all feasible measures to account for those
reported missing". (S/2019/373, para. 45)
In that connection, I would like to stress that the
denial of the responsibility for crimes is a violation of
human rights and a direct obstacle to lasting peace and
genuine reconciliation.

In conclusion, we believe that it is critically important
that the Security Council consistently maintain its focus
on the protection of civilians affected by armed conflict
and systematically reiterate its demand that all parties
to armed conflict comply fully with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.

