Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
also are grateful for the convening of today's meeting
on a very pressing and important subject. We thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, for their important briefings. We also thank
Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, civil society representative, for
her testimony, which I believe has inspired us all.

Peru believes it is crucial to understand that the
growing socioeconomic and environmental impacts of
climate change lead to humanitarian crises and conflicts,
which, because of their scope, could pose a threat to
international peace and security. We also believe that
the primary responsibility of the Security Council
in the maintenance of peace and security includes
resolving and preventing the emergence, recurrence or
worsening of conflicts and humanitarian crises, while
addressing their root causes, with a view to promoting
lasting peace. We therefore believe that the Council
must strengthen and systematize its coordination with
the United Nations system, in particular with those
bodies and agencies directly involved in preventing
and mitigating the negative effects of climate change,
especially with regard to the most vulnerable people.
We stress that such coordination should take into
account the competencies and mandates of the various
United Nations entities and promote synergies that
are conducive to addressing the particular needs and
situations of risk, crisis or conflict that Member States
increasingly face. From the perspective of the Council,
we believe that entails having timely information on
the impact of climate change, both with regard to the
situations on its agenda and those in which preventive
action is necessary to maintain international peace
and security.

Peru is a country that is vulnerable to climate
change and natural disasters. The retreat of tropical
Andean glaciers has led to frequent droughts and
flooding, which have resulted in food insecurity and
new waves of migration, which in turn pose challenges
to lasting peace. The situation compels us to reaffirm
our commitment to multilateralism and to underscore
that growing global interdependence demands that
the Organization provide more coherent and effective
responses to common problems and challenges,
including climate change, poverty and inequality. In
that regard, we emphasize that the Security Council can
and should base its actions on a better understanding
of contemporary challenges and of the factors of crisis
and conflict, on a case by case basis, as well as of the
necessary tools to address them.

We therefore appreciate the fact that since March
2017, the Security Council has recognized the adverse
effects of climate change in areas such as the Sahel,
Somalia and Lake Chad, which affect tens of millions of
people. We especially appreciate that such recognition
confirms the need for responses from the international
community, and from the Council in particular. They
should be based on an adequate assessment of the risks
and the strategies to manage them. That accords with
the reforms advocated by the Secretary-General.

We conclude by stressing the importance of
workingjointly on these issues, including with regional
and subregional organizations, financial institutions,
the private sector, academia and civil society, using
holistic strategies that are more coherent, effective
and efficient.

To summarize, let us work in a more coordinated
manner to face the great challenge that lies before us
within the scope of our respective competencies.

