Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I also thank you for the opportunity
given to Mozambique to deliver a statement before
this important organ in its capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP)
and as my own country at this briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.

The Community ofPortuguese-Speaking Countries
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General, which
covers the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (S/2013/26). In
that regard, we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations and the wider international community
to secure a sustainable and durable solution to the crises
that the country has long faced. We recognize and
encourage the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau in that process.

We remain particularly concerned about the
internal situation in Guinea-Bissau since the coup
d'etat of 12 April 2012, which interrupted the country's
path towards the consolidation of peace, democracy
and stability. Bearing that in mind, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking countries has placed the
search for a credible, inclusive and durable solution
to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau high on its agenda. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau represents a major issue
in the cooperation between the CPLP and the United
Nations.

The full implementation of resolution 2048
(2012) will be decisive in promoting the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. We advocate for
the implementation of the resolution, as it provides the
legal framework for international partners of Guinea-
Bissau - in particular the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the CPLP and European Union - to
strengthen cooperation towards a consensual, inclusive
and nationally owned transition process.

It is in that context that we commend the work done
by the joint assessment mission under the auspices of
the African Union, which brought together ECOWAS,
the European Union, the United Nations and the CPLP
and was conducted in December 2012. We look forward
to the validation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the joint assessment mission as guiding
principles that will inform the positive role of the
international community in assisting the people of
Guinea-Bissau as they chart a new course to take their
country out of its deplorable current situation.

We also support the development of a comprehensive
and integrated strategy to deal with the critical and
immediate challenges facing Guinea-Bissau, namely,
by implementing defence and security sector reform
and political and economic reforms, combating drug
trafficking and fighting impunity. We believe that
the right and the main responsibility to overcome its
challenges and achieve sustainable solutions lie with the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. The international
community can only play a complementary role in
assisting the people of Guinea-Bissau in that effort,
to which the CPLP will continue to contribute
constructively.

In that regard, we welcome the recent parliamentary
agreement between the two main parties, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
and the Party for Social Renewal, aimed at setting up
a truly inclusive and consensus-based transition. That
is a welcome and important preliminary step towards
the establishment of an inclusive framework that will
be crucial for the preparation for elections and a return
to constitutional order. We commend the people of that
sister country for their endeavours to consolidate the
foundations for internal dialogue, notwithstanding the
prevailing situation in Guinea-Bissau. We hope that the
dialogue will pave the way for national reconciliation,
which is so essential to attaining long-lasting peace,
stability and development.

We take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Jose'
Ramos Horta, former President of Timor-Leste, on his
appointment to the post of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, and we assure
him of our full support. We are confident that he will
contribute to creating positive momentum among both
internal and international stakeholders, thus fulfilling
the role that the United Nations wants to play in that
country.

We also support the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau for a period of three months and are
confident that President Ramos Horta will provide the
Secretary-General with a thorough assessment of the
situation, leading to a new mandate for the Office in
May.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the full commitment
of the CPLP member States to work closely with all
the relevant partners and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau to find a
sustainable solution for the crisis in that country.

