Ms. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto, for his
comprehensive briefing. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/508), which reflects the
complex situation that Afghanistan continues to face,
as well as for his recent visit to the country.

Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan and encourages it to continue its efforts
to achieve lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
The consolidation of democratic institutions remains
essential to the achievement of stability. The progress
made in relation to the Government's programme of
priority reforms is encouraging, in particular the fight
against corruption, the improved accountability on the
part of senior officials and electoral preparations.

It is nonetheless discouraging that the lack of
dialogue and progress towards a peace agreement
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban
continue to cause great suffering to the Afghan people.
It is worrying that, according to the report, security-
related incidents have reached the highest recorded
number since 2001. The situation of instability and
insecurity continues to expose the vulnerability of
civilians. The fighting continues to cause a large
number of casualties among the civilian population,
particularly women and children, who, as usual, are
disproportionately affected by the upsurge in violence.
The number of victims among women and children has
been increasing due to the effects of aerial operations,
attacks with improvised explosive devices and
suicide bombings.

It is worth recalling the 31 May attack on in Kabul,
which resulted in a large number of fatalities and
hundreds of wounded. In that connection, we wish to
express our heartfelt condolences to the Afghan people
and Government.

The serious human rights situation and humanitarian
issues arising from the rapid increase in the number
of newly internally displaced persons caused by the
intensification of the conflict, to which can be added
the large number of refugees returning to the country,
are also alarming.
Uruguay reiterates its vigorous condemnation and
repudiation of terrorist violence, and reiterates as well
that violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must not go unpunished.

The political, economic and security challenges that
continue to confront Afghanistan require the continued
support of the countries of the region, the international
community, the United Nations and, in particular,
the Security Council. In that regard, we express our
appreciation for the work of the Kabul process, which
was recently launched. Similarly, we would like to
recognize, and express our appreciation for, the work of
Special Representative and the entire staff ofUNAMA,
who with their unwavering dedication continue to
support the Afghan people. We would also like to
thank to all those involved in providing humanitarian
aid, who often work in extremely difficult conditions,
which include being directly targeted by attacks.

