Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having granted me an opportunity
to voice the views of my delegation following the
adoption of resolution 2410 (2018), concerning the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). The document appears to align with
the approach set out in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/241), dated 20 March 2018, and with
his largely positive appraisal of the situation in Haiti in
recent months.

My delegation notes that the first key element
of the text is the one-year renewal of the mandate of
MINUJUSTH until 15 April 2019. The second element
is the gradual drawdown, over several stages, of the
presence of the United Nations police, beginning
15 October 2018 and ending in April 2019. The third
element is a referral to the exit strategy, which is to
be spread out over a two-year period, based on an
assessment report to be submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General. The fourth element is the conduct of
a strategic assessment mission in February 2019 to set
the stage for the withdrawal of the Mission in the light
of the benchmarks that have been jointly set out. The
fifth element is the design ofa transition plan, including
a United Nations presence in Haiti to be comprised of
country teams, various funds, programmes and agencies
of the United Nations, working in close cooperation
with the Haitian Government.

My delegation deplores, however, the fact that the
recommendations delivered through Member States of
the Council were not taken into account, all the more so
given that the addressee of the resolution is the Haitian
Government. We see an example of that in the tenth
preambular paragraph, in the first operational provision
of the text and, more broadly speaking, in the reference
to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
despite the unanimous view that MINUJUSTH is
a mission of support and technical assistance for the
national institutions responsible for upholding the rule
of law in Haiti.

The Haitian Government has had extensive
experience in cooperating with the United Nations in
general, and with the Security Council in particular.
Over the course of the months to come, and in the
operations and initiatives of MINUJUSTH in Haiti, my
delegation hopes to see the development of harmonious
relations with the Mission at all levels. To echo the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
it is important to maintain a healthy relationship
with the public authorities and the population, based
on solidarity and mutual trust. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 2410
(2018). However, it expresses reservations vis-a-vis the
preamble and the provisions that, although they did not
receive the necessary consensus, have been included
in the text. We are particularly concerned about the
reference to Chapter VII of the Charter.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
