The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for presenting her eleventh report to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The report notes several challenges and includes many
important observations with regard to the functioning
of the Court and the situation in Libya. I would like to
make the following comments in that regard.

Firs, the Libyan Government must cooperate with
the International Criminal Court and surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court, and all manner of
assistance must be given to the Libyan Government to
ensure that it is in a position to honour its commitments
with regard to the Court in that regard.

Secondly, there is a need to stop all crimes oftorture
and inhumane acts being committed in Libya. The
international community must help the Government of
National Accord to design a global strategy to address
the vicious crimes that have been committed in Libya.
The Libyan authorities must be assisted so that they
can be in a position to deliver justice to the victims.
Therefore, the Government must be given the necessary
tools and the Security Council's resolutions, particularly
resolution 2214 (2015), must be implemented.

Egypt notes that the Office of the Prosecutor
intends to broaden investigations to cover the crimes
committed by Da'esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. States must
assume the primary responsibility to investigate their
citizens who have joined terrorist militias in Libya,
including Da'esh, and to bring them to justice. The
International Criminal Court must respect international
norms and the principle of complementarity between
the competence of national jurisdiction and that of the
ICC. The Court's efforts must be seen in the context
of the broader framework required by the international
community to bring terrorists to justice and to ensure
that there is no impunity for the horrendous crimes that
they are perpetrating.

We welcome the cooperation and assistance that
the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General is giving
to the Prosecutor of the ICC, particularly with regard
to the submission of information and evidence, as well
as the ongoing implementation of the memorandum
of understanding, concluded in November 2013, on
burden-sharing in investigations into the former
members of the Al-Qadhafi Government and bringing
them to justice.

In conclusion, we welcome the extensive measures
that Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the ICC, and her
Office have taken to ensure justice and end impunity.
We will continue our cooperation with her in this area.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

