Ms. Citaku: Again, I sincerely apologize for
taking the Council's time, but some things should not
be left unsaid.

First we are very proud that in our political
landscape we do not have descendants of Milosevic. We
have people, young leaders, who fought Milosevic and
Seselj, who were the worst criminals in Europe after
the Second World War. We are proud of the background
of our leadership, unlike some others.

Second, this is not the venue to discuss ethnic and
national civic identities and how they intertwine. This
is not the venue to discuss who was in the Balkans
first, who came in the seventh century, where they
came from or whom they found there. We can have
those discussions if we decide to organize a seminar.
Historians can come together. They can fight, agree or
disagree. I am ethnic Albanian and a proud citizen of
Kosovo, and these identities coexist very well within
me; one does not exclude the other.

Third, Kosovo had borders long before it had
statehood. We were a federal unit in former Yugoslavia
until Milosevic came to power, and our borders were
set long before we declared our independence.

Fourth, our independence is not a product of
a secessionist movement. Our independence is the
product of the consensual dissolution of Yugoslavia.
It is not only Kosovo; there are also Slovenia, Croatia,
Bosnia, Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia. So there is
no secessionist movement.

Fifth, as to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, there was a long
process of negotiations under the auspices ofthe United
Nations, and there was a proposal by former President
Martti Ahtisaari for Kosovo to declare independence.

Sixth, there was a ruling from the International
Court of Justice, upon Serbia's request, to verify the
legality of Kosovo's declaration of independence, and
the ruling was unambiguous and crystal-clear. Kosovo
was within its rights when it declared independence.
That is according to the International Court of Justice,
not me, and I suggest that Mr. Dacie go back and read it
because apparently he has forgotten it.

Seventh, Kosovo is not a perfect place. I am not
trying to say that Kosovo is a perfect place. We have
lots of problems. We have much more to do in terms of
the rule of law, fighting organized crime and corruption
and in creating better opportunities for all of our
citizens, but these are not challenges unique to Kosovo.
One finds these challenges in most of the countries of
the Western Balkans. Frankly speaking, Kosovo is no
longer even in the top 30 countries in terms of asylum-
seekers in Europe. Serbia is way ahead of us. Does that
mean that Serbia is a failed country? No.

Again, in terms of Serbians living in Kosovo,
I would ask the Council to bear with me for just one
minute. These are the Central Election Commission's
numbers from this year's elections. In the municipality
ofNovoberde, there were 9,617 Serb votes; in Shterpce,
13,902; in Ranillug, 5,689; in Partesh, 4,664; in
Kllokot, 5,689; and in Gracanice, 21,411. In the four
northern municipalities, there were 58,138 such votes.
All together, there were 123,774 votes, and we all know
that people over 18 vote. So if we have this number of
voters, what is the number of citizens? Again, I am not
saying that all Serbs were bad, but the numbers that
were cited here are simply not real.

Finally, to conclude, I urge everyone to come and
visit Kosovo, and they will see with their own eyes
what Kosovo is.

The meeting rose at] pm.
