Ms. Gamba: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
who is currently attending the African Union-United
Nations annual conference in Addis Ababa, I would
like to thank Sweden and its Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Stefan Lofven, for taking the initiative
to hold today's debate. In my own capacity, I would
also like to also thank Sweden for its exceptional
role as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed conflict and its dedicated
support for the children-and-armed-conflict mandate.
I also want to thank my close partners, in particular,
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Political Affairs and civil society.

This is the second time I have had the honour
to address the Security Council in the Chamber on
the situation of children affected by armed conflict.
Over the course of these past 13 months, I have had
the opportunity to follow first hand the outstanding
work undertaken by child-protection actors on the
ground. These dedicated men and women are at the
forefront of documenting, addressing and preventing
grave violations against children in some of the most
difficult conditions imaginable. I would like to take
this opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitude for
their commitment.

Notwithstanding their efforts, I am profoundly
shocked by the appalling number of grave violations
perpetrated against children last year. Over 21,000
violations were documented by the United Nations,
representing a significant increase over the previous
year. Each and every one of these violations led to
unspeakable suffering for children, families and
entire communities. The majority of these despicable
acts were perpetrated by armed groups, although
Government forces and unknown armed actors played
an important part.

A sharp rise in the number of abductions,
coinciding with increased levels of recruitment and
use of both girls and boys, was of particular concern.
In Somalia, Al-Shabaab abducted over 1,600 children
by threatening entire communities or targeting
schools as places for recruitment. Surges in violence
also resulted in elevated numbers of children killed
or injured, including in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Iraq and Myanmar, while Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring countries continued to attack
both military and civilian targets by using children to
perpetrate suicide attacks.

Schools and hospitals continued to be directly
targeted or were damaged as a result of indiscriminate
attacks in densely populated areas, denying tens of
thousands of children access to education and health
care. Similarly, broad-based denials of humanitarian
access and attacks on humanitarian convoys and
personnel cut off children from essential aid, thereby
further increasing their vulnerability.

I am also concerned that children allegedly
associated with armed groups, particularly those using
tactics of extreme violence, continued to be detained in
harsh conditions, often without charge and for extended
periods. While those responsible for grave violations
must be held to account, we also must not forget that
children who have been recruited should be treated

primarily as victims and that detention should be used
only as a last resort and for the shortest period oftime. I
feel strongly that rehabilitation and reintegration - and
not retribution - must be the centrepiece of our efforts
when engaging with recruited girls and boys.

Urgent action is needed to address those issues ifwe
want to live up to our legal and moral responsibilities.
Recent commitments by parties to conflict are a source
of hope in that regard. Action plans were adopted in the
Central African Republic, Mali and Nigeria. The full
implementation of its action plan by the Government of
the Sudan and the advances in the protection of children
attained through the peace process in Colombia are
testament to what we can achieve when political will
and international support coincide. The Government of
Iraq set out to develop an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Popular
Mobilization Forces, and the coalition to restore
legitimacy in Yemen established a child-protection unit
at its headquarters. The ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict by the
Government of the Central African Republic in 2017
moved us one country closer to universal ratification.

Specific Member State initiatives, such as
the ministerial conference organized by France to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles and Commitments, the endorsement of the
Safe Schools Declaration by 15 States last year and
the adoption of the Vancouver Principles, continued
to shine a spotlight on the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and catalyse support for this
important agenda. I firmly believe that we must build
on those advances to move to an era of prevention.

Failing to assume this collective responsibility not
only puts boys and girls at risk but may also reduce
societies' ability to overcome conflict and to build
peace. Preventing violations against children must
therefore be an integral part of any strategy to reach
and sustain peaceful settlements.

In that regard, I am happy to announce that,
following presidential statement S/PRST/2017/21,
adopted by the Council during last year's open debate
(see S/PV.8082), my Office commenced a consultative
process with United Nations partners to compile good
practices and develop practical guidance on integrating
child protection issues into peace processes. I am
glad to benefit from the support of the Government of

Sweden in that regard, for which I would like to thank
Prime Minister Lofven.

The tools that will be developed as the result will
aim at enhancing our ability to mainstream children's
issues in such processes to give early guarantees for the
protection and reintegration of children, which may also
serve to build confidence between negotiating parties.
I am also encouraged by the process undertaken by the
Government of the Sudan to develop a broad national
strategy to prevent grave violations against children,
building on the gains of its action plan. Replicating that
initiative with Governments, as well as regional and
subregional actors, is a promising strategy to foster a
child-protection architecture focused on prevention and
ensure common approaches and standards.

Finally, resolution 2427 (2018), adopted by the
Council just a few minutes ago, provides child-
protection actors with political space to engage parties
to conflict at an early stage, and is thus a milestone
in our common journey to make Violations against
children a thing of the past.

Moving towards an era of prevention also requires
the provision of adequate resources. Over 10,000
children were formally released from armed forces or
groups last year, while over 12,000 children affected
by conflict were reached by reintegration support
provided by UNICEF and partners. Those 12,000 boys
and girls have been given an opportunity to overcome
their traumatic past and become forces for peace within
their communities.

However, many children formerly associated with
parties to conflict left those parties through informal
pathways. They often live in a state of heightened
vulnerability and are in urgent need of support. We
must ensure that actors in the field are provided with
predictable, sustained and flexible funding to enable
them to react to immediate reintegration needs and
sustain those efforts. I am currently working with
UNICEF and other child-protection actors to further
promote this idea. The Council will hear today from
Yenny Londofio about her experiences with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo and about her general views on reintegration
needs from their standpoint.

Equally, there is a need to continue prioritizing
child-protection capacity in order to translate resources
and opportunities into results, including by requesting
adequate capacity in the mandates of relevant peace
operations. In that regard, I am encouraged that regional
actors, such as the African Union and NATO, have
strengthened their child-protection capacity. I look
forward to engaging with other regional and subregional
organizations over the course of the coming months to
strengthen child-protection frameworks.
Finally, the level and severity of violations that fill
the pages of the latest annual report (S/2018/465) of the
Secretary-General serve as a reminder that we must
work in unison to change the tide of history. We cannot
further jeopardize our most precious resource through
inaction, but must increase our efforts to develop
preventive tools, utilize reintegration strategically to
break cycles of violence and address the cross-border
nature of violations through increased cooperation.

I began my statement by painting a grim picture of
several conflict situations - and I could have mentioned
many more. Yet we must not leave the Chamber today
in despair. The resolution adopted today is a further
step in strengthening the framework of child protection
provided by the Council, which has given us the tools to
engage in ways that would have been unthinkable just
a few years ago. Our capacity to jointly put those tools
to work will decide the fate of thousands of children,
and ultimately whether we are able to move closer to
ending forever the use and abuse of children in, and for,
armed conflict.

