Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me at the outset
express my delegation's appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to your Government for convening this
important meeting on Angola. The fact that you are
presiding over this meeting is clear testimony to your
Government's commitment to contribute to finding a
lasting solution to the Angolan conflict. I wish in
particular to commend Ambassador Fowler for his
commitment and his leadership in ensuring that sanctions
against UNITA are enforced. My delegation pledges its
full cooperation in the successful resolution of this issue.

Let me also acknowledge the presence of the
Minister of External Relations of Angola, Mr. Miranda.
We eagerly await his remarks.

The report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA was considered in the open
debate of the Security Council held on 15 March 2000. At
that meeting, we reiterated that Security Council
resolutions on sanctions against UNITA were indeed
being violated by Member States, corporations and
individuals at the expense of the people of Angola, and
hence that UNITA was in a position to augment its
military strength and as a result continued to sow death
and destruction in Angola. In this regard, and in order to
add credibility and seriousness to the sanctions
resolutions, the Council must take the appropriate
measures to curb and destroy UNITA's capacity to make
war.

The Southern African Development Community
(SADC), the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries continue to
play an important role in support of the implementation
of the Council's resolutions imposed against UNITA.
These organizations have on a number of occasions
expressed their concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation resulting from UNITA's intransigence and
refusal to comply with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Furthermore, they have declared Mr. Savimbi a
war criminal who has rendered himself an invalid
interlocutor. In particular, we welcome the
pronouncements by the most recent meeting of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena de

 

Indias, Colombia. In our view, it is imperative that the
Security Council heed the call made by the Foreign
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement in this regard.

Today the Council is going to vote on another historic
draft resolution - one which this time, if implemented,
will help bring peace to Angola and to the region as a
whole. Namibia will vote in favour of this consensus draft,
but first let me comment on some of its key elements.

First, my delegation considers the establishment of the
monitoring mechanism an important factor in this exercise,
and it is our sincere hope that the mechanism will receive
appropriate support from the Member States and the
Secretariat to enable it to accomplish the task ahead of it.
It is important in this regard that adequate technical support
and financial resources be provided to this mechanism so as
to enable it to do its job thoroughly.

Secondly, the Council must stand ready to take
appropriate measures by 18 November this year against
those who it determines have violated sanctions against
UNITA, as stipulated in the draft resolution. It would be
unjust and unfair to the Angolan people, who have suffered
for too long - more than 500,000 lives have been lost -
if this draft resolution became just another resolution.
Taking appropriate action against those States, corporations
and individuals that are in violation of the relevant
resolutions will send a clear message to possible violators
that the Council means business. This is the minimum that
the Council can do for the people of Angola.

Thirdly, my delegation takes note of the steps
announced by the Government of Belgium in support of a
more effective implementation of measures against UNITA
and indeed welcomes the measures taken by the Diamond
High Council in conjunction with the Government of
Angola to render sanctions more effective. We call upon
Member States and other concerned institutions to assist the
Government of Angola in its internal reform process with
a view to improving the effectiveness of the implementation
of sanctions against UNITA. We also take note of the
decisions taken by some Governments, both within and
outside Africa, to bring to justice their nationals found to be
sanctions-busters.

Another critical issue of great concern to my
delegation is the use of mercenaries by UNITA, whose
impact has been significant in sustaining the military war
machinery of the rebel movement. We call upon States to
do their utmost to discourage their citizens from serving in
UNITA ranks at all levels. In this regard, we support the
issuing of arrest warrants to individuals who are playing
key roles in circumventing the Council's resolutions
against UNIT A.

Finally, SADC has played, and continues to play, an
important role in the implementation of the Council's
resolutions against UNITA. However, it must be stressed
that the SADC countries lack the technical and financial
capacity to carry out its relevant programmes
successfully. Therefore, we appeal to the international
community to provide appropriate technical and financial
assistance to SADC with a view to strengthening the
effectiveness of the sanctions imposed against UNITA.
SADC is more than prepared to play its role. However,
the assistance of the international community is vital in
this regard.

We look forward to continuing to work with the
Chairman of the Committee for the success of the work
of the Committee and for peace and stability in Angola
and in southern Africa in general.

