Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, and to thank him for his
statement. I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his precise
analysis and description of the situation in Afghanistan
and the prospects for the transition process. More than
a mere bureaucratic report, Mr. de Mistura's briefing
was the testimony of someone who lives and works
side by side with the people and Government of
Afghanistan in restoring peace. UNAMA's substantial
contribution to the stabilization and democratization
processes and its efforts to work in coordination with
the Government to lay the foundation for sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan deserve our full
acknowledgment.

Colombia deeply regrets the recent incidents and
loss of lives, in particular the assassination of the
Chairman of the High Peace Council, Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, who will be deeply missed by the
international community. We express our profound
condolences. As the Secretary-General has noted, such
attacks may be part of an intimidation campaign to
weaken the reconstruction and reconciliation dialogue.
I therefore welcome the statement made today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs that, in spite of this and
other violent acts, the reconciliation process will
continue.

It is crucial to strengthen relations with local
authorities and community leaders in order to facilitate
a process of inclusive dialogue that will lead to
reconciliation with all segments of the population. It is
also essential not to waiver in our efforts to create a
climate conducive to ensuring that the transfer of
security sector responsibilities to the Afghan National
Security Forces takes place in keeping with the agreed
timetable, and that the Afghan forces will be able to
assume that leadership by 2014. On that point, the
efforts of the International Security Assistance Force
and the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan will make
a valuable contribution to enhancing the capacity and
professionalism of the Afghan National Security
Forces.

We underscore the timeliness of regional joint
initiatives in order to combat the various dimensions of
the global drug problem affecting Afghanistan and the
region. The Secretary-General noted that while the
eradication of poppy cultivation has increased by some
65 per cent as compared with 2010, the country
remains the main source of opium and heroin. We
agree with the Secretary-General that, given the global
nature of the drug problem, it must be addressed in all
its aspects based on common but differentiated
responsibilities, with the contribution of the entire
international community.
Afghanistan is facing a number of problems that
could threaten the sustainability of the gains achieved
so far. Violence remains a principal factor that has
affected progress and led to an increased need for
humanitarian assistance and increased numbers of
civilian deaths and internally displaced persons. We
call on all parties to the conflict to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and to take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.

We agree with the Secretary-General with regard
to the need to broaden the scope of the transitional
process. While security is essential to restoring the rule
of law, the exercise of fundamental freedoms and
laying the foundation for economic progress,
governance and rule of law are fundamental elements
to guarantee a sustainable and definitive transition.

The international medium- and long-term
commitment to Afghanistan must include aspects such
as strengthened institutions, increased employment and
economic opportunity and access to justice.
Sustainable transition requires State structures able to
guarantee governance and economic stability at all
levels. That must be the aim of the international
cooperation efforts in Afghanistan.

