Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his valuable briefing.

The delegation of Egypt has considered with
great interest the fourth report (S/2017/1030) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council to continue to fulfil its responsibility to closely
and comprehensively monitor the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) in a manner that ensures Iran's
compliance with its commitments, whether in relation to
nuclear non-proliferation or in the other areas covered in
the resolution. The Council must also carefully monitor
the consistency of Iran's policies and behaviour with the
various other Security Council resolutions related to the
Middle East, which all constitute an indivisible whole.

Egypt stresses that following up on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) is not a
matter that concerns only the participants in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. All States members
of the Security Council and the United Nations,
particularly the countries of the Middle East, have a
stake in ensuring the proper and full implementation
of the resolution, which is now an integral part of
the United Nations machinery concerned with the
establishment of peace and security in the region.

While Egypt takes note of the report's content
with regard to the continued ability of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to verify the non-diversion
of declared nuclear material from peaceful nuclear
activities, my delegation reiterates the need for Iran's
policies to be coherent and consistent with the letter and
spirit of the aforementioned resolution and all the other
areas covered therein, including in annex B. We call on
Iran to work to build confidence and to immediately
cease any activities that could destabilize and fuel
sectarian divides in a number of Arab States.

The contents of the Secretary-General's report
concerning Iranian violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015)
and 2140 (2014) - some of which have been confirmed
while others remain under investigation - offer
compelling evidence of the need for the Council to
intensify its efforts to follow up on that information
and fulfil its responsibilities in addressing those
violations without delay in order to preserve regional
and international peace and security.

Egypt expresses its particular concern over the
information and evidence connected with Iran's supply
of weapons and missiles to militias, encouraging them
to use those weapons target neighbouring countries,
in violation of Security Council resolutions, United
Nations principles and the most basic rules of good-
neighbourliness. Another disconcerting element noted
in the report is Iran's defiance of other sanctions
related to the travel ban and assets freeze. In that
context, Egypt calls for the timely completion of the
Secretariat's investigations into whether the missiles
that the Houthis have launched against the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia from Yemen are of Iranian origin.

Egypt also supports the implementation of
the important recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report so that they Security
Council and other United Nations organs can assume
their responsibilities, including by considering
measures that could supplement the nuclear agreement
and reduce Iran's threat to regional and international
peace and security and its interference in the affairs of
neighbouring States and the Middle East.

The Middle East is already one of the regions of
the world most affected by violence and instability.
We must therefore do our utmost to prevent further
deterioration. In that regard, we emphasize that
maintaining the nuclear agreement in no way implies
turning a blind eye to any violation of Security Council
resolutions or actions that threaten peace and security.

