Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): The terrorist
group Daesh has seized control ofpart of Iraq and Syria.
They wish to be known as the Islamic State. In reality,
they are butchers. Daesh does not have the legitimacy
ofa State nor does it represent Islam. The Grand Imam
of the Al-Azhar Mosque in Egypt did not mince his
words, and rightly so, when he recently said: "they are
criminals who tarnish the image ofIslam and Muslims".
They rape, crucify, slit throats and behead. They employ
the most archaic forms of cruelty and the most modern
communications technology as a grotesque means of
propaganda. They seek to massacre, and they do so to
not only minorities, Christians, Yazidi, Turkmen, and
many others, but to all those who do not submit to them.
They are flouting the rule oflaw and civil society. They
represent a clear challenge to the international order
and the founding principles that underpin the United
Nations. Thus far, they have attacked Iraq after having
thrived in Syria with the regime's support, but their
true aim is to extend to the entire region and beyond.
Let us be clear. If they could, they would want to hold
us all, or almost all, at knifepoint and gunpoint. Before
such a threat, there is no choice but to take action.

France, in line with its principles and tradition,
has decided to shoulder its responsibilities. We did so
recently to face terrorism in Mali and, in a different
context, in the Central African Republic. We did so in
Syria, where we were among the first to support the
moderate opposition, against both Bashar Al-Assad and
the terrorists. In Iraq, we have decided to once again
shoulder our responsibilities by providing humanitarian
aid and military equipment and, today, answering the
call by the Iraqi Government to provide air support, in
compliance with international law. This morning, on
the instructions the President of the Republic, French
Rafale aeroplanes intervened against a warehouse
occupied by the Daesh terrorists near Mosul, in north-
eastern Iraq. The warehouse was completely destroyed.
In the coming days, and without engaging troops on the
ground, we will continue our efforts, in coordination
with all those who want to commit, and in particular
alongside the Iraqi armed forces and the peshmerga.

The action against Iraq in 2003 divided the
Council. In 2014, in a very different context, action in
favour of Iraq and against the Daesh terrorists is the
common duty of us all. This fight, which has already
claimed many innocent victims often under atrocious
circumstances - and our heart goes out to them - will
be won, first and foremost, by the Iraqis themselves.
Military support is essential, but, as we have all said, it
is not enough.

Iraq needs international political solidarity and
internal unity. Terrorists have exploited the divisions
among Iraqis and the serious frustrations of part of
the population. The election of the new President Fuad
Masum and the creation of the new Government by
Prime Minister Haider Al-Abadi, now clears the path
for common action, and we must stay the course. We
support the essential process of bringing about unity
in Iraq. We all believe that the success of that process
will require the building of an inclusive, stable and
peaceful Iraqi State. For the just cause of international
solidarity, we must bring together a maximum number
of countries of all orientations, faiths and sizes.

With regard to security, we know the priorities:
military support to Iraq; blocking the channels of
foreign combatants; and draining the financial resources
of the terrorists, which are primarily derived from oil.
That draining should be completely unambiguous to
everyone. We will not win with force alone. We also
need political support for the Iraqi authorities. As I
have said before, rebuilding the State and restoring
confidence among all Iraqi communities are priorities.

With regard to international humanitarian
assistance, with almost 2 million displaced persons, it
should be greatly increased, together with rebuilding
efforts. A bridge of international solidarity towards
Iraq is truly what is needed. And yet the evidence also
points to the fact that the rear bases of Daesh in Syria
need to be weakened specifically through powerful
support to the moderate Syrian opposition. We must
act on all those fronts and quickly, because we know
from experience that the cost of action dramatically
increases the longer it takes us to take a decision and
move to action.

The Paris conference on peace and security in Iraq
held last Monday was a milestone, as was the conference
in Jeddah a few days before. Today's meeting at the
United Nations, whereby Secretary of State Kerry has
taken the initiative in a very timely manner, is another
important step. The message of France in this struggle
is clear. For peace and against terrorism, we must
assume our responsibilities. The Daesh murderers must
be fought and beaten; only then will Iraq and the entire
region find peace and security.
