Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, and Senegal for providing us
with the opportunity to discuss the linkages between
water, peace and security, in the light of the success of
the Security Council Arria Formula meeting in April.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their important statements.

Water management has become the management of
risk related to the insecurity of water and exacerbated
by climate change. The most recent report on global
risks developed by the Economic World Forum cites the
crises associated with water as among the most pressing
global risks, given their societal impact. In the light of
such threats, it is increasingly important to turn to water
diplomacy, which must play a fundamental role and can
play a role in preventing conflict and settling disputes.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development includes
a Goal dedicated exclusively to water and sanitation,
which is a key step in the right direction. Similarly, the
United Nations recognition of the human right to water
and sanitation is a subject that has been driven forward
for years by Germany and Spain.

Many countries continue to lack the appropriate
institutions to manage water. It is specifically the
incapability of Governments to supply enough potable
water to meet the needs of their populations that often
serves as the source of conflict. Spain has thousands
of years of experience in the management and good
governance of water. Our experience has developed
around chronic shortages in which we had to learn how
to balance demand for water in all its uses with the
protection of the environment, in terms of both our own
river basins and those we share with our neighbours
Portugal and France.

In addition to water, Spain also has experience
that it shares with its partners, both bilaterally and in
regional cooperation, such as our cooperation in the
Iberoamerican Conference of Water Directors and
the Joint Spain-Algeria Water Strategy in the Western
Mediterranean Basin. Similarly, through the Water
and Sanitation Cooperation Fund for Latin America,
Spain is contributing to the efforts of the international
community to put the 2030 Agenda into practice.

We in the Security Council have often seen how
armed conflict can lead to abuses of international
humanitarian law and violations of human rights with
respect to the obligation to protect civilian structures,
especially the right to access to water. Deliberate
attacks on potable water facilities, obstructing access
to repair workers and shortages of fuel and materials
to undertake repairs not only are potential war but also
threaten the health of civilians, given the high risk of
disease in circumstances where water, and drinking
water in particular, is scarce. We must not forget that
the real victim of the use ofwater as a weapon of war or
in political or military negotiations between parties to
conflict is the civilian population itself.

In such circumstances, the international
community must make a special effort, inter alia, to
ensure the conduct of independent investigations into
attacks on protected civilian structures; document their
impact on the civilian population, health-care systems
and the environment; guarantee the unrestricted,
continuous and safe access of humanitarian personnel
and their missions, especially with respect to such
valuable resources as water; and promote exchanges
of good practices in coordination committees and
successful practices in protecting water networks and
infrastructure in armed conflict.

Over the past two years, Spain has championed the
importance of promoting the preventive function of the
Security Council. In that regard, in June 2015, together
with Malaysia, we organized an Arria Formula meeting
on climate change as a threat to security. In March of
this year, we co-presided with Angola an Arria Formula
meeting on food security, at which we clearly heard
the Director-General of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization say "that there is no peace
without food security". I would add that there is no food
security without appropriate water management. More
recently, last May, together with Egypt, we organized a
Security Council briefing focused on a holistic analysis
of the possible security implications in the Sahel of
desertification as the main effect of climate change
in the region. These issues - climate change, food
security and desertification - are intrinsically linked
to the challenge that water insecurity can pose for peace
and security.

I would therefore like to conclude by thanking
the Permanent Mission of Senegal and the country's
Minister for Foreign Affairs for the wise choice of
this topic and by reiterating our hope that the Security
Council will in future continue to analyse these issues
within its sphere of competence.

