Mr. Haekkerup: First and foremost, I thank the
Security Council members for their support and for the
very clear messages about their wish to see Kosovo
Serb participation. I think that it is a very important
subject, and I can assure the Council that UNMIK will
do its utmost to contribute to a process that will lead to
Kosovo Serb participation.

Of course, we think that we have done a lot, and I
can document that. During the time I have been the
Special Representative, the prospects for Kosovo Serbs
have changed dramatically. We are certainly committed
to finding even more areas where we can make
improvements, and we will try to do that in a way that
will facilitate a decision to participate in the elections.

We also are committed to dialogue with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
trying to solve problems of common interest -
especially, of course, problems concerning Kosovo
Serbs. This process has already been continuing for
some time, and we certainly will continue our efforts to
find common ground in solving these problems to the
benefit of all.

I also have to say that even if the Kosovo Serbs
should not turn out in big numbers for the elections, we
will of course find ways to make sure that they are
represented anyhow in our institutions because, as I
said, the institutions are not a goal in themselves. The
idea is that the institutions are a means to create
cooperation to force Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo
Serbs to work together through these institutions and in
that way change the overall security situation. I think
that is the real point about the elections and the
institutions that we are creating: they are in-built
mechanisms that will make them work together; and
that is exactly what we want.

On the joint report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), I have to say that it is very helpful that these
two organizations, which have a watch-dog function
inside our Mission, are pointing out that ethnic
intolerance is still far too high in Kosovo and the
security environment is still not satisfactory. This
reflects the post-war society. It reflects all the atrocities
committed in the past, and, of course, it takes time to
overcome what happened. It is something that has to
change inside people's heads.

Of course, we can contribute to that, and time is
on our side. But I also have to underline that time is
only on our side if we do the right things and take the
necessary steps to move the process forward. But I
think we can achieve that, and what we have been
doing up to this point actually serves that purpose. But
it is not enough to create institutions. It is only an
instrument to change what is inside people's heads so
that they can overcome the atrocities committed in the
past. I think that is exactly what we are trying to do.

There was mention made by the representative of
the Russian Federation on a status-of-mission
agreement and a status-of-forces agreement, and I have
to say that it is United Nations policy, I think, that the
authority is given by Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), so there is no need to have a separate status-of-
mission or status-of-forces agreement. Resolution 1244
gives that mandate clearly.

There was also a question about contacts with
Osama bin Laden. I have to say that I have no
indication that there should have been any contacts
between extremist or terrorist groups in Kosovo and
Osama bin Laden. But I would be very thankful for any
information that member countries can give us
regarding this, because it is very important for our
picture of what is going on in Kosovo.
There was also a question raised about detainees
and missing persons. I think it is a very important
subject, where we already have close cooperation and,
actually, two contact groups with Yugoslav authorities,

and we have been making considerable progress in
exactly these fields, but there is still more to be done

and we are working on that together with Mr. Covic'.

There were also some comments on political
violence. I think there is full agreement that there
should be no place for political violence in the election
campaign or after the election campaign. It is a very
important message. I have to say that all the major
Kosovo Albanian leaders have been out condemning
political violence. But we feel that there could be an
upsurge in political violence in connection with the
campaign and we tried to get KFOR to take all the
necessary steps we can. But I have to say that the
politicians are saying the right things. Whether this will
have an impact or not remains to be seen, but it is
important that they condemn the violence.

