Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland expresses its
grave concern over the use of a nerve agant in an
attempt to murder Mr. Sergei Skripal and his daughter,
Ms. Yulia Skripal, on 4 March in Salisbury, United
Kingdom. That reckless act also endangered the lives
of innocent civilians.

In that regard, the Polish position was clearly
expressed by the highest Polish authorities in the days
following the attack in Salisbury. Poland undertook
diplomatic steps to express its full solidarity with the
British people and Government and condemned that
unprecedented attack on the territory of the United
Kingdom. We also aligned ourselves with the joint
statements of the European Union that were made
in The Hague during the most recent regular session
of the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and at its
meeting yesterday.

Poland has always stood at the forefront of the
efforts of the international community to contain the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
incident in Salisbury is yet another example of the
Violation of international law and of the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). We
remain strongly convinced that those responsible for
the use of chemcial weapons must be identified and
punished. Any such act cannot be left unanswered,
since it undermines not only the basic sense of justice
but also leads to the erosion of the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime. As a result, it undermines
the security of us all. We have full confidence in the
investigation of the United Kingdom and we commend
the transparency and continued information-sharing of
the British Government in that regard.

At the same time, we welcome the ongoing
cooperation between the United Kingdom and the
OPCW in full compliance with the CWC. We look
forward to a further discussion on the matter once the
results of the ongoing independent investigation by the
team of experts of the OPCW are known.

We would like to recall that, on 22 March, the
European Council unanimously agreed with the
assessment of the United Kingdom - that it is highly
likely that the Russian Federation is responsible for
the attack in Salisbury and that there is no credible
alternative explanation.

As we have already stated on other occasions, we
support the decision of the United Kingdom to call on
Russia to address the legitimate questions raised by the
British Government and the international community
and to provide an immediate, full and complete
disclosure of its Novichok programme to the OPCW.

