Mr. Campbell (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries align themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. Iceland has also
aligned itself with this statement.

The draft resolution before the Security Council this
evening marks a reaffirmation by the international
community that it is willing to support the consolidation
of peace and democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
continuing to provide the necessary stable and secure
environment within which the important objectives of the
Peace Agreement can be achieved. The European Union,
many of whose members will participate in the follow-on
multinational stabilization force, welcomes the decision to
authorize the establishment of the force. We also pay
tribute to the men and women of the many nations that
participated in the multinational force (IFOR), established
under resolution 1031 (1995), for the major contribution
that they have made to the peace process. We also
acknowledge the dedicated work of the High
Representative and his team, as well as the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), and we welcome the
commitment that has been made to reinforce their
respective roles for the period ahead.

The next stage must to be build on the achievements
of the last 12 months. The responsibility for doing that
and for bringing about reconciliation and economic,
political and social regeneration lies principally with the
authorities and the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unless they are prepared to assume full responsibility for
the functioning of their State, the continued support of the
international community, through the provision of very
significant human and financial resources, cannot be
guaranteed. It must therefore be clearly understood that
without the fullest commitment from the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to meeting their obligations
under the Peace Agreement, the European Union will
have to reconsider the scope of its engagement in the
peace process.

The European Union and its member States have
been in the vanguard of the international community's
contribution to Bosnia and Herzegovina - providing, in
1996, more than $1 billion in financial assistance,
including humanitarian aid. The diversity of the support

 

mechanisms, ranging from humanitarian assistance to
reconstruction and assistance for transition to a market
economy, has a single aim: that Bosnia and Herzegovina
should develop into a just and stable political society with
a market-based economy anchored in the future Europe.

One of the fundamental components of political
stability and successful economic development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the establishment of effective
institutions. The European Union underlines the importance
of establishing these institutions without delay. We
welcome the setting up of the Council of Ministers and call
upon all its members to work together constructively and in
cooperation. The Council of Ministers and the collective
presidency can, and must, set an example to other
institutions at the national and local level by showing that
it is possible to make them function effectively to the
benefit of all the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
not solely to the advantage of the individual entities of
which they are composed.

The recent Conferences in Paris and London of the
Peace Implementation Council have provided a set of
guiding principles for a two-year civilian consolidation
period together with a comprehensive Action Plan for the
next 12 months. Underpinning both is the requirement that
all parties implement fully the Peace Agreement, including
cooperation with the International Tribunal. As we embark
on the next 12 months of consolidation, the focus must be
on the areas where progress has been slow and on
examining ways of accelerating this. Our common objective
is to urge the authorities at all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work as expeditiously as possible towards
the establishment of a fully functioning multi-ethnic State
with institutions that enjoy the support and confidence of all
citizens.

To this end, the European Union reaffirms its
willingness to contribute, through all the means at its
disposal, to the consolidation of peace and self-sustaining
stability in and around Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will
continue to monitor closely the progress that is being made
and will react as appropriate whenever it believes that
commitments are not being met. Of particular importance
in this respect will be the need for effective action in the
following areas:

Full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the rights of persons belonging to
minorities.

Marked progress in establishing freedom of
movement and communication between the entities:
Urgent steps must be taken to reduce incidents of
intimidation and harassment.

The elimination of obstacles to the early, phased,
safe and orderly return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes: The European Union welcomes the efforts
being made by other bilateral donors, by United Nations
agencies - in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees - and non-
governmental organizations in establishing projects
designed to facilitate the return and reintegration of
refugees and displaced persons to all areas of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We call upon all the parties to cooperate
fully with them in their work.

Full compliance by the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and other States with the orders of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
particularly by those that have failed to cooperate fully
with arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal and to
surrender indictees to the Tribunal for trial: The European
Union, in reiterating its strong support for the work of the
International Tribunal, reminds the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that their obligations under international
law take precedence over any provisions in their local or
national legislations.

Full respect for freedom of expression, including a
free and independent media: The European Union
believes this to be an essential precondition for ensuring
a democratic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The successful holding of municipal elections by
summer 1997 under the supervision of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE): In this
regard, the European Union underlines the importance it
attaches to ensuring a full, free and open political debate,
including full participation by and free access for all
opposition parties to the mass media.

The European Union has made it clear to those
involved that the future development of relations with it
will depend on how they perform in these areas. We see
the application of conditionality of this type, in a regional
context, as an important contribution to the peace process
overall. In this context, the European Union has made
clear its dismay at recent developments in Serbia
following the local elections and has stressed that
democratic norms, including rights of peaceful assembly
and free speech, must be respected. Compliance with

 

these norms is a key factor in the development of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's relationship with the
European Union.

An opportunity for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move forward in peace now exists. They
will have the full support and encouragement of the
European Union and of the international community as they
endeavour to rebuild their lives and reconstruct their
country. The challenges that lie ahead are formidable and
will require all involved to show generosity, a readiness to
compromise, a willingness to embrace reconciliation and,
above all, a determination to build trust and overcome past
enmities once and for all. It is our hope that 1997 will see
the progressive diminution of the remaining tensions and
suspicions, and the fostering of a spirit of constructive and
positive cooperation between the different communities,
from which can grow lasting stability and economic
prosperity based on mutual respect, democracy and the rule
of law.
