Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We met today for two purposes. The first is to
honour Sir Jeremy Greenstock and express how much
we respect the efforts he has made now that the
Chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) is passing to Ambassador Arias. The second was
a quick overview of the CTC's achievements and tasks
for the next stage to come.

However, the Israeli representative, who made his
statement just before the morning meeting adjourned,
did not respect the occasion or the reason why we met.
In the manner of a bankrupt merchant, he came back to
his old, tattered account books to dig up a number of
lies and to fulfil the role entrusted to him to deceive
and mislead the Security Council and distract it from
its true task of combating terrorism - terrorism that is
perpetrated by his Government and army in the
occupied territory. Yesterday's daily press briefing by
the United Nations Department of Public Information
to journalists attests to this. The briefing cited a press
release issued by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which reads, in part, as follows:

"In the early morning on 2 April, Israeli
military forces broke into and occupied a United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) girls'
school in Tulkarem refugee camp in the West
Bank, and proceeded to use the school as a
detention centre for male residents of the camp
between the ages of 15 and 40. The Agency
strongly protests this flagrant violation of United
Nations privileges and immunities and the
continuing denial of UNRWA's access to the
school and the camp as a whole, which has been
declared a closed military zone."(PAL/]940).

A full camp of innocent people is a closed
military zone, and the school is used for detention
and harassment. The press release goes on the
state that UNRWA Commissioner-General Peter
Hansen called the occupation of the Agency's
school 'a violation of international legal norms'
and called on the Israeli authorities 'to leave
UNRWA's school and allow UNRWA access to its
other facilities in the Tulkarem camp so that
essential services can be restored to the
refugees."'

Is this not terrorism, by definition? Have other
aggressors, except perhaps during the Second World
War, committed similar acts? Now the representative of
Israel points a finger of accusation at others. Once
again, if this is not terrorism, what is it then? The
representative of Israel has tried to portray the butcher
as victim. However, he has not and will not succeed,
because, as everyone knows, what takes place in the
occupied Arab territories is a result of Israeli terrorism
and Israel's continuing occupation and unprecedented
oppression of the Palestinian people and its aspirations
to dignity and self-determination.

Even more astonishing, the representative of
Israel points a finger of accusation and names and
shames, so to speak, other parties. This is laughable
indeed. It would seem that the representative of Israel
to the United Nations is again ignorant, and to date,
seems not to be aware that this particular Security
Council has adopted dozens of resolutions that accuse
and condemn Israel itself. The United Nations and the
Security Council have named and shamed and
condemned Israel in dozens of resolutions. However,
Israel has resisted international legitimacy and
continues to defy it.

In brief, because of the formal nature of this
occasion, I should merely like to say that last year
alone, more than 2,600 innocent Palestinians were
killed by the Israelis, including women, children and
the elderly. The Palestinians have done nothing during
the past three months, at least, while Israel for its part,
during the same period, has killed 300 Palestinians in
cold blood without justification. Yesterday alone Israel
killed seven innocent Palestinian civilians.

I ask the Council: who is the terrorist? I would
repeat: Palestinians living in Syria are victims of Israeli
terrorism. They have been displaced by force from
their homes and villages and towns. We believe that the
only solution is for those people to return to their
homes, then there would be no terrorism. There would
be no acts of violence, as some call them. We say that
those Palestinians have the right to express their hopes
and aspirations. They have the right to defend their
dignity and protect their rights. It is not the duty of
Syria or of any other party to oppress or silence the
Palestinians, as Israel wishes. The Palestinians have the
right to express themselves under human rights
principles and international law. Israel is wrong once
again if it believes that Syria can disregard the
Palestinians' right to self-expression.

In conclusion, I must return to the purpose of this
meeting. I should like once again to congratulate
Ambassador Greenstock on all his achievements. I am
sorry that the representative of Israel attempted to
torpedo the occasion; however, he has failed in that
effort. I would emphasize that Syria will continue to
fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

