Mr. Feltman: We meet today against the backdrop
of last week's dangerous escalation in Gaza and Israel
that concluded with a fragile calm. That latest upsurge
serves to underscore the fact that the status quo is not
sustainable.

Eight months since the resumption of talks between
Israelis and Palestinians, United States-led efforts to
present a basis for continued negotiations are ongoing.
We are yet again approaching some decisive timelines.
Leaders on both sides are confronted with difficult
decisions. Public support for peace among Israelis and
among Palestinians - Palestinians both in the West
Bank and in Gaza - will be tested.

The international community's commitment
to engage in those efforts on the basis of existing
principles has remained steadfast. On 3 and 17 March,
the United States President met individually with
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and Palestinian
President Abbas in Washington, DC; Secretary Kerry
met with President Abbas in that city on 16 March and
with the King of Jordan in the first week of March. In
late February and earlier this month, Chancellor Merkel
and Prime Minister Cameron made visits to Israel and
Palestine and impressed upon their interlocutors the
importance of progress on the peace track. Meeting in
Cairo on 9 March, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the League of Arab States reinforced their position
that all final status issues be addressed in line with
principles outlined in the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Quartet
envoys also continued their internal consultations and
met separately with the parties.

We have stressed before the importance of tangible
steps to improve socioeconomic conditions on the
ground, which must go hand in hand with and reinforce
the political process. The urgent need for progress in
that regard was acknowledged at a conference in Prague
on 8 to 9 March. Jointly organized by the Quartet
representative and the United States Secretary of State,
the conference brought together approximately 100
international business people, Palestinian Authority
officials and key figures in the Palestinian private
sector. Early estimates suggest that economic activity
weakened in 2013 in both the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. The International Monetary Fund projects only
a 2.5 per cent increase in real gross domestic product
in 2014, well below the growth needed to absorb new
job seekers. Unemployment reached 23.4 per cent last
year - the highest level since 2010. In February, the
Palestinian Cabinet approved a $4.2 billion budget for
2014, reflecting a 9 per cent increase from 2013. The
2014 budget presents a current deficit of $1.3 billion
and development financing needs of $333 million.

Worrying trends continued in the West Bank.
Israeli security forces carried out 292 search-and-
arrest operations. Three Palestinians were shot dead
by Israeli forces: a Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine activist killed on 27 February in Birzeit,
near Ramallah; a civilian Jordanian citizen killed at
the Allenby crossing to Jordan on 10 March; and a
Palestinian civilian killed that same day near the illegal
settlement outpost of Givat Assaf near Ramallah.
Subsequent to Prime Minister Netanyahu's expression
of regret to King Abdullah of Jordan last week,
Israeli President Shimon Peres offered his deepest
condolences and regret to Jordan on behalf of Israel
over last week's shooting at the Allenby crossing. We
continue to urge investigations into all such incidents
and note that agreement has been reached to establish
a joint Israeli-Jordanian investigation into the Allenby
Bridge shooting.

A total of 325 Palestinians were arrested, including
an alleged Izz el-Deen al-Qassam Brigades leader in
Hebron on 4 March, and 128 Palestinians were injured.
An Israeli soldier was also injured. Clashes also
continued in and around refugee camps, in particular
in Al-Jalazun camp near Ramallah, and during
demonstrations against the barrier.

In five instances, Palestinian security forces
defused unexploded ordnance in different parts of the
West Bank between 3 and 6 March. On 5 March, they
reportedly took into custody and handed over to Israeli
security forces an Israeli settler detained by Palestinian
farmers while uprooting olive trees near Nablus.

Settler attacks resulted in eight Palestinians injured,
including two children. On 2 March, a settler vehicle
reportedly fatally struck a 66-year-old Palestinian
near Ramallah. Settler attacks also resulted in damage
to Palestinian property. Approximately 390 trees and
saplings were reportedly vandalized, including about
180 olive trees uprooted near Qalqiliya on 2 March. On
26 February, Palestinian stone- and Molotov-cocktail-
throwing attacks resulted in injuries to three settlers
near Nablus and material damage to vehicles, including
to the vehicle of an Israeli Knesset member near Nablus
on 9 March.

The Israel Central Bureau of Statistics stated on
3 March that construction in the settlements more
than doubled in 2013 as compared to 2012. We are
also concerned about any movement towards approval
of settlement projects in East Jerusalem. Continued
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory
is contrary to international law and an obstacle to peace.

Demolitions continued on a smaller scale as
compared to the previous reporting period. Eight
structures, including five residences, were demolished
in East Jerusalem, displacing 23 people, including
12 children. We are concerned that, in late February,
the Israeli authorities issued stop-work orders against
18 residential and livelihood-related structures in
the Bedouin community of Jabal Al-Baba, which
was funded by international donors to support the
vulnerable community. Over 85 per cent of the residents
in that area are refugees. We reiterate the importance of
Palestinian access to a fair planning and zoning system.

Tensions continued to increase with respect to the
Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif. A debate on whether
to extend Israeli sovereignty over the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif on 25 February in the Israeli Knesset
plenary, which concluded without action, was followed
by clashes on the ground and by strong Palestinian and
Jordanian opposition. We call on all parties to show
the utmost restraint regarding the holy compound.
Provocative acts from any quarter must cease, and the
sanctity of holy sites of all faiths must be fully respected.
The Secretary-General underscores that incitement,
whatever its source, poisons the atmosphere for peace.
He calls upon Israeli and Palestinian leaders to exercise
their responsibilities in halting incitement.

We remain concerned about the health of eight
Palestinian prisoners on ongoing hunger strike
protesting their administrative detention, five of
whom are currently in Israeli hospitals. Administrative
detainees should be either charged or released. We have
also seen reports that additional Palestinian prisoners
and detainees, who had previously announced the start
of a hunger strike to begin today, have called off that
strike.

Turning to Gaza, the underpinnings of the ceasefire
understanding continued to be undermined. As
mentioned earlier, a dangerous escalation of violence
took place between 11 and 13 March. More than
70 rockets and 5 mortar shells were indiscriminately
fired towards Israel, the majority of which were claimed
by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Over 50 landed in
Israel, fortunately without resulting in injuries. Israel
conducted 15 airstrikes on Gaza in March, resulting in
the death of 5 militants reportedly affiliated with the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and injuries to 5 Palestinian
civilians. A 57-year-old Palestinian woman was shot dead
by Israeli forces on 28 February during a protest in the
vicinity of the border fence, and another two Palestinian
civilians were injured in similar circumstances. The
Secretary-General strongly condemned the firing of
multiple rockets into Israel and called on all actors to
exercise maximum restraint. He also deplores the loss
of civilian life under any circumstances.

On 5 March, Israeli naval forces intercepted a
ship in the Red Sea allegedly transporting arms from
Iran to the Gaza Strip. The cargo reportedly included
40 M-302 rockets with a range of up to 160 kilometres
and 181 mortar shells and approximately 400,000
7.62-calibre rounds. We condemn all illegal weapons
smuggling and call for the full implementation
of resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). If the
allegations of arms shipments from Iran are true, that
also appears to be a violation of resolution 1747 (2007).

At the same time, the economic and humanitarian
situation continued to worsen in the context of a tightened
access regime and violence, both severely affecting
the lives of the population in Gaza. Compounding an
already dire electricity situation, the near shutdown of
Gaza's only power plant was averted by another last-
minute Qatari contribution of $32 million to procure
industrial fuel for the plant. The Qatari contribution is
expected to enable the Gaza power plant to continue
generating some 55 megawatts daily for an additional
3 months. The current situation highlights the need
to advance a sustainable structural solution to Gaza's
energy problems.

Gaza's unemployment rate is 38.5 per cent.
Extremely limited movement in and out of Gaza from
the Erez and Rafah crossings continues to afflict the
civilian population, including patients awaiting medical
treatment. Recurrent drug and medical equipment
shortages are affecting the Gaza medical system,
further increasing the number of patients seeking
referral outside for medical conditions that could have
been treated inside Gaza, were supplies available.
Approximately $250,000 per month would be required
to cover the cost of those critical medical supplies.
The United Nations is seeking donors' assistance to
establish an emergency medical safety net while urging
the Palestinian Authority and the de facto authorities
in Gaza to develop a structural solution to the problem.

Meanwhile, work on previously commenced United
Nations projects has not resumed as originally agreed
to with the Israeli authorities, and about 15 projects,
worth $14 million, remain stalled. Another 42 projects,
valued at around $96 million, are still awaiting Israeli
approval.

We fully recognize the complex security dimension
of the situation in Gaza. However, the price should
not be paid by the people of Gaza. In the context
of deteriorating humanitarian and development
conditions, the United Nations finds it increasingly
difficult to provide assistance to the population of
Gaza while restrictions on access, including for United
Nations operations, persist and have even increased.
We would like to call the attention of the Council to that
unsustainable situation in the Gaza Strip and appeal to
all parties concerned to contribute to alleviating the
deteriorating conditions of the civilian population.

The Council was extensively briefed on Syria
last week by Joint Special Representative Brahimi.
The Secretary-General and Mr. Brahimi also briefed
the General Assembly, so I will not repeat their clear
messages. The situation on the Golan remains volatile,
with heavy clashes between the Syrian armed forces
and members of the armed opposition. Shelling
continued primarily in the southern part of the area of
separation and in the area of limitation adjacent to it. In
a recent development, on 5 March, the Israeli Defense
Forces (IDF) fired 17 tank rounds towards the village
of New Hamadiyah in the northern part of the area
of separation. The IDF informed the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force that it had taken the
action in response to persons placing an unknown object
at the technical fence, west of the ceasefire line. I also
note that there are news reports reaching the Council of
additional clashes that reportedly injured three Israeli
soldiers near Majdal Shams. The upcoming report of
the Secretary-General and subsequent briefing to the
Council by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will provide details of the situation on the Golan.

In Lebanon, the Government formed on
15 February submitted its ministerial policy statement
to Parliament and is awaiting a vote of confidence, due
on 20 March. I am encouraged by the Government's
focus on matters such as respect for United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1701 (2006); follow-
up on the work of the International Support Group for
Lebanon; support for decisions taken under Lebanon's
national dialogue; and recognition of the importance
of securing Lebanon's borders, improving security and
preparing for the presidential election process, which is
due to start on 25 March and to take place by 25 May. It
remains important that all parties in Lebanon continue
to work together in the same spirit in which the new
Government was formed in order to tackle the very
significant security and humanitarian challenges that
the country faces.

On 22 February, a Jabhat A+l-Nusra suicide bomber
detonated a car bomb at a Lebanese Armed Forces
checkpoint in the Bekaa town of Hermel, killing three
people, including two soldiers. On 16 March, another
suicide bomber detonated a car bomb in the town of
Nabi Othman, in the eastern area of Baalbek, killing
4 and injuring at least 10. Clashes in Tripoli between
the predominantly Alawite area of Jabel Mohsen and
the Sunni neighbourhood of Bab Al-Tabbaneh broke
out once again on 13 March, leading to 12 deaths and
tens of injuries. Rocket fire into the Bekaa region
and Syrian airforce strikes have continued, causing
a number of deaths, injuries and material damage in
Lebanese towns and villages, including Arsal, Labwe
and Brittal. We are very concerned about the impact on
Lebanon of the fighting on the Syrian side of the border
and remind the Syrian authorities of the need for full
respect of Lebanon's sovereignty.

In a letter dated 27 February (S/2014/l34), the
Lebanese authorities said that on 24 February, an
Israeli military aircraft had violated Lebanese airspace,
raiding the outskirts of Janta town and firing several
missiles within Lebanese territory, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). On 14 March, there were reports
of a roadside bomb ambush against Israeli soldiers
in the Shaba'a farms area. The Israel Defense Forces
reportedly fired a number of artillery rounds across the
Blue Line in retaliation for the attack. An investigation
by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon is under
way. We urge all parties to fully respect the Blue Line
and to refrain from any action that would constitute a
violation of the relevant resolutions.

On 5 March, the Government of France hosted
a ministerial meeting of the International Support
Group for Lebanon in Paris, which was attended by
President Sleiman and President Hollande. The meeting
reaffirmed the international community's commitment
to Lebanon's stability and security, including support
for its State institutions and policy of disassociation. It
also reviewed the progress made on the Group's support
agenda for refugees, the Government and the Lebanese
Armed Forces and called for greater international
assistance going forward. Additional contributions
were made to the joint United Nations-World Bank
multi-donor trust fund for Lebanon. The Government of
Italy announced its intention to host a senior officials'
meeting in Rome on 10 April in preparation for a higher
level conference in support of the Lebanese Armed
Forces.

The recent escalation in security incidents along
Lebanon's eastern border with Syria is affecting
humanitarian access. As the conflict in Syria enters
its fourth year, Lebanon struggles with the impact,
including the presence of a refugee population from
Syria of nearly 1 million people, who are in need of
protection and assistance. The United Nations is
engaging with the newly formed Government to help
coordinate the urgent humanitarian needs of refugees
and to consolidate support for the Government's
national response through its road map for stabilization.

In conclusion, last week, with the situation in Gaza,
we came very close to the brink of another crisis in
an already volatile region. We should take that as yet
another reminder of the need to work together to restore
prospects for a durable regional peace. The Middle East
still faces an unpredictable future with multiple sources
of uncertainty. What is certain, however, is that the
Arab-Israeli conflict cannot be ignored in shaping the
future constructively. The Secretary-General remains
convinced that a solution of the Palestinian-Israeli
issue, in the form of a negotiated two-State solution, is
the best contribution to regional stability that we can
make at this time.

