Mr. Dauth (Australia): Australia welcomes this
opportunity once again to address the Security Council
on a matter of vital interest to United Nations
Members - the issue of terrorism and how the United
Nations and the international community should deal
with it.

Sadly, we do so against the background of yet
more terrorist bombings in our own region, this time in
the Philippine city of Davao, which have taken the
lives of many innocent civilians. The Australian
Government condemns those bombings in the strongest
terms and conveys its sympathy to the families and
victims of those horrific attacks.
I would like to say at the outset that Australia
fully endorses the statement to be made by Fiji on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum, of which we are,
of course, a member. Much has been said today, by
many representatives, with which we can associate
ourselves, and we join Forum countries and others in
voicing our sincere thanks to Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock for his outstanding work in leading the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) through a very
difficult period. The energy and direction that he has
brought to the work of the Committee has ensured that
it has played a highly effective role in the global effort
to fight terrorism. Australia and the other members of
the international community concerned with combating
this scourge are deeply in his debt.

It is vital that the international community adopt
a comprehensive, coherent and cooperative approach to
fighting terrorism. Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) provides both the obligation and the framework
for such an approach. The CTC in turn has played an
important role in the realization of that obligation.

In particular, the CTC has ensured that the flow
of information between States and organizations
highlights methods of best practice, fosters cooperation
and facilitates the provision of international assistance
that is critical to achieving our goal of reducing the
threat posed by international terrorist networks. The
adoption of the ministerial declaration annexed to
resolution 1456 (2003) underlined the importance of
the CTC and those aspects of its role.

We commend the CTC's recent focus on
strengthening the role of regional and international
organizations in counter-terrorism activities, reflected
in the special meeting held here in New York on 6
March. The counter-terrorism work of regional and
subregional organizations is central to building the
capacity needed to fight terrorism. In the same way that
the CTC is a hub for action by United Nations Member
States, regional organizations have an important role in
disseminating information, providing and facilitating
assistance and developing effective regional counter-
terrorism strategies. We encourage all United Nations
Members to fully support the counter-terrorism work of
the regional organizations they belong to and to
actively look for ways to improve the effectiveness of
that work. By doing so, Members will not only enhance
the safety of their own regional neighbourhoods but
also strengthen the broader international counter-
terrorism network.

The task of monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) is likely to continue for some
time. In this context, we would like to acknowledge the
Committee's valuable role in helping to coordinate the
availability and provision of broader counter-terrorism
capacity-building assistance for those countries in
need. It is vital that every Member State that needs
help developing counter-terrorism legislation and law
enforcement capacity, for example, is able to get access
to the assistance it requires. Australia urges United
Nations Member States to strongly support the CTC's
work in that area.

Since the attacks of 11 September 2001, the
international community has made considerable
progress in fighting terrorism. The CTC, guided so
ably by Ambassador Greenstock, has contributed
substantially to that outcome. Unfortunately,
international terrorism is still with us, so the work of
the CTC must go on.

Australia very warmly welcomes Ambassador
Arias of Spain as the new CTC Chair and looks
forward to working closely with him and the other
members of the Committee in confronting the
challenge posed by international terrorism in the period
ahead.

