The President (spoke in French): I will now make
a statement in my national capacity. Naturally, I would
like to thank the speakers for their presentations on the
challenges in the Sahel and their proposals to respond
to them.

The countries of the Sahel are facing transnational
complex challenges in all areas - governance, security,
the humanitarian situation and the serious challenges of
development. As the speakers stated, those phenomena
know no borders and thus call for a common approach.
It is right that the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which the Secretary-General launched in
September 2012 at the request of the Security Council,
seeks to adopt a comprehensive approach to those
challenges.

The expected reinforcement of the United
Nations Office for West Africa at Dakar will play an
essential coordinating role between all players for its
implementation.

However, that strategy would be meaningless if it
were not supported by the mobilization of the entire
international community. In that context, I welcome
the significant pledges for the countries of the Sahel
that were announced last November by the World Bank
and the European Union. France, the top bilateral donor
in the region, has decided to raise its commitment to
€900 million for the years 2014-2015, which amounts to
more than $1.2 billion. We also believe that the action
fund for the Sahel proposed by Mr. Prodi and to be
managed by the African Development Bank could make
a useful contribution to international efforts within the
framework of the United Nations integrated strategy.
For those investments to be effective, however, they
must be aligned with the needs of the States concerned,
and such proposals must be quickly translated into
concrete projects for the peoples of the Sahel.

An estimated 10 million people in the region have
suffered as a result of food insecurity in 2013. It is our
collective duty to improve the access of those people
to basic services, such as transportation, water, food,
education and health. The development of desert spaces
must also be a major focus of our efforts, in particular
through support for shepherding activities and the
development of the infrastructure that will allow such
spaces to be opened up.

To address those challenges, one word strikes me
as essential: trust. Without trust among all of the States
of the region, we will not be able to offer a coordinated
response to the transnational challenges. Trust among
all the States concerned - among the States of West
Africa as well as those of the Maghreb - is crucial in
order to collectively attack the region's challenges. That
is indeed the meaning of the presidential statement that
we have just adopted (S/PRST/2013/20) at the initiative
of our Moroccan colleagues.

With particular regard to the matter of security,
terrorist and trafficking groups in the region recognize
no borders, which makes a coordinated approach all
the more necessary. In that context, we welcome the
two conferences on borders, held in Tripoli in 2012
and in Rabat in 2013. We also hail the cooperation
and coordination mechanism established as part of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which
was agreed on 5 November in Bamako by the ministers
of all the States in the region. That platform, chaired
for two years by Mali, with a secretariat provided by
the African Union and the United Nations, has the
advantage of bringing together all the States of West
Africa and the Maghreb, as well as the relevant regional
and international organizations. The major country
partners would find it useful to associate themselves
with that mechanism.

Both in its national capacity and as part of the
framework of the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, France stands committed alongside the
States of the Sahel to strengthening security in the
region. That is why we are hosting a meeting next week
on drug trafficking and its consequences for peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel. The deleterious
effects of drug trafficking, which encourages corruption
and undermines the governance of States, deserve a
strengthened collective response.

Moreover, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to the peoples of the Sahel as they face the challenges
before them. After the emergency in Mali, it is high
time for the international community to confront the
root causes of the crisis in the Sahel. There can be no
security in the Sahel without development. The reverse
is also true. Improved security is indispensable for the
region's development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more speakers on my list.

The meeting rose at12.25p.m.
