Mr. Kim Bong-Hyun (Republic of Korea): Let
me join previous speakers in thanking the presidency
of the United Kingdom for organizing this open debate
on post-conflict peacebuilding. I would like to take this
opportunity on behalf of my delegation to convey our
sincere condolences to the peoples of China and
Myanmar for their suffering due to the recent natural
disasters.

My delegation would like to underline the
successful operation of the Peacebuilding
Commission's three country-specific meetings, on
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau. My
delegation commends the Commission for addressing
the challenges of post-conflict peacebuilding and
development simultaneously, which we believe will
contribute to solving the root cause of the recurrent
nature of conflicts. We also appreciate the Commission
for bringing all relevant actors together into a single
forum to develop peacebuilding strategies for post-
conflict countries. In this regard, my delegation hopes
the Commission's working method will be further
developed so that more post-conflict countries will
benefit from its valuable work.

To ensure the Peacebuilding Commission's
comprehensive approach and maximize its synergistic
effects, my delegation would like to stress the
importance of communication among the
United Nations, its field missions and Member States.
The United Nations should play a central role in
maintaining such triangular communication so that
Member States are fully informed and remain
connected to the field. That approach will enable us to
collect the best available peacebuilding experiences
and secure future participation from Member States.

There is no doubt that strong and effective
leadership in the United Nations field missions is
necessary to meet the need for more coordinated
peacebuilding efforts. On that note, my delegation
would like to commend the Security Council for its
creation of an integrated field office with
peacebuilding mandates in Sierra Leone through its
resolutions 1620 (2005), 1734 (2006) and 1793 (2007).
My delegation supports the Security Council in the
extension of peacebuilding mandates to other United
Nations field missions and their heads.

The peacebuilding strategies recommended by the
Commission cannot be accomplished without sufficient
funds. My delegation reiterates that as the Commission
fulfils its mandates and proves its worth, Member
States will recognize its achievements by increasing
their contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.
However, the Fund is designed to cover initial financial
needs of post-conflict countries, and the international
community should consider how to effectively help
those countries in financing their long-term
peacebuilding needs. My delegation would like to
advance its view that the United Nations should first
develop a standing contact mechanism with
international financial institutions with a view to
facilitating the mobilization of peacebuilding funds.

Non-financial contributions such as technical
assistance for capacity-building in a post-conflict
country should also be considered a necessary resource
for peacebuilding. The United Nations should not spare
its efforts to make non-financial contributions available
at the locations where they are needed. In this regard,
my delegation would like to see the Organization
further develop its partnerships with regional
organizations and civil society in order to allow them
to be fully engaged with peacebuilding efforts. Their
role would be even more critical in ensuring rapidly
deployable and skilled civilian capacity for real field
work.

Finally, national ownership should be highlighted
to avoid moral hazards and solidify post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts on the ground. In that context, we
believe that the United Nations should encourage and
strengthen a national Government to actively
participate in the process of recovery and
reconstruction of its own post-conflict nation.

The Republic of Korea is willing to contribute to
the world's peacebuilding efforts and the further
development of the peacebuilding activities of the
United Nations. It is our sincere hope that the United
Nations will continue its considerable success and
facilitate peace throughout the world.
