The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the Philippines.

When the world was less complex and less
complicated, and when local and border wars were
fewer and less disastrous in humanitarian terms, the
protection of civilians, particularly women and
children, was followed as a matter of policy. It was
followed as a matter of course. Sadly, that is not the
case today. My delegation therefore appreciates the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/431) on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and its
presentation by Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland.

The Security Council, in its past resolutions and
presidential statements, has consistently dwelt on the
core issue since the Council's adoption in 1999 of its
first resolution on this theme, resolution 1265 (1999).
We fully agree that the focus on this core issue should
not be lost; rather, it should be developed in a manner
responsive to present and emerging challenges,
consistent with the principles embodied in the Charter
and international law.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
protecting civilians, as outlined in part II (A) of the
report. We note, however, that there are a few other
important points highlighted in resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) that have not been given as much
emphasis. First, it is still unclear how much the
Council has contributed to implementing appropriate
preventive measures to resolve conflicts. Secondly,
along with the constant reaffirmation of the primary
responsibility of the State, it would also be worthwhile
to know how much has been done in terms of providing
needed support to States, particularly in improving
their capacity to protect civilians.
In 2002 the Council and the Secretariat jointly
developed the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians, a practical guide for the consideration of
protection issues in peacekeeping operations and a tool
for ensuring an orientation towards civilian protection
in the mandates of peace operations. How useful has
this been to peacekeeping missions in improving their
orientation in protecting civilians? Answers to that
could guide the Council in determining what type of
action it should take to improve the protection regime.

The Council's resolutions and presidential
statements, the aide-memoire and the road map for the
protection of civilians have provided the political
impetus to create a culture of upholding the safety of
civilians. The real value of these commitments,
however, is in the implementation of practical and
concrete endeavours, as specific situations may
demand, to make a difference in improving the
protection of the people. The Council should give
priority to the forgotten thrusts that I mentioned earlier:
the need for the Council to act as a catalyst for
developing preventive measures; and assisting States
that need support in building their capacity to protect
civilians.

The Secretary-General's report mentioned that
some counter-terrorism measures can have an adverse
effect on the welfare of civilians. My delegation would
be ready to support appropriate measures to ensure the
protection of the people in campaigns to curb terrorist
activities.

Relating to the aide-memoire and the road map,
we would like to draw attention to the actual
experience of peacekeeping operations in
implementing protection mandates. The Council has
constantly endorsed the view that peacekeeping
mandates should incorporate a "protection orientation".
To what extent and scale has that protection orientation
been integrated into mandates issued by the Council,
and how successful has their implementation been?
The answers would surely assist the Council in
evaluating peacekeeping mandates and in giving
necessary guidance.

My delegation is also concerned by the violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law in
many conflict areas, including by non-State armed
groups. Many of these non-State parties have also been
tagged as terrorist groups and are thus subject to the
laws of concerned States. My delegation is cautious
about the suggestion of engagement by the
international humanitarian community with non-State
armed groups, as that would present a complex
situation that could compromise previous and current
national efforts towards an effective and appropriate
strategy to protect civilians. The neutrality and
impartiality of United Nations humanitarian operations
may neither give adequate safeguards against
manipulation by non-State armed groups nor guarantee
that the legal status of these groups, as determined by
the State, will remain unaffected.

The possible use of coercive measures to compel
States and other parties to comply with humanitarian
standards has been mentioned. In specific situations,
this may be an option, but as a general principle, it
should be used as a last resort and only in extreme
cases, such as large-scale and systematic violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. The Council has
other means at its disposal to enhance the security of
civilians. The growing humanitarian aspect of
peacekeeping, however, needs to be carefully
considered, as humanitarian personnel could get caught
in the crossfire.

It should be clear that different conflict situations
require different approaches to effectively protect
civilians. The representative of the Russian Federation
also mentioned this. We therefore believe that there
should not be a one-size-fits-all approach, lest the
United Nations be unable to deliver the appropriate
response. In fact, resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000) both emphasize the principle of proceeding on a
case-by-case basis while taking into account the
particular circumstances of a situation, whenever ways
of providing protection for civilians are being
considered.

The nature of protecting civilians requires the
broadest involvement of United Nations bodies and
agencies in a comprehensive, integrated, coordinated
and sustainable manner. Under a system-wide
approach, the theme of protecting the vulnerable,
encompassing the concept of a culture of protection,
was identified as a priority in the Millennium
Declaration. In this connection, we all have to
recommit to the road map that identifies the
responsibilities of the various entities within the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, regional organizations and the relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies. My delegation thus calls
for the wide dissemination of this road map throughout
the United Nations system to maximize contributions
to realizing our common objective of effectively
protecting civilians in all areas and at all levels.
In conclusion, the stark reality of the unabated
victimization of innocent civilians should prod all of us
to embark seriously on this system-wide approach to
solve the problem. The response can be no less than the
full engagement and cooperation of United Nations
entities. That is the only way to make a significant
difference on the ground. This open debate in the
Council should be one of many discussions that we
would like to see take place throughout the United
Nations system. We need to join hands, cooperate more
effectively and synergize our expertise if we want to
save more lives.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

