Judge Meron: I am grateful for this opportunity
to appear before the Council to report on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals. My remarks supplement the written reports
that the ICTY and the Mechanism recently submitted
(8/2015/342 and S/2015/341, respectively), and I hope
they will serve to further elucidate both the successes
and challenges these institutions have faced over the
past half year.

However, before turning to these points, I would
like to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish
to underscore my gratitude to the Security Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and especially to Chile for its role in leading the Group.
Last, but certainly not least, I am grateful for the crucial
assistance provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism
by the Office of Legal Affairs. The Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, is an outstanding leader in
the cause of international justice; he is ably supported
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Stephen Mathias.

I first turn to the ICTY. The Tribunal has faced
a number of challenges that, to my great regret, have
caused delays in cases. The specific lengths and causes
of these delays are outlined in the completion strategy
report submitted in May (8/2015/340, enclosure).
Certain of these changes to previous forecasts are
caused by factors outside our control, such as the
health of accused individuals and the discovery of new
evidence. In particular, the trial of Mr. Goran Hadiie
has been temporarily adjourned for reasons relating to
his health. In addition, the trial of Mr. Ratko Mladie
has been reduced to four sitting-days a week, following
medical advice, and the Prosecution case in that trial
has been reopened following the discovery of new
evidence. Finally, I note that Mr. Vojislav Seselj's
health continues to be of great concern to the Tribunal.

Adverse health developments concerning accused
persons and the discovery of new evidence are, by
their nature, factors that are very difficult to predict
or, when they arise, to ignore. I can assure members
of the Council, however, that the Judges sitting on the
benches in the affected cases make every effort to limit
delays linked to these factors, while ensuring that the
Tribunal meets its obligation to provide detainees with
appropriate medical care and allow relevant evidence to
be presented in court.

Perhaps the most widespread cause of delays to
particular cases is, however, staff attrition, particularly
among mid-level and senior-level members of the
legal drafting teams assigned to support the work
of the Judges. As those Council members who have
followed our reports over the past years are no doubt
aware, the Tribunal has long warned of the problems
that such attrition can cause. We have taken all steps
we were permitted in order to address this problem,
including obtaining waivers to particular staff rules
and undertaking initiatives to improve staff morale.

These efforts have been effective up to a point, but
they have not been enough. In the last reporting period,
a number of mid-level and senior-level staff members
with extensive case-specific experience have accepted
positions at other institutions able to guarantee longer-
term employment. The Tribunal acted swiftly to
replace them as soon as possible, but inevitably new
staff members are not able to immediately match the
extensive case-specific knowledge of those who depart
after spending years immersed in the evidentiary
context and procedural history of individual cases.

In conjunction with the Council's Working Group
and the Office of Human Resources Management, the
Tribunal continues to examine all steps we are able
to take in order to curtial attrition in these critically
important final years of the Tribunal's life. On a
personal level, from the moment I realized the potential
for delays in cases, I have led efforts to identify problems
and potential means of resolving them or minimizing
their impact. In particular, I insisted that the Registrar
provide key drafting teams with all possible resources;
for example, in the Prlic' appeal, which is forecast to
be completed in the latter part of 2017, I doubled the
membership of the drafting team.

I very much regret the fact that I am not in a position
to provide only positive news today. As the President
of the Tribunal, I accept full responsibility for these
delays. I urge the Council, however, to consider the
delays I have just discussed in their broader context.
Of course, it is absolutely clear that the Tribunal must
continue and redouble its efforts to adopt strategies
that reduce any delays in ongoing cases to a minimum;
this obligation implicates both the rights of defendants
and the resources of the international community.
I can assure members that the Judges and staff are
working diligently to complete judicial work as rapidly
as possible, while maintaining our commitment to
procedurally just trials and appeals.

At the same time, however, considered through
broader lenses, the Tribunal continues to make
significant progress. During the reporting period,
the ICTY rendered two major appeal judgements in
the large, multi-accused Popovie er a]. case, and in
the complex Tolimir case. By the end of this year, the
forecasts provided by presiding Judges indicate that the
ICTY will have completed its work on all but two trials
and two appeals. While various cases have suffered
delays, these can each be counted as a matter of months,
and the last cases are still expected to be completed in
2017, as predicted in the ICTY's previous forecasts.

Even more significantly, the Tribunal's contributions
to ending impunity for international crimes continue
to serve as a momentous symbol of the international
community's commitment to rendering justice for
crimes committed in the Yugoslav wars, and to the
laudable aim of preventing grave crimes like those that
hang so heavily over any historical account of the past
century from being committed again.

I will soon be travelling to the former Yugoslavia
to join commemorations of atrocities committed in
Srebrenica and elsewhere. I recognize that the work
of the ICTY can only ever offer a small measure of
solace to the individuals and broader communities
most affected by these heinous acts. But even as all
acknowledge the limitations of international criminal
tribunals, we must also appreciate the ground-breaking
nature of courts like the ICTY. The fact that the ICTY
has accounted for every single individual it has indicted
is a testament to the power of the rule of law. Indeed,
I am convinced that the international community's
increasing condemnation of grave breaches, as
expressed through the establishment and ongoing
support of international criminal tribunals, has had
a material impact on the conduct of war everywhere
and - it is my sincere hope - reduced the suffering
of those affected by conflict. When the history of the
ICTY is written, it is this legacy, not limited delays in
projected delivery dates, that will be remembered and,
I believe, celebrated.

I will now turn to the Mechanism. I am very pleased
to confirm that, as set out in its May progress report,
the Mechanism continues to serve as an example ofbest
practices, completing its judicial and administrative
work to a high standard and in an efficient manner.
In these efforts, the Mechanism has been fortunate to
receive excellent cooperation from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY,
as it increasingly assumes responsibility for functions
once carried out by these Tribunals.

With respect to judicial work, I can report that in
December I presided over the panel that rendered the
Ngirabatware appeal judgement. This was the first
judgement of the Mechanism and was delivered with
no delays to the ambitious schedule previously reported
to the Security Council. The Mechanism's judges have
also issued a number of decisions and orders on motions
addressing a variety ofissues, including matters related
to enforcement of sentences, variation of confidentiality
measures, requests for review of judgements and
cooperation with national jurisdictions. I have every
expectation that the Mechanism's judges and small
supporting legal team in Chambers will continue to
efficiently process ongoing judicial work. In addition,
the Chambers of the Mechanism have established
rosters and procedures that will allow us to adjudicate
upcoming trial and appeal work both efficiently and in a
manner that respects the highest procedural safeguards.

In addition to addressing ongoing work, the
judges of the Mechanism adopted a code of judicial
conduct last month. This code sets out core principles
that will guide Mechanism judges on such issues as
independence, integrity, confidentiality and outside
activities. Adoption of the code is a reflection of the
Mechanism judges' commitment to the highest ethical
standards.

The Mechanism has also been making great
progress in assuming responsibility for other ICTR
and ICTY functions. Most notably, the Mechanism
has made steady progress in creating a small, self-
standing administrative capacity in the light of the
ICTR's imminent closure and the ICTY's continued
efforts to transfer responsibilities. These efforts are
complemented by the signing ofa host State agreement
with the Netherlands and the continued implementation
of the parallel agreement concluded earlier with
Tanzania. Both these countries and Rwanda have
offered important assistance to Mechanism offices
based in their respective territories.

In addition, the Mechanism has made significant
progress in a number of other areas. Construction of
our new Arusha building is continuing and on schedule,
with our move there planned for next year. Our archives
section is assuming responsibility for an increasing
percentage ofthe ICTR's and ICTY's materials, and our
monitoring of cases referred to national jurisdictions
was recently strengthened when the Kenya branch
of the International Commission of Jurists assumed
responsibility for monitoring cases referred to Rwanda.

As I have stated before, two key challenges continue
to face the Mechanism. The first involves the outstanding
arrest warrants for the remaining ICTR indictees who
have yet to be apprehended, including three who are
expected to be tried by the Mechanism. The fact that
the ICTY was able to account for all its indictees is
a powerful symbol of the international community's
determination to end impunity. It is imperative that all
members of the international community continue and
indeed increase their efforts to apprehend the remaining
ICTR fugitives. The Council's leadership in this regard
remains essential.

The second challenge facing the Mechanism is
posed by persons acquitted by the ICTR or who have
completed the sentences imposed by the Tribunal. The
Mechanism assumed responsibility for outstanding
relocation issues on 1 January 2015. We have adopted
a strategic plan that sets out ways to address the
challenges posed by the issues of relocation in relation
to this group of individuals. Our planning focuses on
concrete steps that can promote resettlement and also
reduce costs to the international community, in keeping
with the Mechanism's commitment to efficiency and
cost savings. However, we continue to rely on the
good efforts of the international community to provide
appropriate opportunities for relocation. As I have
stated before, it is a fundamental responsibility and a
humanitarian imperative to resettle the small number
of individuals who have been acquitted by the ICTR or
completed the sentences imposed on them. Once again,
the continued leadership of the Council on this issue is
very important.

I cannot conclude my report on the Mechanism
without underscoring again the gratitude of its judges
and staff for the enormous support we have received
from the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office of Legal Affairs
and other United Nations agencies, as well as from
national Governments. As we rise to the challenge of
serving as an example of best practices in international
criminal justice, we recognize that our efforts are
successful only because of this continuing support.

As always, my report today contains descriptions
of both progress and challenges. It is perhaps inevitable
that institutions with mandates as audacious as those
of the international criminal tribunals will never be
able to comprehensively meet all the high aspirations
of our many stakeholders. But I can assure the Security
Council that the judges and staff of the ICTY and the
Mechanism strive every day to make progress on the
inspiring mission we have been assigned. Together with
our partners from all over the globe, the ICTY and the
Mechanism are committed to continuing the fight to
end impunity and, through our work, to supporting the
strengthening of the rule of law at the international
level and around the world.

