Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate. I warmly
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
and thank him for his statement. I would also to
thank Mr. Jan Kubis for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2012/703). Under the leadership of Mr. Kubis, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is to implement a challenging mandate. But
the United Nations role in Afghanistan should adjust
to emerging realities, characterized by the projected
drawdown of international forces and the onset of
the phase of transformation. Similarly, a reduction
in the budget of UNAMA must not compromise core
objectives of the United Nations in the medium and
long-term perspectives.

The Secretary-General's quarterly report under
consideration today has provided some mutual insights
on the prevailing situation in Afghanistan. I would
like to share some of those with the Council; they say
a lot and yet need to be pointed out. The fact that it
was seen necessary to write in the report that Chairman
Rabbani and senior members of the High Peace Council
"visited Saudi Arabia and agreed with their Saudi
Arabian counterparts on the need to work with Pakistan
in advancing the peace process and to utilize the
important role of" (S/2012/703, para.]2) the ulema and
religious leaders, is not necessarily being reflected on
in today's debate, but was considered important enough
to be stated at an important venue. On 15 July, at a
similar event in Kandahar city, "participants adopted
a lS-point resolution, emphasizing the need for the
rule of law" - and I say that pointedly - "reform of
security agencies and improved outreach by provincial
peace committees"(ibid., para. 13) It then points out
that 69 per cent of all incidents took place in Kandahar,
Kunar, Nangarhar, Ghazni, Khost and Helmand
provinces.

Then the concern increases. UNAMA has expressed
concern over the appointment of alleged human rights
abusers to positions of responsibility, as well as over
several reports of abuse involving Afghan local police
personnel. Furthermore, it says that there have been
continuing reports of defections from various Afghan
security bodies. That includes 17 members of the
Afghan local police in the north-western province of
Badghis, who are understood to have joined the Taliban
on 24 June, and a further 93 who switched sides on
3 July. This is a worrying development affecting trust
during a security transition based on close coordination
between Afghans and their foreign mentors. Included
in that development is an incident that took place on

17 August in which a local police recruit was understood
to be a former insurgent.

That raises a point that needs to be looked at closely
here, as we have discussed those matters in other
aspects. On the pro-Government side, civilian deaths
and injuries caused by air strikes, night raids and other
military operations have decreased significantly. But
air raids continued to cause more civilian casualties
than any other tactic used by pro-Government
forces. Furthermore, with regard to the Ministry of
Information and Culture's risk of curtailing freedom
of speech and increasing Government control of the
media, the presidential decree of 27 July, as stated in
the Secretary-General's report, "contains language
that can potentially restrict the right to receive and
impart information, with the media ordered to "refrain
from anti-State propaganda and anything that may
lead to negative motivations' " (ibid., para. 35). With
regard to the most the important aspect, which no
civilized society can do without - I am referring to the
judiciary - the report says, "The period also saw the
creation of several working groups to revise the Penal
Code. Appointments of a new Chief Justice and one
member of the Supreme Court, whose terms expired
two years ago, are pending."(ibid., para. 43)

There is mention of the increasing narcotics
problem, but after hearing so much about the Tokyo
Conference, I want to refer to an important element.
Given the depth of humanitarian needs in Afghanistan,
following the mid-year review, the consolidated appeals
process increased to $448 million to address the life-
saving needs of approximately 8.8 million people.

It is worrying that as of 1 August, funding stands at
only 33.5 per cent, less than half of what was available
during the same period in 2011.

I now turn to the ISAF report, where it talks of
the security situation. During the reporting period,
insurgent-initiated attacks increased by 6 per cent,
compared to the same period in 2011. In the Regional
Command South-west, insurgent-initiated attacks have
increased by 13 per cent. In the Regional Command
South, the insurgent-initiated attacks for the reporting
period have increased by 6 per cent. In the Regional
Command North, the insurgent-initiated attacks have
increased by 29 per cent. In the Regional Command
West, the insurgent-initiated attacks have increased
by 46 per cent. The last two cover the furthest side of
Afghanistan, miles away from anything close to us.

In the capital, it is good to know what has reduced
the entire aggregate. The insurgent-initiated attacks
have decreased by 22 per cent for the Kabul area. It now
seems that by October, there will be 352,000 troops and
police in Afghanistan. Yet, we have this report of the
ISAF that I find disconcerting.

I now move to an article from Foreign Policy
magazine published, I believe, in Washington, DC. It
says that it is incorrect, if not disingenuous, when we
say that the Taliban's momentum has been blunted. It
continues,

"The Taliban's spear is sharp as ever. Last week,
on 14 September, it cut through Camp Bastion, one
of the most secure foreign bases in Afghanistan.
There . . . it destroyed six jets valued at up to
$180 million."

It continues,

"The US surge is over. All troops brought into
Afghanistan after December 2009 will have
returned home by the end of this week. But the
Taliban surge has just begun."

Sadly, it also says,

"Meanwhile, in Helmand and Kandahar
provinces - the heart of [the] surge - nearly 30 per
cent of children suffer from acute malnutrition."
("So Much for the Good War" by Arif Rafiq, www. foreignpolicy.com, Sept. 19, 2012)

I will now quote briefly from The New York Times,
in August. On 9 and 10 August, eight American and
British soldiers were killed. On 13 August, there were
two more green-on-blue attacks. On 17 August, there
were two American Special Forces members shot to
death by a new Afghan local police patrol. And in
early September, which is of even greater concern to
me, American officials said that the training of Afghan
local police and special operations forces had been put
on hold.

1 will move to another aspect which I consider
equally serious, as quoted in The New York Times on
18 August.

"In one of a series of recent steps, the military

decreed that American and NATO service members

should always carry a loaded magazine in their
weapons, to save precious moments if attacked by

Afghan forces. Another initiative, now a priority,

is a program named 'Guardian Angel' that calls for

one or two soldiers to monitor the Afghans during
every mission or meeting, officials say.

The 'angels,' whose identities are not disclosed to
the Afghans, must be prepared to fire on anyone
who tries to kill a coalition service member."

Now, I do not know how everyone will take that.
But I have been reading from official documents and
two of the most renown publications in America.

The Secretary-General has made an important
point on the need to transform security gains into public
perception of greater security. He has also expressed the
need to factor the financial impact of the withdrawal of
international forces.

It remains to be seen whether security and
humanitarian risks associated with a possible economic
shrinking following the withdrawal, have been
addressed forthrightly. The Secretary-General has
rightly noted that Afghan peace and reconciliation is
essential to avoid protracted conflict and instability. I
share that observation in addition to a long-term solution
to the challenges that lie on the path of the sustainable
reconciliation process, under Afghan ownership.

The process must not be complicated by
inexplicable caveats or conditionalities. Sustainability
of the reconciliation process can only be ensured
if stakeholders share the goal of reconciliation.
International partners should facilitate the convergence.
The idea of reconciliation, under any coercion,
contravenes a fundamental lesson of Afghan history.

We are committed to an Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process. We are not only committed,
we are supportive of the objectives and work of the
Afghan High Peace Council. Our commitment to the
reconciliation process was reiterated in ajoint statement
issued after the visit of our Prime Minister to Kabul
in July. We hope that our efforts will be supplemented
by meaningful international cooperation based on
pragmatism and attention to ground realities.

The security situation in Afghanistan is a matter
of paramount importance for Pakistan. Afghanistan's
march on the road to transition, particularly in the
security sector, is not too encouraging, at the moment.
While we value the effectiveness of Afghan national
security forces, the importance we attach to them
is evidenced from our financial contributions made
at the Chicago summit of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Our offers for training and
capacity-building in the past are on record.

Despite our bilateral arrangements, often not
acknowledged in this venue, Pakistan has sought
closer regional engagement with Afghanistan and its
international partners on all security-related issues. We
continue our active participation in the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan and a number of trilateral and
quadrilateral processes manifest our commitment.

We look forward to the senior officials meeting
of the Istanbul Process next week in New York. Our
ongoing intelligence and military cooperation with
Afghan and international counterparts is self-evident.
Improvement in military cooperation should be
acknowledged by all of the players. We welcome the
deliberations of the Tripartite Commission meetings,
which resumed in May.

Pakistan is also maintaining a robust presence
of our security forces along the international border
with Afghanistan. We recently have enhanced our
presence and monitoring through check posts and
regular patrolling. Our deployment of security along
the international border far exceeds the number of
international and Afghan forces deployed on the other
side, which might also be the reason why so many
attacks take place on the western side of Afghanistan.
And we continue to be resolute, despite the high human
and economic cost of this endeavour.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
often eclipsed by the glare of security and political
challenges. We have suffered substantially, and I need
not read the figures here, as I had intended to do. But
we will have to say that we have shown considerable
restraint in the wake of attacks on our check posts
across the international border. We will not join the
blame game, and we will seek to address those issues
with objectivity.

Against this backdrop, cross-border attacks into
Pakistan are being actively discussed with ISAF,
including the border coordination mechanism, as part
of the ongoing coordination and cooperation between
Pakistan and ISAF, based on mutual respect and mutual

interest. We hope that such interaction will help end
terrorism across border posts. As a matter of interest,
on 13 September a flag meeting was held between the
two forces to discuss this very issue.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
somewhat unfortunate, as the country continues to suffer
from natural calamities, food insecurity and the impact
of never-ending conflict. We remain by far the largest
contributor to the easing of the humanitarian burden by
virtue of hosting more than 2 million registered Afghan
refugees. We hope that those refugees' dignfied return
will be achieved through the implementation of the
solution strategy agreed in Geneva in May. In my home
of Karachi, we are now facing serious issues resulting
from the large numbers of refugees coming together
in that southern city. We will nevertheless call for
immediate measures to address the current shortfalls
in humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan and the
Afghan people. That assistance should be insulated
from the impact of the financial shortfalls that are so
rampant at the United Nations at the moment.

Pakistan is supportive of the counter-narcotics
efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Afghanistan. NATO-ISAF operations are
also vital to the disruption and neutralization of the
narcotics industry and its growing funding streams.
Our collective goal must be the complete eradication
of cultivation and the progressive elimination of the
manufacture and trafficking of higher derivatives.
That is not necessarily happening yet, but Pakistan
will continue to support bilateral and regional efforts
against narcotics.

In conclusion, let me express my confidence that
the redoubtable people ofAfghanistan will overcome all
their pressing challenges and seize new opportunities
for a brighter and more prosperous future. Pakistan will
remain their committed and steadfast partner.

