I would like to thank the honourable President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz, for their briefings today and their recent reports (see S/2020/309 and S/2020/416). Today the whole world is faced with unprecedented challenges caused by our joint enemy, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has already claimed many lives. We extend our sympathy to all victims of COVID-19 and their families. But with thoughts of them and of all others who are endangered by the pandemic and its consequences, it is our common responsibility never to forget the victims of the brutal aggression of the 1990s, including against Croatia, during which numerous war crimes and crimes against humanity were committed. Unfortunately, after almost 30 years, a significant number of victims and their families still have not found long-awaited justice. Croatia therefore fully supports the Mechanism and its continued efforts to bring to justice the most prominent perpetrators of the horrible crimes committed during the 1990s on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. The forthcoming commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica reminds us once more of the important and significant task and work the Mechanism performs. Croatia maintains good cooperation with the Mechanism and regularly answers its requests for assistance, as in the instance of the Prosecutor's requests in the case against Serbian nationals Jovica StaniSi¢ and Franko Simatovic. Along with cooperation with the Mechanism, Croatia also attaches significant importance to continued cooperation with other countries in the region in matters related to war crimes. However, constructive cooperation is possible only if all parties are willing and ready to actively and openly engage. In that respect, we appreciate positive developments in cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which resulted in the transfer of some cases to the Croatian judiciary, not all of them category II cases. Croatia hopes to achieve the same progress with Serbia in due time as well, because, regrettably, the current level of cooperation is not satisfactory. Croatia is still waiting for Serbia's response to our invitation of September 2019 to the fourth and final round of negotiations, which we hope will result in the finalization of the draft text of a bilateral agreement on processing war crimes. Regarding cases currently before the Mechanism, we are fully aware of possible difficulties that the COVID-19 pandemic may cause to regular activities and work, and regret that the Mechanism will not be in position to conclude ongoing proceedings in the appeal case against Ratko Mladi¢ and the trial case against Jovica Stanisi¢ and Franko Simatovie by the end of this year, as previously planned. We stress once again the importance of the timely conclusion of all pending cases. This is of crucial importance for ensuring justice for victims because delays always increase the risk that proceedings will not end with final judgement, as was the case with Slobodan MiloSevic. We therefore urge the Mechanism to increase its efforts in this regard. Croatia welcomes the February 2020 decision of the Appeals Chamber in the contempt of court case against Petar Joji¢ and Vjerica Radeta, which confirmed Serbia's obligation to fulfil the Mechanism's order for the arrest and extradition of the accused. We would like to seize this opportunity to recall that full cooperation with the Mechanism is one of the conditions in Serbia's negotiation process with the European Union (EU), and to call upon the Government of Serbia in this regard to respect and implement that decision. Croatia strongly supports the EU aspirations of the countries of the Western Balkans based on their full compliance with all established criteria, which include full cooperation with the Mechanism. In this regard, we would like to recall that, under the Croatian presidency of the Council of the European Union, the EU-Western Balkans Zagreb Summit took place on 6 May 2020 via video-teleconference due to the COVID-19 pandemic. EU leaders agreed on the Zagreb declaration, with which the Western Balkans partners have aligned themselves. In the Zagreb declaration, the EU once again reaffirmed its unequivocal support to the European perspective of the Western Balkans, and the Western Balkans partners reiterated their commitment to the European perspective as their firm strategic choice. It is also clearly pointed out in the declaration that the credibility of that commitment depends on the implementation of the necessary reforms. Croatia welcomed the adoption of Council's first-ever resolution on missing persons in armed conflicts in June last year (resolution 2474 (2019)), which reaffirms the obligations on that subject that flow from international humanitarian law and human rights law. The issue of missing persons and shedding light on their fate remains one of our top priorities, and we continue to address it on every occasion. That is of regional and global significance, and also improves the prospects of lasting reconciliation. To that end, strengthening cooperation among countries in the region is of the utmost importance, which includes the opening of all archives - something for which Serbia still does not show readiness. Some progress in this area has been achieved with Bosnia and Herzegovina and with Montenegro. We find the Mechanism to be well placed to play a supportive role in that regard. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Croatia will continue to support the Mechanism in its future activities.
