Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): In accordance
with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report to the
Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to the same resolution. The report
covers the period from 10 June to 15 September 2014,
during which time the members of the Committee met
twice in informal consultations.

At the outset, I would like to recall that, by its
resolution 2174 (2014), of 27 August 2014, the Council
reinforced the arms embargo and expanded the criteria
for the designation of individuals or entities as subject
to the travel ban and assets freeze. On 2 September,
the Committee discussed the implementation of the
resolution and adopted a press release on the subject.
It also discussed, and intends to proceed with, the
dispatch of notes verbales to all Member States on arms
embargo-related matters and inviting the provision of
information in the light of the additional designation
criteria.

On 4 September, the Panel of Experts submitted its
interim report to the Council. I shall briefly recapitulate
the main points of that document. The Panel identified
the rapid decline in the security situation in Libya,
coupled with weak oversight over procurement of
military materiel and virtually no control over sea-
and airports by the Libyan Government, as a strong
indicator that large quantities of military materiel had
reached militias. The Panel presented evidence of two
diversions of military materiel that was previously
exempted by the Sanctions Committee. The Panel also
described a separate potential Violation of the arms
embargo involving a militia. The Panel has received
several reports of external support to armed groups
through the provision of arms and financing, which it is
currently investigating. In addition, the Panel informed
about continued illicit arms transfers to the civilian
black market in Libya.

While the Panel noted an increase in leads related
to attempted and actual transfers of arms into Libya
since the beginning of 2014, it found, as in previous
mandates, that arms also continued to be trafficked
out of the country. Since, however, at the time of the
writing of the Panel's report it had not yet been invited
by any Member State to inspect seized materiel, the
report contains no specific case studies in that regard.

The Panel reported a violation of the travel ban
by one of the listed individuals and is investigating a
possible further violation of the travel ban by another
listed individual. The Panel noted that large amounts of
assets that should be frozen are held under false names
and by front companies around the world. In follow-up
to its last report (S/2014/lO6, annex), the Panel presented
further evidence of the lack of implementation capacity
of States in relation to its assets-freeze measures.
The Panel reported on its ongoing efforts to trace the
potential hidden assets of a range of listed individuals
and expressed its intention to look into the financing of
armed groups in Libya, thereby gathering information
on individuals for possible designation under the new
designation criteria of resolution 2174 (2014). The Panel
presented a total of 19 recommendations, of which
four were directed at the Security Council, 14 at the
Committee and one to the Government of Libya.

On 12 September, the Committee discussed the
interim report and its recommendations. The Panel's
report was generally well received. One member of the
Committee, while recognizing the value of the Panel's
work, called for clear identification of the origins of
arms flows and regretted the lack of cooperation from
Member States in that regard.

The main points emerging from the discussion were
concerns about the security situation, arms flows into
and out of Libya and the operationalization of resolution
2174 (2014), including possible designations of spoilers,
in particular those violating the arms embargo. The
Committee agreed to follow up on 15 recommendations,
including through a note verbale to all Member States,
as well as a press release covering issues relating to the
arms embargo and by extending an invitation to Libya
and its neighbours to attend a Committee meeting to
discuss sanctions implementation challenges.

In that context, I would further like to note that
agreed follow-up action on the recommendations
numbers 7, 8 11 and 14 contained in the Panel's final
report is still pending before the Committee. Taking into
account recent developments in Libya and the Council's
response in resolution 2174 (2014), follow-up action
on those recommendations will be addressed together
with the additional recommendations contained in the
Panel's interim report.

The reporting period was quite busy for the
Committee. Therefore, I will now simply touch on
those issues on which the Committee took action.

On 27 June, the Committee updated its list of
individuals and entities in follow-up to recommendations
10 and 13 contained in the final report of the Panel
of Experts and issued a corresponding note verbale
to all Member States, as well as a press release. On
23 July and 11 September, the Committee updated its
implementation assistance notice number 2, adding
two new procurement focal points - respectively,
in the Libyan Ministries of Justice and the
Interior - and introducing additional post-delivery
notification requirements, reflecting the provisions
of resolution 2174 (2014), and streamlining the notice
to make it more user-friendly. On 5 September, the
Committee approved a new regional expert for the Panel
of Experts following the resignation of his predecessor.
On 8 September, following the receipt of a request for
guidance from a Member State in relation to the scope
of the arms embargo ahead of deliveries of military-
related material to Libya by another member State
using its air space, the Committee dispatched letters to
both Member States on the matter.

Lastly, I turn to some updated statistics on the issues
dealt with by the Committee since the last periodic
report to the Council. In relation to the arms embargo,
the Committee approved one exemption request and
received outstanding documentation onthreeincomplete
notifications, which were subsequently considered by
the Committee and on which no negative decision was
taken. Moreover, in relation to the arms embargo, the
Committee responded in one case that did not require
notification, citing paragraph 10 of resolution 2095
(2013), and replied in three cases that the notifications
were incomplete. The Committee further received an
implementation report by a Member State and a follow-
up to an inspection report from another Member State.

