The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.

The Presidency of the European Union has already
stated the common views of its member States on
Afghanistan. Therefore, I will emphasize only certain
elements of my country's position with regard the
situation in that country.

As the fighting continues, we urge the parties to halt
hostilities. A ceasefire should be the first step, to enable
them to begin real negotiations aimed at a political
settlement. Only in that way will the territorial integrity
of Afghanistan be maintained and will the Afghan people
be able to enjoy peace as an independent and sovereign
country.

Yet this may not be at hand, as one of the parties
seems to be convinced that it is in a position to take over
the whole country militarily. But the past 18 years of war
in Afghanistan lead us to believe that a military victory
by one of the warring parties will not bring an end to the
fighting. The United Nations must help to break this cycle
and induce the parties to move forward towards a political
settlement. The Security Council must send a precise,
concise and clear message in support of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. We must make
sure that the parties and their external backers get this
message.

This open meeting of the Council is instrumental in
sending the international community's message that the
United Nations is committed to a settlement in
Afghanistan. With that purpose, the Council fully backs
the efforts of the Organization's main instrument in
Afghanistan, the United Nations Special Mission. The
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan plays a
central role in that process and all United Nations
Members must cooperate with it, by coordinating any
initiatives regarding Afghanistan with the Head of the
Mission, Mr. Norbert Holl.

For too long, Afghanistan has been subject to
interference from outside, which has only served to
prolong the conflict. Like others, we call for an end to
such interference and an end to the supply of arms and
ammunition to the factions, which continues despite the
denials of those involved. I would like to recall that
following the adoption of Security Council resolution

 

1076 (1996), the European Union decided to impose an
arms embargo on Afghanistan. We urge others to follow the
same pattern.

Two other extremely worrying features of the Afghan
conflict continue: drug trafficking and the existence of
terrorist training camps. These two factors not only help
fuel the conflict but also constitute a serious threat to peace
and security in the whole region. We urge the parties to put
an end to these intolerable destabilizing practices.

Every new day of war in Afghanistan brings misery
and suffering to the civilian population. And every day that
Afghanistan remains without a broad-based interim
Government and an effective civilian administration, the
country is pushed further backwards on the scale of
economic and human development. In the humanitarian
field, the fighting has caused heavy casualties and has
forced thousands of civilians to flee their homes and many
more to flee the country. We, too, call on all factions to
cooperate with the delivery of humanitarian aid to all the
people of Afghanistan, irrespective of their ethnic group,
race or gender. Portugal expresses its deep concern about
the widespread violations of fundamental human rights in
Afghanistan, in particular the intolerable measures imposed
by the Taliban affecting the rights of girls and women.

The Security Council must make it known to all the
factions that they are responsible not only for complying
with humanitarian law, but also for respecting and
implementing international human rights standards with
regard to each and every citizen in Afghanistan.

The United Nations stands ready to assist the parties
in reaching peace and national reconciliation. But the
parties bear the primary responsibility in this task.

Those countries which have been channelling
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan would certainly
prefer to divert resources to the huge reconstruction needs
of the country. But the Afghan parties should be made
aware that this will not happen until peace is achieved.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan has asked to speak. I now call on him.

