Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): First of all, Mr. President,
on behalf of the member States of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, your able team and
your country on the excellent conduct in steering the
work of the Council for the month.

Amid a rapidly changing situation in the Middle
East, the Palestinian question remains at the heart of
the outstanding issues that require the utmost attention
of and prompt intervention from this body, which has
so far failed to address and correct the injustices that
Israel has been inflicting on the Palestinian people
from 1948 until today. The Palestinian people's
aspirations to realize their legitimate dreams and rights
to freedom, sovereignty and self-determination and
to practice the principles of equity, justice and human
dignity in their own independent State on their own
homeland, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, are
systematically blocked and denied. Their long-standing
question is still unresolved and peace and justice are
unsecured, and the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is ultimately made
permanent.

After 20 years of painful, tortuous and often
futile negotiations, prospects for peace and justice
in the region are now diminishing more rapidly than
ever. Indeed, Israel's occupation policies and practices
continue to undermine the vision of the two-State
solution and to defy the will of the international
community through settlement, construction, land
annexation, appropriation of properties, isolation of
East Jerusalem from the Palestinian territory, and so
on, all in violation of international law and relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.

Indeed, it would be hard not to notice the
emergence and proliferation of parties in Israel with
hard-line positions and the primary goal of supporting
settlements and not making peace with the Palestinians,
thus leaving the fate of Palestinian statehood hanging in
the balance. Definitely, while Israeli settlement policies
constitute a standing challenge, the current stalemate in
the peace process is neither acceptable nor conducive
to ajust and lasting settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

Meanwhile, the recognition and upgrading of
Palestine status to non-member observer State at the
United Nations constitutes a timely and fundamental
opportunity that should not be lost but rather fully
utilized to create a new momentum for reviving the
currently deadlocked peace process and to create
genuine progress in the pursuit of a just and durable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, one that
will lead to the comprehensive realization of the
independence of the State of Palestine on the basis of
pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The realization of peace and stability in the
Middle East is an utmost priority for the OIC and
the international community alike, given that a
credible political process, to which the OIC remains
committed, is of strategic significance to the entire
region and beyond. Therefore, the OIC remains firm
in its conviction that the Security Council must not
be absolved of its role and duties under the Charter of
the United Nations to take necessary and immediate
actions to ensure that Israel halts its occupation and
settlement policies, so as to enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights in line with
United Nations resolutions and international law, and
eventually to maintain the internationally endorsed
two-State solution.

Our debate today coincides with the most
intense and aggressive Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem in particular, where Israel continues to
pursue a systematic process of altering the city's
indigenous demographic composition and character
and creating facts on the ground. Israeli policies are
designed to isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian environs, in defiance of the unanimity of
the international stance, United Nations resolutions

and international law. At this crucial phase, there must
be continued economic, financial and political support
for the Palestinian people with a view to enhancing the
sustainability, viability and existence of the Palestinian
State, which faces dire financial challenges due to
arbitrary Israeli measures and illegal withholding of
Palestinian revenues.

The OIC will continue to stress that resolving
the Middle East conflict hinges on a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question. The international
consensus to realize the vision ofthe two-State solution
requires a clear stance based on international legality
and justice. There must also be full acknowledgement
of and respect for historical commitments and pledges
made in that regard, as embodied in relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.

