Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Over the past 50 years, the Security Council has
had its great moments. We believe that this evening's
meeting will be among those that have best contributed to
giving the concept of collective responsibility its true
meaning. However, our meeting this evening will have
above all contributed to making the Security Council that
prestigious assembly to which millions of human beings
turn and upon which often depends the survival of
millions of human beings like you and me, Sir. The
meeting this evening will have contributed to giving out
Council a human face and a soul.

We have listened very attentively and with great
respect to the statements made here by the countries
involved - Zaire, Rwanda and Burundi - but also to
those made by all the other members of the Council. We
have above all listened very carefully to the statement by
the representative of Canada, a most enlightening and
courageous statement. We salute the delegation of Canada
which has taken a stand in favour of the survival of that
part of humanity formed by the populations living in
misery today in eastern Zaire.

A short time ago the representative of Zaire dwelt on
the circumstances prevailing in his country, a most
regrettable situation whose precariousness is difficult to
exaggerate. However, I think that we need to remember
from what he said that Zaire, an African country we all
respect, has always been committed to championing the
human condition. Because I believe that this evening it is
indeed the human condition that is at stake.

I think, as has been said here, that apart from the
emotions and resentments - which are sometimes
justified - we first need to focus on the desire to achieve
a solution in which human rights will prevail.

 

We are living today in a world in which centres of
tensions explode all over the globe as a result of racial
hatred, the lack of tolerance, ethnic persecution, the absence
of democratic rule and unbridled political ambition. These
are the cause of confrontations and armed conflicts that
unfortunately create an exodus of thousands of human
beings who take to the roads: men, women, children and
old people are left abandoned, adrift in despair wandering
waves of humanity searching for safe - or supposedly
safe - places, forced to survive crushed together,
sometimes like cattle, in camps where the conditions were
just described by our colleague from Zaire as subhuman.

These mass movements of people, in conditions that
are difficult to control, hamper the socio-economic
development of the host countries and give rise to the
serious consequences we are deploring today. These
consequences have serious implications for the security and
stability of the countries involved, but also for regional and
international security.

The events in eastern Zaire are a clear illustration of
the reality that confronts us today. We are aware that the
magnitude of the population movements is not confined to
a humanitarian aspect. There is also a political aspect that
would be difficult to ignore the major responsibility for
which lies first and foremost with the countries involved.

Nevertheless, the assistance of the international
community is indeed proving to be indispensable. This is
why my delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
this evening, in which several other members of the United
Nations are participating. This is indeed a collective
responsibility, which we have decided to shoulder.

My country today is more convinced than ever that the
efforts of the international community, and above all the
efforts of the competent bodies of the United Nations, must
be more sharply focused, with much greater determination
and political will, on the major causes of the flow of
refugees and displaced persons. The creation of a healthier
socio-economic and political environment, as well as the
installation of political regimes that respect human rights,
including the creation of institutions based on the principle
of the primacy of law, justice and the equality of citizens,
are fundamental conditions for the mass exodus of refugees
and displaced persons to be halted.

We believe that the countries involved must create
conditions conducive to the voluntary repatriation of
refugees and to the return of the displaced persons to their
permanent homes in full safety and dignity.

 

Since 1994, the Great Lakes region has unfortunately
become the greatest hotbed of tension and inter-ethnic
confrontation in the recent experience of Africa. The
assassination of the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi
exacerbated political violence and stepped up the conflicts
in these countries in addition to causing a massive tidal
wave of displaced persons and refugees into neighbouring
countries. This deplorable situation is at the root of the
present situation and has resulted in the consequences we
are seeing today in eastern Zaire in horrifying television
images, as though broadcasters had committed themselves
to reminding us, as is in fact their duty, that in other
places, somewhere over there in Africa, a part of
humankind is suffering and that their suffering is a matter
for our universal conscience.

Thousands of people - men, women, children and
the elderly - deprived of their properties, their land, and
their livestock, deprived of everything, have fled their
country of origin seeking a safe place to survive. Today
those people are somewhere in the forest because they
have preferred this to the hostility of their compatriots, of
their very brothers, who have decided to massacre them
in the name of ethnic "superiority", which we condemn.
These people have preferred to live among wild animals,
no matter how dangerous it is, rather than risk the brutal
instincts of their compatriots. For at least three weeks
now, we have been witnessing this intolerable tragedy,
which, according to the estimates of Doctors without
Borders, has been causing more than 1,200 deaths a day.
One might wonder why the Security Council was unable
to take a decision three weeks ago. Of course, there are
reasons why the Security Council was not able to
intervene as we would have hoped, but we need to
welcome the fact that today, at last, we have the
opportunity to adopt a draft resolution in keeping with the
wishes of millions of suffering human beings in that part
of Africa, in that part of the world, which is part of our
common humanity.

There are those who wonder whether there is a
double standard in the application of international
humanitarian law. Is respect for human rights and
humanitarian law in Zaire, somewhere over there in
Africa, not as important as when we need to intervene
elsewhere, in other latitudes? We would like to hope that
this is completely untrue and that, as we have said,
Zairians, Rwandese, Burundians - Africans - are all
human beings and that we all not only deserve the
attention of the Security Council but, above all, we
deserve having the international community as a whole
ponder our fate as human beings.

 

It is true that the Security Council will at last be
adopting a draft resolution that will finally authorize the
deployment of a multinational force to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid. But in the meantime, is there not also
reason to ask how many individuals we could have saved?
Three weeks ago, Ms. Ogata presented a horrendous report
on the plight of millions of human beings in that part of the
world. That report, moreover, was largely backed by the
statements of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and above all by what the Secretary-General himself said to
us to prompt us to act: that, given the urgency of the
situation, we must put aside our differences and act as the
circumstances demand, by giving the Security Council a
soul, a human face.

This is why we welcome the stage at which we have
finally arrived. We welcome the contributions of all
delegations sitting around this table. Finally, we welcome
the fact that a decision has been taken to do something to
help alleviate the torment and suffering of an entire people.
When I say a people, I mean simply the African people,
because when a Zairian, a Rwandese or a Burundian is
suffering, when he prefers to wander in the forest or to die
rather than be killed or massacred, then we simply think -
in our country, Guinea-Bissau, but also in Algeria, Tunisia,
South Africa - that it is an African who is dying, a part of
ourselves. This is why we welcome the fact that, finally, we
have decided to render our assistance to put an end to the
misery in that country.

We thank the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts,
which are commensurate with his responsibilities. These
responsibilities give whoever presides over the fate of the
United Nations the authority and the full weight of the
Charter. We are proud to have an African to guide the
destiny of the United Nations in these times, which are so
difficult for Africa.

We also thank the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), which has met many times to address, responsibly
and with respect for human rights, the situation prevailing
in eastern Zaire. But when we say eastern Zaire, we are not
suggesting that what is taking place in that region of Africa
is a merely Zairian situation. There can be no question of
that. This is a situation in an African country and,
fortunately, we here have all agreed to remember the need
to respect the boundaries it inherited from the colonial
period. Those boundaries were formally sanctioned by the
charter of the OAU, which, through the principle of the
inviolability of borders, has ensured that we in Africa
respect our neighbours and that we live and coexist in
friendship and cooperation. Furthermore, we are pleased

 

that the representative of Zaire reminded us here that for
more than 30 years now peaceful coexistence, friendship
and cooperation have dominated the lives of the brother
peoples who live in that region of the African continent.

We hope that that same coexistence, those Virtues
which the African peoples hold so dear, will win out, and
that, on the basis of respect for borders, of the need for
respect for one another and for our political regimes, we
will be able to work towards the advent of an Africa
without the misery that we deplore.

We welcome the intervention of the Organization of
African Unity. We would also like this evening to express
our gratitude to the countries of the Great Lakes region,
which have made tireless efforts to enable dialogue to
prevail, and to enable understanding and harmony to reign
as the fundamental principles for this region of the
African continent.

We would like to thank the members of the Security
Council that took the initiative to present this draft
resolution, I am thinking in particular of the German
delegation, which, it must be said, took the initiative some
three weeks ago. We are also thinking of the French
delegation which, with determination and intelligence,
sought to remind us of our shared humanity. And, of
course, we thank the Canadian Government which, as was
stated earlier, had the courage to take the correct decision
in taking on the leadership as circumstances required to
serve our shared destiny - our shared humanity - in
making the contribution the African peoples deserve: the
peoples involved, who are our brothers and sisters.
This is why we believe that it is important for all of
us around this table and for all who will be speaking later
not only to lend their support but also to voice their
determination to commit themselves to and support the
multinational force, so that it will not only be born but
will also contribute to solving the problem.

I declare here that my country, Guinea-Bissau, is
ready to participate in the multinational force under the
conditions and terms set out in the draft resolution which
will be our responsibility and, above all, our great joy to
adopt very soon. We believe that the adoption of this
draft resolution will contribute to alleviating the suffering
of those people, who nightly fix their gaze on New York
in the hope that an end can finally be brought to their
suffering.

 

We welcome the participation of a very large number
of United Nations Member States in our deliberations this
evening. When leaving this Chamber this evening,

(spoke in English)

we should all remember, as the Argentine writer Jorge Luis
Borges says, that "Each person is all persons".

