Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to first
congratulate you, Madam President, on your competent
leadership during your country's presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I also
thank you for organizing today's briefing. The United
States has been a strategic partner of the Afghan people
in our quest for prosperity and stability.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2019/935) and welcome his Special Representative,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, whom I thank for his
comprehensive briefing and, more broadly, for his
effective leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Mr. Yamamoto's
experience and able guidance of the work of UNAMA
at an important crossroads in the history ofAfghanistan
are commendable and exemplify the long-standing
commitment and cooperation between the Governments
and the people of Japan and Afghanistan.

When talking about the situation in Afghanistan, it
is important to show the full picture, one that underlines
not only the threats affecting our country, but also the
achievements reached over years of hard work and
sacrifice. Ms. Aisha Khurram, one of today's briefers,
presents a picture of the new generation of educated
Afghan women playing an active and influential role,
not only in our local society, but at the international
level as well. As our first female Youth Representative
to the United Nations, she is the voice of the post-2001
generation - a generation that is committed to the
values of democracy, multilateralism and peace. She
represents a new Afghanistan that is striving to not
only protect the gains of the past 18 years, but to build
upon them. It is truly a testament to the evolution of a
new country.

Reflecting on that evolution requires us to
remember our difficult journey to where we are today.
In 2002, with the support and assistance of the
international community, a new era of State-building
and reconstruction that established the foundations for
democracy, the rule of law and our modern institutions
began. The adoption of a comprehensive Constitution
opened the doors to the establishment of a republic that
defends the equality of all its citizens. That new republic
called for equal provision of health services, education
and security, while instituting a democratic system of
Government that gave our people the opportunity to
elect their leaders for the very first time in decades,
with presidential and National Assembly elections in
2004 and 2005, respectively.

The pursuit of democracy and the strengthening
of our national institutions continued with the first
peaceful transfer of power, following the presidential
elections of 2014 and through the consolidation of our
security forces in 2015, after resuming responsibility
for full security from NATO. We then decided to
embark on a bold journey towards economic growth
and self-reliance through the start of our transformation
decade 2015-2024 - an important goal, in which we
re-envisioned an Afghanistan as a country no longer
reliant on aid and insisted on a country capable of
leading itself into an era of stability and prosperity.

That has required us to take steps in developing the
legal and governance foundation for the benefit of the
well-being of our people and strengthening our State.
As part of those efforts, over 400 pieces of legislation
were passed to modernize and expedite the effectiveness
of our institutions. The success of those reforms is
evident, and we can highlight the important growth
of internal revenue by over 90 per cent since 2015, as
an indicator. Efforts were also redoubled towards the
strengthening of the independence of the judiciary,
and key legislation was implemented to better tackle
corruption as a cornerstone for enhancing the rule of
law in Afghanistan.

In September, another decisive step was taken
towards the building of a stronger, self-reliant
Afghanistan. The holding of presidential elections
represented a rejection by the people, both the elders
and the young, of the ideology of extremism, as they
withstood the threats of the Taliban to empower the
republic and the strong values of democracy. That
election was safeguarded by the heroism of our Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, and I want to
take this opportunity to once again reiterate their
bravery and effective work in allowing our people to
cast a vote for the future of our country.

As we wait for the results, it is now the critical
responsibility of the Independent Election Commission
(IEC) to deliver the results of each vote cast by the
people of Afghanistan. We are a committed and patient
partner in that demanding task, and we hope that they
are able to announce the results as soon as possible. In
the meantime, we continue to call on all candidates to
allow the IEC and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to carry out their obligations according to the existing
mechanism and election law.

Since his first day in office, President Ghani has
placed peace at the top of the national agenda. He
shared his peace plan in the Kabul process and the
Geneva conference and announced unconditional peace
talks with the Taliban. As part of that, we thank our
international and regional partners who have responded
to our call for peace and provided assistance to building
an environment conducive to Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned direct talks between the Taliban and the
Government. Particularly, allow me to highlight the
role of the United States in those important efforts.

As a next step in the process, President Ghani
announced in October a seven-point peace and stability
plan to move the process forward. The elements of
that plan focus on building consensus on drivers of
conflict at the national and transnational levels and
emphasizing mechanisms to support an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The plan emphasizes
guaranteeing non-repetition of conflict and a credible
system of verification in dealing with threats posed by
transnational terrorist networks, transnational criminal
organizations and non-State actors. Finally, on a post-
peace future, it addresses the need for a development
plan, while also stressing the need for institutional
reforms to strengthen governance, fight corruption and
address post-conflict grievances.

As part of the critical work to implement that new
peace road map, the Government has identified three
immediate concrete steps to better coordinate efforts
and define priorities for the achievement of peace.
Those include the hosting of mini jirgas to determine
priorities of the mechanism to end the conflict, the
formation of an alliance consultation group that engages
the special representatives of our 12 to 15 countries in
consultations on the way forward for peace, and the
holding of additional intra-Afghan dialogues. We look
forward to the cooperation and input of our international
friends and partners as part of that framework, and we
hope that those efforts will further serve to successfully
move the peace process forward.

As we move in that new direction, it must be
highlighted that we are committed to achieving
enduring peace and stability in the country as a
common goal and a shared aspiration of the people and
Government of Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts
of our regional and international partners in seeking to
facilitate an environment for direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban, but we also remain firm
that a willingness to move that process can come only
in the form of an immediate ceasefire by the Taliban.
The gains of the past 18 years, particularly those
of women, must also be protected and expanded on
further. That is the shared view of the Afghan society
and the international community as well.

Just last month, we launched the Group of Friends
of Women in Afghanistan, along with Ambassador
Pierce, who I once again thank for her dedication
and support to women in Afghanistan. The message
of support and solidarity by respective ambassadors
coming from different countries and cultures and the
leaders of non-governmental organizations and other
organizations was loud and clear in that we cannot
have long-lasting and consequential peace without
the participation of women and the maintenance of
their rights.

While peace remains our main objective, the
Government is also focused on protecting our territory
against all terrorist threats, including those created
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da'esh. Currently, the
Taliban remains the main umbrella organization that
provides an enabling ecosystem for Da'esh, Al-Qaida
and others to launch their attacks against the security of
us all. As such, we continue to engage the Taliban in the
battlefield to prevent it from gaining any ground, while
we diminish its control in various areas. In a recent
operation in north-eastern Afghanistan, our security
forces effectively eliminated the presence of Da'esh.
More than 243 Da'esh fighters and their families
surrendered in Nangarhar province.

Afghanistan appreciates the support of NATO
forces under the Resolute Support Mission, which
continue to train our security forces, while also
providing advice and assistance in the fight against
that terrible threat. Looking forward, our focus should
be on not only defeating terrorists on the ground, but
also on countering their extremist ideologies and the
sources of financing from their nexus with organized
crime and the illegal narcotics trade.

Particularly on the latter, a comprehensive regional
approach that truly addresses the issue in all its
stages, from production to consumption, is urgently
needed. In our response to that problem, we have made
strides, conducting close to 3,000 operations this year,
seizing and destroying thousands of drugs and their
precursors in the process and arresting almost 800
individuals involved in that crime. Nevertheless, the
efforts of one country alone will be futile in the face of
a multinational threat that connects criminal networks
around the region, if the larger root causes are not
appropriately addressed. Regional platforms, such as
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, are good examples of what
could be an effective mechanism to help us strengthen
our cooperation in better countering those threats.

The selfless commitment of international humanitarian
workers in our country is a real inspiration to all
Afghans to continue our efforts to build a self-reliant
and prosperous Afghanistan. We are forever indebted
to those brave individuals, and we are determined
to build on their work to achieve the goal of a
prosperous Afghanistan.

In that context, I would like to pay tribute to the
work of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura and Mr. Anil Raj. In the
past weeks, enemies of Afghanistan targeted and killed
those two individuals, who had focused their career on
bettering the lives of Afghans. Mr. Raj, an American
citizen and a staff member of the United Nations
Development Programme, was attacked along with
two of his local colleagues. Dr. Nakamura, a Japanese
citizen who also held honorary Afghan citizenship,
known as Uncle Murad to those he worked with,
dedicated decades of his life to assisting Afghans in the
construction of irrigation canals. The Afghan people
still mourn his loss and he will be remembered as a
symbol of love and friendship between the peoples of
Japan and Afghanistan.

I will conclude by saying that we have come this far
through the steadfast commitments and goals set since
2002 to achieve a secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
Many Member States ask a genuine question in
wondering if they have done the right thing and made
the right investment. I would answer yes. They have
made the right investment by making the impossible
possible. The presence today of two women from
Afghanistan to proudly present the new nation and
the new Afghan economy is the impossible thing that,
together, we made possible.

It is now time to redouble those efforts and look
to the next step as an opportunity to strengthen and
preserve the democratic values and gains that we have
earned through the sacrifices of the Afghan people
and our international partners. We are determined to
move this unfinished mission forward and to continue
working to make Afghanistan a self-reliant, prosperous
and peaceful country.

