Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Today another important collective step has been taken
towards achieving a political solution to the conflict in
Syria. The Security Council, in the resolution that it has
just adopted 4 resolution 2268 (2016) - endorsed the
joint statement ofthe Russian Federation and the United
States of America as the co-Chairs of the International
Syrian Support Group on the cessation of hostilities in
that country, on conditions that are part and parcel of
that joint statement.

This document and the resolution that has
been adopted, which Russia co-sponsored, must be
implemented strictly and without any preconditions.
The process of implementation itself must be monitored
reliably. What is important is that the resolution was
adopted at almost exactly the same moment as the
cessation of hostilities is entering into force in Syria.
Many armed groups in Syria have already declared that
they are ready to comply with its provisions.

As was confirmed in the joint statement, the
cessation of hostilities regime will not apply to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra or
other terrorist organizations that have been recognized
as such by the Security Council. The combat against
them will continue. Our position is that the long-
term stabilization of Syria will be impossible without
eliminatimg the terrorist threat in that country.

To achieve that goal, it is essential to put an end
to efforts to use terrorists as a weapon for suspect
geopolitical aims. All sources of supply to the terrorists
must be shut down reliably. At the Syrian border we
must prevent illegal flows, which allow criminal
groups to prosper and thrive. We need to put an end
to the continuing infringement of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria by external forces.

The joint actions agreed with the United States can
contribute to making this a real turning point in the
Syrian crisis, which has gone on for far too long. We
now have a real chance to end the violence and to step
up our collective combat against terrorism and improve
the very serious humanitarian situation in the country.
Of vital importance is the fact that we are creating new
conditions for developing the political process under the
auspices of the United Nations and that the main role
will be played by the Syrians themselves. That process
should ensure a meaningful role for the Syrians that
did not leave their homeland during the many years of
conflict, in particular the Kurdish population, which is
one of the key elements in the counter-terrorist efforts.
In other words, it should ensure a meaningful role
for all the representatives of the ethnic and religious
components of Syrian society.

We understand that this process will be difficult
and complex given how entrenched the conflict has
become and the various efforts to derail the initial
progress. However, inter-Syrian negotiations must
be resumed as soon as possible and we should move
forward on all the remaining aspects of the agenda. In
fact, the resolution we have just adopted affirms that.
We hope that the United Nations will be impartial and
principled in its support of this process and that Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura will play a constructive role.

At the same time, we need to be firmly committed
to all provisions ofresolution 2254 (2015) and the other
foundational documents. We should not single out
individual components of those documents in order to
take advantage of the changing situation on the ground
or to benefit the selfish priorities of any particular
opposition group. Any measure that could derail the
political process by establishing preconditions should
be rejected. We should not be at the beck and call of
radicals, but rather should urge them to engage in
dialogue. At the same time, we must end the harmful
practice of providing external support to armed groups.
That has had a very negative impact on the political
process and threatens the future of the cessation
of hostilities.

We expect the Syrian actors, the States of the
region and the entire international community to act
responsibly and implement the whole range of decisions
on the Syrian political solution. The cornerstone of this
process should be the interests of the Syrian people. We
cannot squander this historic opportunity.

Russia has consistently supported a political
solution to the conflict in Syria. Through our joint
efforts, we launched the Vienna process and established
the International Syria Support Group. We supported
some of the most important foundational decisions of
the Security Council on this conflict. We believe that
the groundwork laid today for constructive cooperation
will be essential to success on the path towards a
peaceful solution.

In a broader context, we should discuss the
possibility of developing a comprehensive strategy for
political stabilization and the socioeconomic rebuilding
of the Middle East region and North Africa. The
solution to the challenges that the region is facing must
be collective. The proposals of the Russian Federation
to initiate broad-based cooperation in that area remain
as valid as ever.

