Allow us to congratulate you and your country, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We commend you for choosing the issue of the linkages between terrorism and organized crime as the topic of this meeting. It is a topic of interest to Qatar, which sponsored resolution 2482 (2019), adopted at the Council's most recent meeting on the subject, held in July 2019. We thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General for the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for their briefings. International terrorism in all its forms poses a significant threat, as does organized crime in all its forms, including trafficking in persons, drug trafficking, cybercrime and piracy. However, these threats are compounded by terrorist groups being fuelled by crime and criminal gangs benefiting from the spread of terrorism. For instance, terrorist groups exploit human trafficking by recruiting young people to carry out terrorist operations and using sexual violence as a terrorist tactic. Conversely, the causes of terrorism are factors in the spread of human trafficking. The risk that information resources and technologies will be used to facilitate suspicious financial transactions is a persistent one. It is therefore necessary to study and address these challenges effectively. Qatar seeks to strengthen information security and encourage international cooperation to combat cybercrime and provide a safe and robust cyberenvironment, especially given that the country has been the victim of a cybercrime that has served as a pretext to fabricate a regional crisis that has done great harm to regional and international security and stability since 2017. The threats of terrorism and organized crime take evolving forms and present constantly changing challenges that must be addressed collectively, including the current challenges in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. These threats are not confined to a particular country; bilateral and multilateral cooperation are therefore essential to an effective response. In that connection, we note the important role of United Nations bodies. Qatar engages regularly with these bodies in the context of international cooperation to identify the best practices that will ensure a coordinated and effective response, through such initiatives as the international academic conference on exploring and countering the linkages between organized crime and terrorism, held in Doha on 25 April 2018 in a collaboration between UNODC and the College of Law at Qatar University. Doha also hosted a workshop on disrupting the financing of terrorism in May 2017, in collaboration with UNODC and the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force. Qatar also co-sponsored the High-Level Conference on International and Regional Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing Through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime, held jointly by Tajikistan and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May 2019. Convinced of the need to adopt evidence-based policies and understand the causes, forms and circumstances of the linkages between terrorism and crime, Qatar co-sponsored the 2018 study entitled [Identifying and Exploring the Nexus between Human Trafficking, Terrorism and Terrorism Financing", which highlighted this important issue and helped to advance the discussion on how to help the United Nations and Member States fulfil their obligations under resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017). Aware of the importance of taking the necessary measures at the national level, in particular, continuously updating laws and regulations on combating terrorism and the financing thereof in order to address any emerging terrorist challenges, Qatar has repeatedly updated the relevant national legislation and regulations to combat cybercrime, terrorism and the proliferation of weapons. It has also established national commissions to combat terrorism, organized crime and the proliferation of weapons and to disrupt linkages among the three phenomena. In addition, Qatar has taken financial and economic measures, such as investigating and exposing networks that facilitate organized crime and instituting strict customs procedures to combat the import of smuggled goods. In conclusion, we affirm the commitment of Qatar to continue cooperating with the United Nations and Member States to eradicate all forms of terrorism and to deprive it of its sources of sustenance, which include all kinds of organized crime.
