Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation would
like to thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Greenstock, for his
comprehensive and informative briefing on the work of
the Committee. My delegation also joins others in
commending him and his staff for the very good work
done by the Committee. Let me also express my
satisfaction for the immense contribution of the
Secretariat and the experts to the work of the
Committee.

My delegation associates itself with the views
and comments expressed by Ambassador Greenstock
on the work of the Committee, and we fully support the
contents of the draft presidential statement to be
adopted after this meeting.

The overwhelming response to resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States is not only a manifestation of
the international global alliance against the scourge of
terrorism, but is also telling evidence of the desire of
each Member State to rid its territory of terrorism.
Perhaps this is the first resolution ever to receive such
a degree of acclaim and support from Members.
Indeed, it must be. When we see the indiscriminate
atrocities and callous violence meted out to innocent
citizens by barbaric acts of terrorism, when we assess
the economic and social damage and the disruption
resulting from irresponsible terrorist acts, and, most of
all, when we imagine the trials and traumas suffered by
the victims and their families, including women and
children, we realize the imperative need for immediate
action at the national, regional and international level
with a view to doing away with the plague that
international terrorism represents.
The work conducted by the CTC during the first
and second 90-day periods is, indeed, impressive. Most
of all, we appreciate the transparent and even-handed
manner in which the Committee has been operating.
We strongly support the procedures that have been
adopted; they have been very rewarding in terms of
establishing confidence-building measures between
Member States and the CTC. As Mauritius is one of the
vice-chairmen of the Committee, my delegation would
like to thank the members of the Council for the
confidence placed in our delegation. We will continue
to work with determination and to shoulder the
responsibility of the vice-chairmanship over the next
six months with full dedication.

Terrorism cannot be wiped out on this planet
without the true and genuine engagement of all
countries, individually and collectively. The
submission of reports by countries is only the initial
stage in the process. Constructive action to combat
terrorism will require more than pledges and promises.
Effective enforcement at the domestic level of the
international conventions signed by Member States
would be a good start. In addition, it will be necessary
for each country to incorporate the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) into its domestic legislation.

Allow me to make a few remarks on our
experiences with respect to our vice-chairmanship of
the Committee and Chairmanship of Subcommittee B.
We have been confronted with many questions from the
Member States that have so far been invited to our
meetings to take cognizance of the draft letters
addressed to them following the assessment of their
respective reports. Here, we would like to share some
of their concerns.

First, States have asked whether some of the
questions in the draft letter might not be beyond the
scope and purview of the mandate of resolution 1373
(2001). Secondly, they have asked whether the answers
to the questions set out in the draft letters would in any
way help in understanding whether, or concluding that,
a country has complied with resolution 1373 (2001) or
whether it has taken sufficient steps to deal with the
problem of international terrorism. Thirdly, they have
asked what the next course of action might be after the
reports of all Member States have been thoroughly
studied at the level of the CTC.

While we do not have clear and precise replies to
those questions, we believe that the objectives set out
in the resolution speak for themselves, and the very
comprehensive statement of the Chairman today will
help us to clarify many of the points raised.
Another pertinent question is the linkage between
respect for human rights and the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). It is the View of many Member
States that anti-terrorism measures should not be an
excuse for the violation of human rights. It is important
to remind ourselves of what the Secretary-General said
at a meeting of the Commission on Human Rights in
Geneva on 12 April this year. He said:

"while the Council has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and
security, this Commission has a particular
responsibility to promote the international
implementation of human rights. Therefore it
must make every effort to protect those
threatened by violations of human rights, whether
these violations result directly from terrorism or
are committed in the name of counter-terrorism."

Finally, let me conclude by making two
observations. First, terrorism is the enemy of peace,
life, hope and society. It is the enemy of all that we
should strive for and of the aspirations of ordinary
people. Secondly, in order to fight terrorism and

eradicate it from the globe, it is important to address its
causes.

