Mr. Ekorong a Dong (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/42l). The highly informative briefing that we
have just heard updates and complements the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Kosovo
during the last three months. His briefing and the
report that it complements enable us to assess the
progress made in the institutional, security and
economic areas. It is worth recalling that those three
areas constitute the three agreed priority pillars for
Kosovo for 2003.

The functioning of the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government is a reality in the
province, despite the lack of progress in dealing with
substantive issues. That lack of progress, duly noted by
the Secretary-General, is caused by internal disputes,
which, in turn, are fuelled by partisan rivalries that
spawn intolerance, hatred and the rejection of the other.

While we should welcome the acceleration of the
transfer to the Provisional Institutions of the
responsibilities outlined in chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework, there is reason to regret the
tendency of the Provisional Institutions not to abide in
their activities with the relevant provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation reaffirms that
any decision taken by the Provisional Institutions must
be in strict conformity with the provisions of that
resolution and with those of the Constitutional
Framework.

As well, the activities of the Provisional
Institutions and of the municipalities must involve all
segments of the society of Kosovo. That requires the
participation of all stakeholders in the province, indeed
of the region, in order to facilitate the reintegration,
protection, education and especially the security of
minorities.

The precarious security situation of minorities
leads me to address the second pillar of our priorities
as agreed for Kosovo in 2003: addressing the lack of
security. According to the report of the Secretary-
General, lack of security in Kosovo mainly affects
minorities. According to the report, minorities are
victims of acts of intimidation, harassment,
discrimination, threats and violence intended to
discourage them from participating in public life. Such
acts are reprehensible because they seriously
jeopardize the fragile dialogue for inter-ethnic
reconciliation and because they are a serious obstacle
to the return of displaced persons. They defeat the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which with courage,
determination and persistence is setting up attractive
projects to benefit those wishing to return to Kosovo. A
total of 247 returns were observed from January to
March 2003. That is an average of 82 persons per
month. That rate of return is particularly telling.

Faced with a situation that is destroying the hopes
of an entire people and of the international community,
we reiterate our appeal for dialogue and tolerance to all
segments of society in Kosovo. That is the only way
for a climate of peace to prevail in this part of the
Balkans, which is the only way to create conditions of
economic and social development benefiting all.

The current environment marked by the lack of
security and the absence of a strong judicial system can
hardly attract private investment. Worse, it could lead
to the gradual disengagement of the international
community. The result of this state of affairs is there to
see: the weakening of economic activity in Kosovo. To
be sure, enormous efforts have been made to train the
Kosovo police and to make the rule of law irreversible.

But the facts graphically remind us that much
remains to be done to ensure that Kosovo becomes a
State based on the rule of law - a country where peace
prevails and that can, as a result, attract the private
investment that can facilitate positive economic
growth, which, in the long term, would ensure the
development of the province.

If Kosovo is to develop in such a manner - and
we ardently hope that it will - the people of Kosovo
themselves, whatever their ethnic background, must
think of the future of their region and return to the
high-minded path of peace, tolerance and brotherhood.

I cannot conclude without conveying strong
encouragement to the Secretary-General, to his team
and to the men and women of UNMIK, who, working
with courage and determination, are seeking to
implement the recommendations of the international
community in order to bring about peace and
development for the benefit of all in Kosovo.

