I would like to thank Indonesia for organizing today's public debate and the briefers for their briefings. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has evolved from a health crisis into an unprecedented economic and social crisis with uncertain medium- and long-term consequences. It has already presented a major challenge to international peace and security, as well as to conflict prevention and the sustainability of peace. The consequences threaten to reverse the gains made in peacebuilding and development, further repress human rights, increase social and political tensions and give rise to new conflicts. The Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire, his report on the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, his human rights policy paper and the reports from field missions and country teams clearly highlight these risks. The impact of the pandemic is being felt in all situations on the Security Council's agenda. Sustainability and prevention are at the heart of any effective and sustainable response to the pandemic. The Security Council must assume its responsibility in the following three areas. First of all, Switzerland welcomes the unanimous echo given in resolution 2532 (2020) to the Secretary-General's appeal. The resolution contains important measures on delivering humanitarian assistance and maintaining space for diplomacy. It must be translated into specific follow-up measures for situations on the Council's agenda, such as in the Sahel area, Syria, Yemen and the Sudan, where the intensity of violence is on the rise and the humanitarian situation is deteriorating. The Council must demand that the parties to armed conflicts guarantee rapid, unimpeded and sustainable humanitarian access so that the needs of populations are met. The Council must put all its weight behind mediation efforts and efforts to ensure the sustainability of peace. Secondly, for a coordinated and integrated response to COVID-19, Switzerland calls on the Council to strengthen collaboration with other actors, such as the World Bank, regional organizations, national authorities and civil society. Such collaboration should include a joint analysis that reveals the risks posed by the pandemic, takes into account socioeconomic dimensions and addresses the root causes of conflicts. The Peacebuilding Commission, which has been particularly active since the beginning of the pandemic, plays a key advisory role in supporting the Security Council in this regard. The Security Council needs to work better with human rights bodies and mechanisms that rightly highlight the accelerating impact of COVID-19 on human rights violations, which are often early warning signs of future conflict. The consultations for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in Geneva, organized by Switzerland, also highlighted the role of the humanitarian and disarmament communities. Switzerland calls on the Council to further integrate these different sources of expertise, including by inviting such representatives to participate in its work. Thirdly, efforts to take COVID-19 into account in the renewal of mission mandates are progressing, but they are still insufficient. Switzerland calls on the Council to strengthen mission mandates to enable them to play a leading role in responding to the pandemic, in improving the resilience of the countries where they are engaged and in sustaining peace. Strengthening these mandates in support of inclusive and accountable State institutions, the protection of civilians, human rights monitoring and the inclusion of women and youth is essential for a sustainable response to the pandemic and for peacebuilding. Together we must strengthen solidarity and maintain our support for prevention and peacebuilding efforts, including through adequately funding such relevant entities as the Peacebuilding Fund. Despite the immense challenges, COVID-19 is also an opportunity for building back better and for increased commitment to sustaining peace.
