Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of Chad
for organizing this wrap-up session, which provides us
with an opportunity to assess the work of the Security
Council in the month of December.

The open debate on peace operations (S/PV.7343)
presented the Council with an opportunity to examine
the evolution of the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). It
also underscored the growing significance of the
collaboration between the two organizations. The basis
for that partnership is the mutual recognition that other
international organizations besides the United Nations
can and indeed do make a positive contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Our
examination of the impediments to greater coordination
between the AU and the United Nations provide a
basis for building future responses. It is imperative,
therefore, that the relevant authorities consider this an
opportunity to draw lessons and assess the prospects
for strengthening the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU.

The open debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime (see S/PV.7351) highlighted the intersection
between those two threats to international peace and
security. The fact that cross-border crimes generate
substantial revenues that are being used to finance
terrorism in the subregion and beyond demands that we
strengthen our efforts to combat money-laundering and
the financing ofterrorism. Concerted national, regional
and international action to address this challenge is
therefore vital. We commend the delegation for its
leadership role in the adoption of the first-ever Security
Council resolution on terrorism and cross-border
crime (resolution 2195 (2014). Nigeria was pleased to
co-sponsor the resolution, and it is our hope that it will
boost the fact against cross-border crime and terrorism.

The briefing on the Sahel (see S/PV.7335) revealed
that, in terms of the three pillars of the integrated
strategy for the region - security, governance and
resilience - considerable challenges remain. In the
area of security, terrorist groups like Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and the Boko Haram remain active
and continue to pose a threat to the peace and security
of the region and beyond. The transnational nature
of terrorist threats make it essential for countries
to cooperate. It is in that regard that the Republic of
Benin and the States members of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission have decided to establish a multinational
joint task force to defeat and uproot Boko Haram. We
will continue to count on the support of our bilateral
and multilateral partners in that important endeavour.

We would like to conclude by thanking Chad for
the astute manner in which it has presided over the
Council this month. We extend our best wishes and full
support to Chile as it prepares to assume the presidency
of the Council in January. We bid farewell to Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda, and commend them for their significant
contributions to the work of the Council over the past
two years. It has been a pleasure working with them.

We look forward to welcoming Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela to the Council in
January, and we assure them of our full support and
cooperation.

