Mr. Razali (Malaysia): It is a pleasure to see you
presiding over the work of the Council, Sir, whatever the
circumstances. You are presiding over a debate on an issue
that must command the priority attention of this Council,
given recent disturbing developments. If these developments
are not comprehensively addressed, they will have serious
repercussions further affecting international peace and
security. Even if we are uncertain about the effect of the
Council's debate today, the Malaysian delegation sees it as
a necessary response to the plea made by Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat to this Council to address the policy of
blockade and closure being pursued by the Government of
Israel, and also to the escalating Israeli military attacks in
Lebanon, which have brought death and misery to innocent
people and which are playing into the hands of those who
oppose reconciliation and stability in the Middle East. The
combined effect of Israeli action in Palestine and Lebanon
at a time of political volatility in Israel itself has reinforced
the position of those exploiters in Israel who want to derail
the peace process and of those extremists outside Israel
who would like to undermine the fragile foundations of
peace in the Middle East.

The Malaysian Government is deeply disturbed by the
worsening situation in the Middle East. Like others in the
international community, we feel let down that Israel should
play into the hands of extremists, allowing events, as if
inexorably, to bring everything back to a circle of violence,
where, distressingly, both Governments and extremist
groups terrorize and maim people to achieve their political
ends. The major Powers, including the United States, and
important countries of the Middle East must take steps to
arrest this slide, which could undo the historic achievements
made to this point with courage and sacrifice.

Yasser Arafat took the right step by petitioning this
Council for a debate, due to the serious hardships being
undergone by Palestinians as a result of the Israeli general
security blockade, which is also damaging the nascent
Palestinian economy. Given the current structure of the
Palestinian economy, any restrictions imposed on the
mobility of Palestinians would exacerbate the hardship of
the population living in those areas. The Israelis' closure of
Palestinian territories has resulted in rampant
unemployment and has had an adverse effect on the
Palestinians' income derived from agricultural exports.
The harsh measures adopted by the Israeli authorities
represent grave violations of the relevant provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. These measures,
which include the demolition of homes, the confiscation
of land, the expansion of settlements, and severe
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods within
as well as into and out of the Palestinian territories, are a
blatant strangulation of the Palestinian people and their
economy. Mounting resentment brings about restiveness
and retaliation, producing hotbeds of discord and
desperate action.

It would be a fatal mistake if Israeli retaliatory
action, as a result of suicide bombings by extremists,
were to bring about a serious rift in the joint
commitments between Israeli, Palestinian and other Arab
leaders, and were to divide Israelis and Palestinians. The
continuing support of both the Palestinian and the Israeli
peoples is necessary to move the peace process forward.

Only a few months back, the Malaysian delegation
joined in the universal acclaim at the signing of the
Israeli-Palestinian Agreement. We then envisaged
prospects for peace and stability in the Middle East, in
particular in the occupied Palestinian territories. Both
sides - the Palestinians and the Israelis - had shown
their strong commitment to further foster their
understanding to work together to achieve peace. Now
more than ever, these commitments to peace should not
be allowed to be derailed by extremists, or by the
temptations of domestic politicking. In the words of the
Palestinian leader,

"Peace is not the quest of the Palestinians
alone, but is a pressing need and a basic quest for
the international community, for Arabs and for
Israelis equally."

Malaysia would like to reaffirm our total
commitment to and unwavering support for the
Palestinian people and its leadership in the attainment of
all its inalienable rights, to exercise self-determination and
to establish an independent State. We equally support the
need for peace and security in Lebanon and an end to the
Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon. The Israeli
occupation of southern Lebanon not only violates the
sovereignty of Lebanon but is becoming militarily
indefensible. The way to protect Israeli security is through
 

a political compact with neighbours, and the integrity of
Lebanon must be part of that compact.

At this juncture, when the situation is delicate and
fragile, every effort must be made to consolidate the peace
process. The continued strangulation of the Palestinians
would certainly hamper the course towards peace. The
attacks in Lebanon have put Israel on a collision course.
The leaders who have been courageous enough to forge a
historic breakthrough for peace must not allow extremism
or a short-sighted policy to prevail.

