Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative
to organize today's open debate, which comes at a
timely moment, at the dawn of the year in which we
commemorate the outbreak of the First World War. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
briefing. I also endorse the statement that Ambassador
Thomas Mayr-Harting will make on behalf of the
European Union.

When in the aftermath of conflict guns fall silent,
it does not mean that peace has been restored. The end
of physical violence or even the conclusion of a peace
agreement does not erase in a simple stroke the memory
of pain and suffering that has been experienced. The
question we ask ourselves is, what do we do with this
history of conflict? Expressed in another way, how can
we demobilize not only combatants but also minds?

Following a conflict, the memory of the atrocities
experienced exercises a constraint on the process of
rebuilding a society. There is a risk that the memory
could be manipulated to serve a logic of opposition. In
contrast, there are also examples where revisiting the
past has gone hand in hand with efforts to bring people
together. That is the case of Europe in the second half
of the twentieth century.

European integration is certainly one of the best
examples of reconciliation. Countries that had made war
for generations, which were responsible for two world
wars, worked together to build a common economic area
that has became a political union. Today, the European
Union is a sui generis model, where disputes between
States are regulated exclusively by law.

European integration seems to provide us with
useful lessons for today's open debate. The first of
those lessons is that neither historical fatalism nor
determinism exists, that people who once saw in the
Other an age-old enemy have since chosen the path of
cooperation and reconciliation, which proves that the
course of history is not set once and for all and that
political will, used advisedly, remains an extraordinary
engine of progress.

The second lesson, which stems from the first,
concerns the way the past is interpreted. While the
wounds of the Second World War were still open,
Europeans rejected calls for revenge and stigmatization.
Although at no time was it a question of forgetting what
happened or of creating forced amnesia, today, when
they look at their history, Europeans do so in the light
of the cooperation that they have enjoyed for more than
60 years.

A third lesson deals with the pragmatism that
guided the building of Europe, which began by specific
achievements that created first a de facto solidarity, to
quote Robert Schuman, one of the founding fathers of

Europe. The first of those concrete achievements was
the pooling of coal and steel production in 1951 by six
countries, including my country, Luxembourg.

Despite the weight of the past, those six countries
chose to look forward towards a common future. That
approach was probably motivated as well by economic
interests, but it began a process of interdependence
that fostered reconciliation. The European model of
reconciliation is certainly the product of a historical
context that is unique to it. But it gives us a formula that
is still valid, as can been seen in the ongoing process of
the expansion of the European Union.

Let me turn now to the proposal contained in
the stimulating concept paper that was submitted to
establish the terms of our debate (S/2014/30, annex). It
is suggested that, at the end of a conflict, the Security
Council could consider assigning a team of historical
consultants the task of assisting the authorities of the
affected country or countries to recover or protect
the documents necessary to establishing a shared
interpretation of the history of the conflict.

That suggestion seems quite relevant to some of the
crisis situations that the Council is currently dealing
with, for example, the Central African Republic.
Knowing that discussions are under way for the
possible establishment of a United Nations mission
to help the Central African authorities to restore
State institutions and the rule of law, dispatching a
team of historical consultants could be considered in
that framework. The work of that team could also be
useful to the international commission of inquiry that,
under resolution 2127 (2013), the Secretary-General
is requested to rapidly establish in order to, inter
alia, investigate reports of violations of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
abuses of human rights in Central African Republic.

Collecting sources and documents could also prove
to be valuable to commence proceedings in national and
international criminal courts. We are firmly convinced
that the fight against impunity is an integral part
of transitional justice and that it is essential to post-
conflict peacebuilding. Prosecuting those responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law
will help to prevent such crimes from being committed
again in the future.

We would therefore call for such a team to provide

a voice for those without voices, namely, victims, and
collect testimony from the most vulnerable groups, such
as women, children and minorities. In so doing, we will
avoid the pitfall of an official uniform narrative of the
past that would be out of kilter with the conflict in fact
experienced by the people. For post-conflict societies
to reconcile themselves with their past, light - all the
light - must be shed on events. It is in that way that
hope for the future is born.

