Mr. Abbott (Australia): While I am happy to be
here at your urging, Mr. President, it is the weightiest
of matters that brings us together today.

Right now, thousands of misguided people from
around the world are joining terrorist groups in Syria
and Iraq because they claim Islam is under threat and
because they are excited by the prospect of battle, but
whatever they think or say, those terrorists are not
fighting for God or for religious faith. At the heart of
every terrorist group is an infatuation with death. What
else can explain the beheadings, crucifixions, mass
executions, rapes and sexual slavery in every town
and city that has fallen to the terrorist movement now
entrenched in eastern Syria and northern Iraq?

A terrorist movement calling itself the Islamic
State insults Islam and mocks the duties of a legitimate
State towards its citizens. To use this term is to dignify
a death cult - a death cult that, in declaring itself a
caliphate, has declared war on the world. Countries do
need to work together to defeat it, because approximately
80 countries have citizens fighting with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and every country is
a potential target.

Last week, an Australian operative in Syria
instructed his local network to conduct demonstration
killings, and this week, an Australian terror suspect
savagely attacked two policemen. It is hard to imagine
that citizens of a pluralist democracy could have
succumbed to such delusions, yet clearly they have.
The Australian Government will be utterly unflinching
towards anything that threatens our future as a free,
fair and multicultural society, a beacon of hope and
exemplar of unity in diversity. Already, more than 60
Australians are fighting with ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra.
More than 60 Australians have had their passports
suspended to prevent them from joining terrorist groups
in the Middle East. Our laws are changing to ensure
that foreign fighters returning home can be arrested,
prosecuted and jailed for a very long time indeed.

However, we are not just dealing with potential
terrorists at home. We are tackling their inspiration
abroad. Our combat aircraft and special forces are now
in the Middle East preparing to join the international
coalition to disrupt and degrade ISIL at the request of
the Iraqi Government. I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the leadership you have shown in assembling a
broad coalition. The participation of Middle Eastern
countries in this week's strike on ISIL in Syria is the
clearest possible demonstration that the West cannot
solve this problem alone and will not have to.

Our goal is not to change people, but to protect
them. It is not to change Governments, but to combat
terrorism. Governments that do not commit genocide
against their own people nor permit terrorism against
ours - that is all we seek. Even in what seem to be
darkening times, there are grounds for hope. The
ISIL horror has generated all-but-universal revulsion.
Muslim leaders, from Prime Minister Najib Razak of
Malaysia and President Yudhoyono of Indonesia to the
Grand Mufti of Australia have declared that the ISIL
movement is against God, against Islam and against
our common humanity. Perhaps the realization is now
dawning for all peoples, all cultures and all faiths that
it can never be right to kill in the name of God. That
would be a moral victory far surpassing any military
success.

