South Africa is encouraged by the positive developments that have taken place in the South Sudan's peace process, including the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. We further welcome the spirit of compromise and political will demonstrated by the South Sudanese leaders to create the conditions necessary to advance the peace process. This is demonstrated by the decrease in conflict-related violence, and the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their territories. We hope that the establishment of the mechanisms and committees provided for in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan to complement the prevailing positive development will be completed soon. The Security Council has recognized these important developments in the peace process and the Council has urged the international community to continue to assist South Sudan in its endeavour to achieve sustainable and long-lasting peace. It is only through the patience and support of the international community that we are witnessing a change in South Sudan. Let us continue supporting the aspirations of the world's youngest State by, among other things, availing resources and relevant expertise in support of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, especially security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well as in establishing the rule of law institutions. South Africa acknowledges the role that Charter-mandated measures such as sanctions can play, both in working towards the reduction of armed conflict between parties and, secondly, in supporting the conditions for a peace process. We have consistently maintained that sanctions should always serve as a means and not an end and be based on the context and situation as it unfolds on the ground. South Sudanese leaders have demonstrated the political will, determination and maturity to place the interests of the people of South Sudan first by agreeing to peace. They have made a commitment to building their State and requested the Security Council to remove any punitive measures that may be a hindrance towards their goal. Consistent with our position expressed in the Council in 2019 on the same issue (see S/PV.8536), we abstained today on the renewal of sanctions on South Sudan, as we remain convinced that the situation in South Sudan does not necessitate the application of sanctions. This is in line with the assessment by the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the subregional body. The African Union Peace and Security Council, in its 917th meeting, on 9 April, "urge[d] the concerned members of the international community, who imposed sanctions and other forms of punitive measures on South Sudan to immediately and unconditionally lift them, in order to facilitate the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and create conducive conditions for socio-economic recovery and development in the country". Moreover, in light of these recent developments, South Sudan continues to require our partnership and support in its nation-building, institution-building and peacebuilding efforts. In this context, the Council's consideration of reviewing the imposition of sanctions, with a view to eventually lifting them as the situation improves, is a welcome development. To conclude, we reiterate our commitment and support to the peace process in South Sudan and want to urge all of us to accompany the people of South Sudan on their journey to national unity, sustainable peace, security and development in their State.
