Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/535), his Special Representative Mr. Jan Kubis
for his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his positive
remarks this morning.

Let me begin by condemning the recent attacks
in Afghanistan. Over recent months, we have a seen a
spike in civilian deaths and injuries, including among
women and children. As Mr. Kubis noted, the killing
of Lieutenant Nigara - one of Afghanistan's senior
policewomen - is the latest tragedy. These attacks
are reprehensible and a reminder of the significant
challenge to building peace in Afghanistan.

I will focus my statement today on five key
areas: security, the 2014 elections, the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, peace and reconciliation,
and the United Nations future engagement in
Afghanistan.

First, on security, the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have now assumed the lead for
security throughout the country and continue to grow
in confidence and capability. This is a significant
achievement, but we must not be complacent. As the
Secretary-General highlights and Mr. Kubis confirmed
today, this has been a challenging summer for the ANSF.
The number of casualties has risen, underscoring that
ongoing support from the international community will
be vital. The United Kingdom will continue to support
the ANSF, including through taking the coalition lead
at the new Afghan National Army Officers Academy.

Secondly, with respect to the 2014 elections,
Afghanistan is in a crucial phase ahead of presidential
and provincial elections in 2014. The window for
candidate registration is now open, and we look
forward to broad participation, including by women,
as Afghans prepare to shape the future of their
country. A strong framework for the elections will be
essential. The Law on the Structure and Duties of the
Independent Election Commission and the electoral
law all represent significant steps towards delivering
transparent, credible and inclusive elections. For our
part, the United Kingdom will continue to support this
process, including through an additional $12 million to
the United Nations Development Programme ELECT II
programme.

Thirdly, as to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, the 3 July meeting confirmed that good
progress is being made, but neither the Government
of Afghanistan nor the international community
can afford to shift their focus. Progress in priority
areas, such as the role of women and human rights, is
essential for long-term development and to sustaining
donor funding. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to assist
in monitoring, coordinating and reporting on progress
over the coming months.

Fourthly, with regard to work towards a political
settlement, such a settlement remains the best way to
secure sustainable peace in Afghanistan. We welcome
continued efforts towards an Afghan-led peace process.
Over the coming months, we need to see early meetings
between both the Taliban and the United States and
the Taliban and the Afghan High Peace Council.
Afghanistan's closest neighbours will also be central.
President Karzai's visit to Pakistan last month delivered
tangible outcomes in the pursuit of peace and trade and
economic agreements. In addition, the United Kingdom
continues to support the Istanbul Process and other
initiatives that encourage trade, economic prosperity
and security.

Finally, let me turn to the future of the United
Nations after the elections and beyond. The partnership
between UNAMA and the Government of Afghanistan
is an important one. While that relationship will evolve
as the task facing the international community in
Afghanistan shifts its focus, UNAMA must retain the
right presence throughout the country. It must provide
the right level of support for the international community
to deliver on agreed commitments, in particular on the
human and women's rights agenda. As the report of the
Secretary-General highlights, to achieve that it is vital
for UNAMA and United Nations agencies to adopt a
"One UN" approach and better coordinate activities on
the ground.

We do not take the challenges ahead lightly. But
there is room for optimist and, together in support
of the Government of Afghanistan, we can meet our
shared vision of a stable, inclusive and prosperous
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom will continue to play
a committed and strong role in that shared endeavour.

