Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Our position on the use
of chemical weapons is well known, and we had an
opportunity to reiterate that position yesterday (see S.PV.8221), one year after the chemical attack in Khan
Shaykhun, Syria. It is absolutely important to underline
again and again that the use of chemicals as weapons is
unacceptable and constitutes a serious violation under
international law.

However, 20 years after the entry into force of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, we are seeing that this
international regime is increasingly being undermined.
We believe that it is in the best interests of all of us to
do everything possible to maintain the use of chemical
weapons as a taboo and to preserve the integrity of the
regime for the sake of global peace and stability.

With regard to the Skripal case, we have been
following the developments closely. We reiterate our
sympathy and solidarity with the Victims, as well as with
the people and Government of the United Kingdom.
The rationale for this is self-evident. The crime was
committed on British soil. As we said last time, we
hope that the necessary independent investigation
will be conducted and also vetted, including through
consultation and the exchange of information on
the basis of the relevant provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, with a View to bringing those
responsible to justice.

In this case as well, accountability is critical. We
understand that the case has now been brought to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which is the appropriate international body
to deal with the issue. There are indeed a number of
issues surrounding the Salisbury incident that need
to be clarified, and we note that upon the request of
the Government of the United Kingdom, a technical
mission of the OPCW was deployed recently and took
samples from the individuals who were exposed to
toxic chemicals. We note the updates by the Director-
General of the OPCW yesterday at the special session of
the Executive Council at The Hague. We hope that the
report of the OPCW will eventually clarify those issues.

In the meantime, it is necessary that all the relevant
parties cooperate with the OPCW and make every
possible effort to resolve the issue in the spirit of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, which clearly outlines
what needs to happen in such cases. The lack of trust
and the further deterioration of relations among major
Powers on this issue will not help but further undermine
the rules-based international order. It is very clear that
we can address some of these difficult issues only if
there is the necessary cooperation among us all and if
we abide by the rules that we have set for ourselves in
all transparency and fidelity to the truth.

