Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
sincerely congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
entire Indonesian delegation on successfully assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate on the training and capacity-building of United
Nations peacekeepers.

I wish to align my delegation's statement with the
statement just delivered by the observer of the European
Union. My statement will be very short, and I will limit
myself to a few additional remarks on beyond those
already made on behalf of the European Union.

Today's open debate builds on an important
resolution - resolution 2436 (2018), adopted in
September last year. The resolution provides important
provisions and commitments to ensure the effective
training of United Nations peacekeepers as an enabling
component of delivering effective performance as well
as strengthening the safety and security of military,
police and civilian personnel in United Nations missions.
Similarly, the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as part of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative spearheaded by the
Secretary-General, represents yet another important
milestone to shore up the effectiveness, credibility and
integrity of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The safety, security and performance of United

Nations peacekeepers was also the subject of this year's
deliberations in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. While consensus was achieved on those
particular chapters, we regret that a substantive report
as a whole could not be adopted.

As a committed and long-term troop- and
police- contributing country (TCC/PCC), Slovakia
remains strongly committed to improving the overall
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations through its comprehensive national
predeployment training, comprising language training,
cultural diversity awareness and the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse, among other areas, in
order to ensure the security and best performance of our
peacekeepers soon after entering the operational area.

In order to achieve operational readiness status,
Slovakia has developed a demanding national training
system that puts emphasis on the specifics ofthe mission,
the rules of engagement and situational awareness.
It is also our common national practice to include
subject matter experts - personnel from previous
deployment on missions - to develop scenarios that
are also part ofthe assessment team for the certification
of the contingent. Key leadership personnel receive
operational updates and consultations with deployed
contingents. In addition, women are an integral part
of the training teams, which contributes to their equal
mission preparation and performance.

We welcome the recently launched comprehensive
performance assessment system in selected United
Nations missions, including in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), where we
have our largest contingent. We hope that it will prove
to be a useful tool in ensuring proper conduct and
discipline and also serve to deliver important feedback
for participating TCCs and PCCs. In that regard,
ensuring active communication among the Secretariat's
assessment teams, force commanders and the respective
TCCs and PCCs is absolutely essential. We welcome
the upcoming visit to Slovakia next month by the
UNFICYP Force Commander Major General Cheryl
Pearce, to observe the training of Slovak peacekeepers.

Slovakia also appreciates the introduction of the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, which will
help in capacity-planning, reducing critical capability
gaps and ensuring the smooth transition of services
among Members States as their deployments undergo
changes. We think that the key to success in the force
generation process is timely, systematic and inclusive
communication among all stakeholders.

In conclusion, as we approach the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers this month - on
29 May - allow me to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all those who wear blue helmets and
serve under the United Nations flag, as well as to pay
tribute to all those who have lost their lives in the
service of peace.
