Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for presiding today over the
first-ever Security Council meeting on the cooperation
between the Security Council and the League of Arab
States. We also thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Secretary-General Aboul Gheit of the League of
Arab States for their briefings. We would also like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland to
today's meeting.

I want to join the Secretaries-General in
condemning today's attack on the maritime vessels in
the Gulf of Oman. We must keep the sea lanes safe for
global commerce and travel.

The Charter of the United Nations gives the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Chapter VIII of
the Charter also recognizes the complementary roles
of the United Nations and regional organizations in
this regard. Political and strategic alignment between
the Security Council and regional organizations has
yielded effective results, as we have seen in the cases of
Somalia and the Sudan, among many other examples.
Such coordination should be enhanced and become
more formalized and structured, which is why South
Africa has consistently championed the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

As Council members are aware and recall, South
Africa played a pioneering role in the adoption of
resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 (2012) to further
strengthen the relationship between the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council. Through these resolutions, we, as a country
and as a representative of the African continent,
demonstrated our collective political will to strengthen
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

We also believe that cooperation among regional
organizations is equally important, especially in
instances where there is overlapping membership,
which is the case with the League of Arab States
and the African Union. In these instances, regional
organizations should collaborate on developing
regional solutions to such common challenges as the
prevention and resolution of the conflicts, in particular
those ravaging Africa and the Arab world.

South Africa is of the View that cooperation among

global and regional bodies is critical to reaching a deeper
understanding of regional challenges, seeking solutions
for regional peace and security, and implementing
agreed solutions, agreements and frameworks. We
have found that since the start of cooperation between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
the relationship between the two has been meaningful
and useful in finding common ground on peace and
security issues on the African continent. South Africa
wholly supports improved and increased cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States as this is pertinent to dealing with conflicts in
the Arab region.
South Africa appreciates the efforts of the League
aimed at promoting peace in the Middle East region,
especially those intended to further the Middle East
peace process, the oldest peace and security item on the
Council's agenda. It is therefore vital that the United
Nations strengthen its engagement with the League
of Arab States. In this regard, South Africa welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari as
the Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific, which was created as part of the
Secretary-General's proposed reforms of the United
Nations peace and security architecture.

We emphasize that in its cooperation with the
League of Arab States, the Council should be consistent
in addressing all of the conflicts in the Middle East,
rather than selectively choosing some to the detriment
of others. The underlying causes of uprisings and long-
standing conflicts have to be addressed in a coordinated
manner. We have not seen such an approach applied to
the Middle East. There has been swift international
reaction to some conflicts, while in others such
cooperation is lacking. This is evident when it comes to
the Israeli-Palestinian question, and it is unacceptable.

As we continue to consolidate and strengthen
cooperation among the United Nations, the League
of Arab States and regional organizations, we call on
the members of the Council to value and support these
relationships and consistently make use of them in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We support the draft presidential statement that
will be adopted at the end of our deliberations.

