Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Before starting, I would also like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. Jose Viegas Filho of Brazil as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Viegas has more than four decades of experience
in public service and diplomacy, and the PBC looks
forward to closely working with him. I would also
like to thank the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure, for his close
collaboration with the PBC and the Peacebuilding
Support Office (PBSO) during his tenure in Guinea-
Bissau.

Since my previous briefing to the Security Council,
on 14 February (see S/PV.8182), there have been positive
developments in Guinea-Bissau. I will not dwell long on
those points, especially after the excellent briefing we
received today from the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun. As
we have heard, President Jose Mario Vaz appointed
Aristides Gomes as the new consensual Prime Minister
and confirmed that legislative elections would be held
on 18 November. Members of the new Government
were sworn in on 26 April.

After almost three years of political impasse, an
extraordinary plenary session of the Parliament was
convened on 19 April, when the National People's
Assembly elected new leadership for the National
Electoral Commission (NEC) and extended its ninth
legislature until November. The appointment of a new
Chair of the NEC is indeed an important step, since that
was a factor blocking the preparations for the upcoming
elections in November. As I informed the Council
during my statement in February, that was stressed by
many of my interlocutors in Guinea-Bissau last July,
when I visited the country.

Let me also add that, on 3 May, the Chair of the
organizing committee of the National Conference
for Guinea-Bissau on Peace Consolidation and
Development, Father Domingos da Fonseca, delivered
a report to President Jose Mario Vaz entitled "In the
name of peace". That document was drafted after a
long process of national consultations involving more
than 3,000 people in the Guinean diaspora and in the
country. The paper examines a series of issues related
to peacebuilding and aims to contribute to national
reconciliation. Preparations for that report began in
2009, and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) provided
support to it.

With regard to the PBF, it is worth mentioning that
the implementation of its new portfolio for Guinea-
Bissau started this year. As I mentioned during my
previous briefing, it consists of six projects, totalling
$7.3 million, running from January 2018 to June 2019.
It aims to contribute through bottom-up peacebuilding
approaches, supporting inclusive processes and
strengthening the participation of women and youth.

On Monday, 14 May, I convened a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to discuss the
situation in the country. On that occasion, we received
briefings from Mr. David McLachlan-Karr, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau; Mr. Tanou Kone, Permanent Observer
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-
Bissau; Ambassador Fernando Delfim da Silva of
Guinea-Bissau, and Ms. Barrie Freeman, who updated
us on the most recent work of the PBSO.

During that very positive meeting, participants
expressed support for developments in the country,
including the fact that the constitutional framework for
free and fair elections would be respected. Members
also underlined the engagement of ECOWAS and
recognized the effective, preventive and deterrent role
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the importance of ensuring its continuity until the
necessary conditions for its withdrawal were fully
met, at least until the 2019 presidential elections.
The PBC therefore would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the political actors
for the constructive spirit that allowed for the consensus
appointment of Prime Minister Aristides Gomes and
his Cabinet and the establishment of a date for the
legislative elections this year.

I would like to stress, however, the importance of
continued support for that positive momentum and to
underline the need to move forward on other provisions
of the Conakry Agreement, including the adoption
of a stability pact. I am sure that the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau and key political actors will continue
to demonstrate leadership and determination in
that direction.

I would also like to recognize the efforts of the
region to solve the political impasse in the country.
That was made possible due to an exemplary showing
of international coordination, which includes the
group of five international organizations involved
in the peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau,
that is, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union, the United Nations and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP). The PBC
actively participated in these efforts.

All of what I have mentioned speaks to the
sustaining peace approach in peacebuilding and the
importance of ensuring the coherence of international
efforts in support of building and sustaining peace
in a country-specific context, with a strong emphasis
on inclusiveness and partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as other relevant
stakeholders, including civil society. This is also where
the added value of the PBC comes into play.

With regard to the electoral process, important
challenges ahead include, inter alia, the financing ofthe
elections and the update of the voter registration list.
The existing financial challenges must be surmounted
in order to allow for the timely preparations for
the elections. A project document in support of the
elections has been signed between the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau. The total budget of $7.7 million
covers technical preparations for mapping, an update
of voter registrations and the practical administration
of the elections. It is important to underline that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau has already made an
unprecedented contribution to this basket fund. UNDP
has also made contributions. In addition to the ongoing
technical assistance the European Union is providing to
the Technical Office for Electoral Processes Support, it
is also preparing its contribution to the elections support
project. However, additional financial resources are
still needed. I would therefore once again like to call for
the support of the international community for bridging
the existing financial gap associated with the process.

I would also like to reiterate to the Council my
intention to visit Guinea-Bissau in the coming months,
probably in July, to consult with a broad range of
stakeholders on how the PBC can further support
peacebuilding efforts in the country, especially the
upcoming elections. The exact date of the visit will be
scheduled in consultations with the local authorities.
The visit will allow me to witness at first hand the
ongoing preparations for the legislative elections.
On my return, I intend to convene a PBC meeting to
discuss the process. I would also like to reiterate my
disposition to share the findings with the members of
the Security Council.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration will continue
to be actively engaged in following the situation
in Guinea-Bissau and in providing support for the
country through different initiatives. All efforts must
be made to encourage the international community to
demonstrate renewed confidence in Guinea-Bissau now
that the political impasse has been addressed.

Finally, I would like to remind the Security Council
that Brazil is currently the Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. As was done when
I previously briefed the Council, the members of the
CPLP have endorsed my remarks and recommendations.

