Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on our sister country of Indonesia's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to wish you all the best. I would also
like to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, on his efforts as President
of the Council for the month of April.

Since 2011 we have affirmed that the Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area forms the basis for a
comprehensive solution that should ultimately decide
Abyei's final status. The Agreement cannot be violated
or its outcome changed without the approval of the three
parties concerned, the Governments of the Sudan, the
Republic of South Sudan and the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia. By its nature, therefore, the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is
a security force. It was deployed solely as a military
component to carry out specific functions for a specific
period of time. That is what all the parties agreed to
and what the Security Council adopted. Now the
Council has just adopted resolution 2469 (2019), which
has overridden one of the most important principles
of UNISFA and peacekeeping operations by creating
a position of a civilian Deputy Head for UNISFA, in
a violation of the 2011 Agreement. This appointment,
without the approval of the parties concerned, is also
considered a Violation of one of peacekeeping's main
principles, the approval of the host country. As Council
members know, Abyei is part of the territory of the
Sudan, which has full sovereignty over it by virtue of
the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

With regard to the changes created by the resolution
just adopted by the Council, I want to express the
Government of the Sudan's total rejection of any
steps designed to change the mandate, composition or
nature of UNISFA's work, including the appointment
of a civilian Deputy Head, increasing the police
component and deploying a civilian component. In
order to make sure that the Government of the Sudan
can continue to cooperate and coordinate with UNISFA
and other parties, we urge that our position be taken
into consideration. We call on the United Nations to
refrain from taking any action without consulting and
gaining the approval of the Government of the Sudan.
Maintaining the 2011 Agreement and working to
implement its provisions as quickly as possible is the
only way to resolve the Abyei issue and maintain the
security and stability of the area and the region.

As Council members know, the Agreement
provided for establishing three joint mechanisms for
administering the area until a final status is reached.
The Government of the Sudan has emphasized time
and again the importance of creating those entities,
especially an Abyei police service, which could carry
out security functions better than any international
component, as well as creating a joint administration
committee and joint legislative council. The tasks to
be carried out by each of these temporary entities were
specified in detail, agreed on by the Government of the
Sudan and the Government of South Sudan and adopted
by the African Union and the United Nations in the
June 2011 Agreement.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm that the
Government of the Sudan is determined to cooperate
with allpartnerstoreachapermanentand comprehensive
solution that maintains security and stability in the area
and the region and provides our people in Abyei with
the opportunity to live the decent life that they deserve.
We also stress that we are fully open to any initiative
that will help to reach our main objective, which is a
final settlement of the Abyei issue. I would also like to
thank all who have made efforts to facilitate the work
of UNISFA, especially the Government of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the African Union
Commission and the United Nations.

