Mr. Konishi (Japan): The persistent delays in the
implementation of the Angolan peace process have finally
exhausted the patience of the international community. Let
us be clear about where the responsibility for those delays
lies: it lies primarily with UNITA, which time and again
has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

If UNITA and its leadership harbour any hope that the
international community lacks the will to act decisively, or
that it can be cajoled into tolerating further delays, the draft
resolution which we are about to adopt should disabuse
them of that mistaken notion.

The United Nations, and specifically the Security
Council, has been engaged in Angola for nearly a decade.
Working with the Angolan people, it has advanced the
peace process one small step at a time, fortified by the
confidence that true and lasting peace will one day be
achieved. Now, at the final stage of that lengthy process,
there is a great deal at stake. We must not fail the Angolan
people by allowing the situation to once again erupt into
conflict. In this context, I heartily welcome the recent
reaffirmation by the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation of its commitment to resolve the remaining
issues by political, not military, means. Japan commends
the Angolan Government for continuing to demonstrate
admirable patience and self-restraint in the face of a
difficult situation.

These past few months have been a particularly
critical period in the Angolan peace process. The United
Nations, and those who have worked with and for the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola under the
guidance of Special Representative Beye, deserve our
deep appreciation for their steadfast commitment and
careful efforts to facilitate the peace process. But now the
time has come for the Security Council to take decisive
measures to demonstrate to UNITA and its leadership that
their lack of cooperation will no longer be tolerated. The
draft resolution before us sends precisely that message,
and Japan will vote in favour of it.

If UNITA's leaders contemplate the impact which
the sanctions called for in this draft resolution will
have - on their very political survival - they will
realize that they have no recourse but to cooperate, fully
and without delay, in completing the tasks remaining
under the Lusaka Protocol. Thus, I call upon UNITA to
heed the will of the international community and
demonstrate through concrete actions that it is committed
to the peace process. If it does so by 23 June, as stated in
the draft resolution, the sanctions will not be imposed and
cooperative efforts for the consolidation of peace
throughout Angola will resume. The longer it delays, the
greater will be its responsibility in prolonging the
suffering of the Angolan people will be.

