I would like to join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Estonia is concerned about the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to Somalia, and we welcome measures taken to combat the disease. Even in the face of the obstacles created by the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that Somalia, together with the international community, should not lose sight of the long-term goals of State-building. In that connection, we would like to highlight the following points. On the political front, holding peaceful, transparent and one-person-one-vote elections, within the agreed time frame, must remain a priority. In that regard, it is crucial that the Federal Government of Somalia and all federal member states urgently resume their dialogue. It is also important that the remaining issues regarding the electoral law be addressed. We warmly welcome any progress made and strongly encourage further efforts to those ends. On the security front, we welcome the commitment of the Somali authorities to update the transition plan. Clear timelines, clear tasks and a clear vision are crucial in order to achieve the end goal of Somalia taking full responsibility for its security. We will achieve the best results on how to get there if all stakeholders work closely together. Therefore, we encourage the Somali authorities and all key partners to engage in inclusive discussions about international support for the post- 2021 arrangements. We also welcome the joint operations against Al-Shabaab in Lower Shabelle. However, we underline the need for the military operations against Al-Shabaab to be conducted in compliance with human rights law and international humanitarian law. We are very concerned about the threat of the increased use of improvised explosive devices in Somalia. To address that trend, we should support Somalia in the development of a national regulatory framework that would help to effectively combat the threat. In addition, on the operational level, it is important to support the capacity-building of security institutions and the Somali National Army through the provision of training and equipment. Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian situation, which is exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, a locust infestation as well as floods. We are concerned that the humanitarian response plan for 2020 remains only 17 per cent funded and call for the international community to address that. I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia's thanks and support to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment and sacrifices to make long-term peace and stability in Somalia a reality.
