Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like thank you, Madam, for the initiative of
organizing this meeting on the issue ofthe consequences
of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons for
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations on the issue.

The most widespread and easily accessible
instruments of violence are small arms and light
weapons. Their proliferation and accumulation pose a
genuine threat to international peace and security and
to the development of many countries. These weapons
are light in name only, because in countries in conflict
and even those at peace, they are often the leading cause
of violence, suffering, loss of human life, unspeakable
misfortune and turmoil for families and societies.

The disturbing ease with which such weapons can be
acquired is a result of the illegal trade going on around
the world. There is also a direct link between the illicit
trade in small arms and the activities of armed groups,
rebels and terrorists, as well as the illegal exploitation
of natural resources.

Africa, like other continents, has not been spared
the uncontrolled circulation and use of small arms.
Because of weaknesses of every kind and vulnerability
of its States, Africa remains, unfortunately, the most
profitable market for arms dealers and thus has the
highest number of victims. Given this situation, it is
imperative that effective measures be taken against
their proliferation and illegal use in order to prevent
conflicts and ensure States' stability and the success of
peacebuilding processes.

We welcome the fact that the international
community is now involved in the process of
negotiating the limitation, control and reduction of
weapons systems. The Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which entered
into force in 2005, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, is
one of many examples of the United Nations response
to this scourge. Even more important were the adoption
and opening for signature by the General Assembly of
the Arms Trade Treaty (see resolution 67/234 B). These
positive actions by the United Nations complement the
many national, subregional and regional initiatives on
the African continent.

Despite all these initiatives, the existence of
uncontrolled weapons remains a multidimensional
problem that is deeply interlinked with other,
broader security issues and that has implications for
development. The biggest problem is the coordination
of the various national and subregional initiatives, given
limited resources and legal systems and institutional
and technical capacities that vary so greatly. All that
is against the backdrop of porous borders and the
risk of national efforts losing their relevance. It goes
without saying that no State can fight alone against this
phenomenon.

The nature of the problem caused by small arms
therefore requires coordinated and complementary
efforts among the various organs of the United Nations
system.

Mainly, it is important that Security Council fulfil
its mandate to ensure peace and security in the world
by giving increased attention to two fundamental
issues: respect for arms embargoes, and participation
in the disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration ofex-combatants. Indeed, arms embargoes
must be respected in order to prevent arms from falling
into unsuitable hands. In view of this, the Council must
take, as necessary, sanctions against those who violate
embargoes.

Similarly, the management of post-conflict
situations is a very important element. Thus, it is
imperative to collect weapons from ex-combatants and
neutralize and destroy them. Such programmes should
be systematically included in peace agreements ending
internal conflicts and in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. These actions should go hand in hand
with the demobilization of ex-combatants and their
integration into civilian life, with particular attention
to the plight of child soldiers.

The work of the Security Council would be more
effective if it were accompanied by support from
the international community. Certainly, the General
Assembly adopted, on 2 April 2013, the Arms Trade
Treaty, which Togo welcomed and proceeded to sign the
first day of its opening for signature. The international
community should work for the ratification and rapid
entry into force of the Treaty and ensure its effective
and practical implementation. Togo is preparing to
carry out this formality within the next few weeks.

However, in the meantime, the international
community and the United Nations should help
countries strengthen arms control and facilitate the
harmonization of national legislation and regional
and subregional coordination. A special focus by
the Security Council on this issue will allow us to
effectively address the security and humanitarian
dimensions of the phenomenon, as the resolution just
adopted (resolution 2117 (2013)) urges us to do.

