We wish to begin by thanking the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing this timely topical debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic swept across the globe in an unprecedented fashion and caught us off guard. The effects of the pandemic on our societies are profound and far-reaching, including in the maintenance of international peace and security. It is therefore important that we come together and exchange views on the security implications of the crisis. From our perspective, one of the main lessons learned is the importance of multilateralism, cooperation and solidarity. After the initial shock, countries and international organizations came together and responded to each other's needs. We would therefore like to point out that, in line with Slovenia's dedication to the stability and well-being of its immediate neighbourhood, most of our in-kind assistance during the COVID-19 pandemic has been directed to the Western Balkans. Assistance was delivered to North Macedonia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Medical experts were also flown in to conduct COVID-19 testing among troops of the European Union-led peacekeeping force. However, we also decided to engage on a wider scale. We provided contributions to international organizations, such as the World Health Organization, the International Committee of the Red Cross, et cetera, and started the process of reprogramming our development assistance. As part of this global approach, we decided to maintain our personnel in all missions that we participate in abroad, including United Nations peace operations. Regarding the procurement of medical equipment during the pandemic, we cannot but acknowledge some issues that the crisis has brought to the fore. I must express my concern about the difficulties that many United Nations States Members, including my own, encountered in procuring the necessary medical equipment and capabilities in the hour of need. This is security vulnerability, and it has to be treated as such. This issue is something that we must work on together. In Slovenia, we have already come to the conclusion that we need to increase our resilience, including by planning an investment in additional airlift capability for the Slovenian Armed Forces. The United Nations and its specialized agencies, for their part, could make an important contribution by providing a higher level of transparency and early warning. Turning to the issue of water and COVID-19, the pandemic has also served to highlight access to clean water as a key factor in ensuring global health and food security. Ensuring water, sanitation and hygiene, particularly hand washing, is deemed one of the most effective and cost-efficient measures for preventing the spread of COVID-19 and numerous other contagious diseases. Our attempts to stop the virus should go hand in hand with strengthened cooperation among States and other relevant stakeholders through water diplomacy as a mechanism for building peace and health. The COVID-19 crisis has also revealed the essential role of efficient cooperation between multilateral agencies and the United Nations in the very fragmented area of water. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown how important digital assets have become to our societies. We see an accelerated digital transformation across the globe, as many countries around the world struggle to sustain business, work and education processes during extended lockdown periods. Networks, connectivity, digital skills and cybersecurity have proved to be indispensable in tracking the spread of the virus and pursuing a robust recovery. Another issue that has to be addressed is disinformation. There have been many examples of it, including a false story about a supposed outbreak of COVID-19 among members of NATO's multinational battalion battle group in Latvia. Let me say that we did not take this fake news lightly, not only as a NATO ally but also as a country whose soldiers form an integral part of that unit. This sort of propaganda in times of crisis must be stopped. We therefore think that the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and resolution 2532 (2020) should be complemented by acknowledging the existence of hybrid threats. These are real and contribute to mistrust and animosity among countries and their peoples. As such, they should also be addressed by the United Nations. With regard to a global ceasefire during COVID-19, Slovenia welcomes the fact that the Security Council finally adopted the resolution on a ceasefire, following the Secretary-General's appeal. However, we have to express disappointment that it took the Council more than three months to take action. The lukewarm, patchy and delayed reaction of the Security Council on this time-sensitive matter did not help the most disadvantaged, living in conflict zones. This is why Slovenia joined other countries in the core group that issued the joint statement in support of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We are happy that the wide support confirmed the collective and unified endorsement of the call. With the COVID-19 outbreak, people in conflict zones are now faced with yet another threat to their lives. Despite the delayed action, the pandemic is still very much present in the world, and the second wave is projected to break out in the coming months. We therefore welcome the fact that the adopted resolution should bring about some relief for the people living in conflict zones. COVID-19 and the pandemic's complex security implications are an example for my last point. While the States members of the Security Council hold the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, they do so not only in their specific national capacities but on behalf of the wider United Nations membership. This holds true for both the non-permanent as well as the permanent membership categories. Extraordinary times such as these are no time for capricious politics. We sincerely hope that the Security Council and the United Nations will learn from the pandemic and come out of it stronger and more prepared for the upcoming challenges. In saying that, I fully acknowledge that the United Nations is us, the Member States, and Slovenia will continue to do its best to ensure a constructive and meaningful contribution to the joint effort.
