Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I should like to echo what you said towards
the end of your briefing in thanking the entire team,
and especially the members of the Security Council
Affairs Division, who did outstanding work. With
your permission, I also wish in particular to thank the
interpreters. What they did was incredible. Two people
were on their feet for three days, from morning till
night, trying to interpret. I must admit that my own
French is not always perfect, so their performance was
especially remarkable. I also thank the members of the
security team.

I also thank France and C6te d'Ivoire. This was a
very enjoyable experience for me. It was also a first
to have three countries co-lead such a mission. The
cooperation among members who undertook the trip
was most gratifying. At some moments it brought back
memories of journeys I took with my friends in high
school. On the other hands, it was also very tiring.
There were two colleagues, whom I shall not name,
who remained behind in Paris for a few days before
returning to New York.

As to Burkina Faso, I believe that our visit there
was most timely. The country has gone through a
very difficult time. The members of the Security
Council conveyed a message of support, friendship
and solidarity, which I believe was understood by all
of our interlocutors. We were very well received in all
of our exchanges. The programme extended a full day,
from our arrival in the morning until our departure
in the evening. We had a very busy agenda - almost
crazy - but a very interesting one. We met with the
entire United Nations team there, as well as with
representatives of civil society, including mayors. I
must say that, like in Mali, we were all very impressed
by the competence, energy and commitment of civil
society representatives. We held a lengthy meeting with
key Cabinet ministers and representatives of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, on which our colleague from
Cote d'Ivoire will elaborate later. We were received by
President Kabore', who held a long and very collegial
meeting with us.
I wish to make three important points.

First, while Burkina Faso has no equivalent to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, there is a strong United
Nations team. Mr. Chambas, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, is very involved
in developing a strengthened United Nations strategy
on the ground. We met with Resident Coordinator Metsi
Makhetkha, who made a very favourable impression on
us. She is deeply committed. We also felt that she has
brought the entire United Nations team together to work
as one, which is critically important. Prior to that, the
members of the Security Council held a meeting with
the Peacebuilding Commission. We saw on the ground
the important role being played by the Peacebuilding
Fund, as noted by our interlocutors. In other words,
there is a good United Nations team on the ground.

Secondly, we must address the challenges. As I
said at the outset, the country has gone through a very
difficult time. The security situation is fragile, not
only along the borders with Mali and the Niger, but in
other regions as well, which is truly worrying. There is
intercommunal tension, like in Mali. The socioeconomic
situation is also very fragile. In Burkina Faso, too,
schools and health centres are closed. There are 140,000
displaced persons. Many have also mentioned climate
change, which has tragic consequences on the security
situation on the ground.

Thirdly, with regard to the domestic situation,
we encouraged the Government to pursue the path of
democratic reforms within the country. Those reforms
began three years ago, and we have encouraged the
Government to continue reforming the Constitution,
organize elections and reform the education system.
We have also urged them to implement laws that have
been adopted on combatting corruption, stressing the
necessity of zero tolerance for corruption. We also
stressed the importance ofreopening schools and health
centres, as well as of building new housing, given the
demographics of the country. Finally, we emphasized
the need to work to ease the tensions among the various
ethnic communities.

With regard to human rights, we mentioned
several times that there have been damning reports of
summary executions of civilians by security forces. We
have called for impartial judicial investigations to bring
those responsible to justice. The message we conveyed
is that the fight against terrorism must be carried out in
respect for human rights.

The last important message relates to women and
children, who have suffered most in the crisis. We
must protect them and strengthen the participation of
women in Parliament and in administration. In the light
of the demographics, their support is also needed for
family planning.

Finally, after long discussions with the Government,
we got the impression that the Government is truly
committed to doing what must be done. We must
recognize the difficult budgetary and security situation,
but the Government is willing to take action on human
rights. Even before we raised the point of ensuring a
strong justice system, they mentioned the importance
of respecting human rights.

As I said before, this was a good visit. I will
conclude by saying that we need to continue to improve
the situation and to see it through the lens of conflict
prevention. I think the visit was key, but we must
continue to engage with the country and the region.

