Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their
statements. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto

ll-33372
Zannier for his informative update on the situation in
Kosovo.

Nigeria welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/201l/281) and the observation that the
overall situation in Kosovo has remained relatively
stable during the reporting period. We appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to foster cordial relations
among all actors within the country and in the region.
This remains vital to ensuring lasting peace, prosperity
and stability in Kosovo. UNMIK therefore deserves the
continued support of the Council and the international
community.

Nigeria welcomes the ongoing European Union-
facilitated talks aimed at regional development,
enhancing cooperation among local actors and progress
towards joining the European Union (EU). There is a
need for the parties to remain engaged in the process
and to show the flexibility, compromise and
constructiveness needed to achieve results. We
commend the European Union and UNMIK for their
contributions and urge them to continue to offer their
facilitation in support of the talks.

While the Secretary-General's report indicates
that the situation in northern Kosovo is calm, the
underlying tensions suggest that the situation remains
fragile. Broad-based consultations aimed at promoting
social change and reconciliation among the
communities are needed as a matter of policy.

The Council can and should do more to help
build confidence among the communities and
consolidate peace and stability in the country and in
the region. It is in this regard that we call on UNMIK
to continue to play its pivotal role in facilitating inter-
ethnic contacts and fostering cordial relations with
international actors. We hope that the EU-facilitated
talks will provide an opportunity to address more of the
outstanding issues.

The low number of returns, forced returns and the
fiscal and socio-economic limitations that impede the
reintegration of returnees deserve serious and
concerted action. We reiterate the importance of
promoting voluntary returns and the viability of the
conditions of return, such as access to public services,
housing and property rights, and socio-economic
activities. The law-enforcement authorities should also
reinvigorate their efforts to curtain the harassment of,
and attacks on, returnees. Such measures should go a
long way towards promoting safe returns as well as
reconciliation and the long-term stability and
development of Kosovo.

On the issue of investigations relating to the
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo, we remain convinced of the
need to bring to justice those held accountable. A
thorough international investigation is therefore
required. However, in such an effort, the various
jurisdictional issues involved in the matter should be
taken into account. It is essential that the relevant
national authorities, UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) provide the
necessary technical, organizational and logistical
support to the investigation.

Nigeria appreciates the untiring efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his team in the promotion of peace and security in
Kosovo and in the region. We would also like to note
in this regard our satisfaction with the cooperation
between the Mission, EULEX, the Kosovo Force, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
as well as United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes aimed at improving the lives of all
Kosovars.

