Mr. Griffiths: Members of the Council may recall
that, after the events in the south in August of this year,
I called for decisive action to seize the opportunities
available for peace in Yemen. Since then, the
momentum to reach a political settlement in Yemen has
been building. We have seen the parties work together
with the support of Saudi Arabia, regional powers, the
international community and the United Nations to
achieve compromise on a range ofissues, including the
situation in the south, the de-escalation of hostilities
and specific economic challenges. None of those are
small issues. Reaching compromises has been no small
achievement by those involved.

We are now beginning to see the need in Yemen
for the kind of leadership that creates peace. A leader
for peace is one who practises the art of concession
and of inclusion and who encourages forbearance over
entitlement. We are now seeing some evidence of that
kind of leadership. In this briefing, I would like to give
some examples.

The Riyadh agreement, signed on 5 November
between the Government of Yemen and the Southern
Transitional Council, is a first example. The events of
August created what I defined to the Council at the time
as "an existential threat" to Yemen. The prospect of a
break-up of the State was real and, frankly, terrifying.
During the talks leading to the Riyadh agreement,
negotiated over 86 days, leaders from opposing parties
sat down and agreed to work for a greater cause. The
mediator, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in the best
traditions of that role, praised them for their courage
rather than criticizing them for the many weeks of hard
work that had gone into making that moment happen.

We must all thank President Hadi Mansour and
the Southern Transitional Council, as well as the Saudi
leadership, for this example of how to bring out the
best in the parties. It should serve as a catalyst to move
Yemen swiftly towards settling the conflict before us in
the Council through political means.

Saudi Arabia's achievement in that regard shows
the positive role that regional support can play in
all our efforts to achieve peace. Two weeks ago, I
had the privilege to meet with the Crown Prince and
Deputy Prime Minister, His Royal Highness Prince
Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
He was very positive about the prospects for a
comprehensive peaceful resolution to the conflict in
Yemen and made clear to me that Saudi Arabia would
support efforts to make that happen soon. That was
confirmed on Wednesday by Saudi Arabia's King
Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud in his message to the
Shura Council, in which he hoped that the agreement
signed in Riyadh would open the door to broader peace
talks. I am grateful to the leadership of the King and
that of the Crown Prince for their words of support.

In what is perhaps an even more important sign
that something is changing in Yemen, I would draw
the Council's attention to a simple indicator of the war
itself. In the past two weeks, the pace of that war has
dramatically reduced. There were reportedly almost
80 per cent fewer air strikes nation-wide than in the
previous two weeks. I realize that those are short
periods but nonetheless it is striking. In recent weeks,
there have been entire 48-hour periods without any air
strikes for the first time since the conflict began.

We call this de-escalation, a reduction in the tempo
of the war and perhaps, we hope, a move towards the
overall ceasefire in Yemen for which Mr. Lowcock,
Ms. Mueller, I am sure, and many members of the
Council have been calling for a very long time. The
cessation of missile and drone attacks on Saudi territory
announced by Ansar Allah on 20 September has been
sustained for the second month in a row. Efforts to
de-escalate Violence are holding. I hope that we will all
soon be able to build on that achievement.

I should say here very clearly that I fully support
and endorse all efforts that reduce the war in Yemen.
I am sure that the members of the Council agree with
me. As the United Nations, we continue to uphold our
responsibility to bring the parties closer to ending the
conflict. What is taking place at the moment, both in
the south and in the north, lays the necessary, indeed
vital, groundwork for that process. The acts that we
have seen translated into a reduction of the tempo in
the war and an agreement on the south are the decisions
of leaders who begin to see, perhaps as yet indistinctly,
though clearly unmistakably, a prospect for peace.
They are doing the right thing. Let us have a lot more of
it. We therefore celebrate these achievements, even as
we prepare for our turn at the table.

My third example relates to the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, which is now almost
a year old. We have seen continued positive signs in
Al-Hudaydah, where the parties have taken further
steps forward in implementing the agreement reached
in Stockholm last year. In an earlier briefing to the
Council, Mark Lowcock and I both spoke of the urgent
need for some creative flexibility on the part of the
Government of Yemen to allow fuel ships expeditiously
to enter Al-Hudaydah to avoid the crushing damage
to livelihoods of a fuel shortage, the outlines of which
were already visible in Sana'a and in other cities. At
that time, the Government stood by its right to issue
decrees for the purpose of raising taxes - a process
which led to a politicized deadlock over fuel imports to
Sana'a and surrounding governorates.

This month, however, the Government's economic
and technical team has agreed with my Office to
establish a mechanism to have traders deposit the taxes
and customs for commercial oil and gas shipments into
a special account in the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah,
under United Nations supervision. The proceeds will go
to pay the salaries of the civil servants in Al-Hudaydah
and elsewhere, as set out in the Al-Hudaydah element
of the Stockholm Agreement. I am grateful to both the
Government and Ansar Allah for the concessions they
have made to achieve significant progress on addressing
this issue of port revenues and for breaking the logjam
for the entry of fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah. The result
is that fuel ships are now entering Al-Hudaydah and a
crisis has been averted due to the creative thinking of
those involved.

In Al-Hudaydah, the parties have also strengthened
their adherence to the ceasefire. The establishment
of the ceasefire enhancement and de-escalation
mechanism has enabled a reduction of the number of
security incidents in the governorate; there are now
40 per cent fewer incidents than before the mechanism
came into effect. Since the creation of five joint
observation posts on the frontlines in Al-Hudaydah,
we have also observed a decrease by approximately
80 per cent in the number of security incidents in the
city. Indeed - remarkably, belatedly, but very much
welcome - for several days in a row, there were no
incidents in the city at all. I would like to commend, as
I am sure Lieutenant General Guha will, the parties for
this constructive cooperation. Both achievements are
remarkable and should be noted by all of us. I suggest
that Al-Hudaydah is another example of the value of
creative concession supplanting the desire for victory.

The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) has been playing a vital role
in supporting the parties with the implementation
of that agreement. I would therefore like to express
some concern here about the increasing restrictions
imposed on the movements of the Mission's personnel
in Al-Hudaydah. These restrictions not only hamper the
Mission's day-to-day operations, but also threaten the
implementation of its mandate. I hope that the relevant
authorities will take all necessary measures to ensure
the freedom of movement necessary for UNMHA to
carry out its mandate.

In late October, my Office had the privilege of
meeting for two days with 20 Yemeni women peace
leaders from across the country. We discussed together
the elements of any political settlement so as to ensure
that their perspectives are taken into account now,
before the settlement is negotiated. They also provided
evidence of the intrinsic and, I think, perhaps unique
contribution that women's groups make in Yemen, as
they do elsewhere, in improving local conditions during
conflict. We know how important it is to include both
a gender perspective and women's participation in the
processes of peace.

In conclusion, during my last briefing to the Council
(S/PV.8642), I referred to signs ofhope in Yemen. I hope
that through this brief survey I have given evidence
that these signs are beginning to produce results. That
means that Yemen's leaders must now ask themselves
what peace should look like. They will need to reach an
agreement on the political and security arrangements to
end the fighting, and we will be there to help them to do
so. They will need to lead in rebuilding the country, its
economy and its social fabric, and we will all be there to
make that happen. They will need to deal pragmatically
with complex political challenges in a landscape that
has changed dramatically during the years of conflict.
Laying the groundwork to address all of these issues
must start now, but we believe, as one Yemeni leader
said so vividly to me, that we may soon see a return to
civility in Yemen's social life.

