Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to express to you, Mr. President, my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you presiding over our work and to
thank you for organizing this open debate. I would also
like to welcome the Secretary-General's outstanding
contribution to our discussion of this item, which
relates to an area where he has made his own mark.

For more than 10 years peacekeeping operations
have been at the centre of fruitful consideration. The
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) at one time brought
together the results of this thinking. Today we must
take stock of the progress achieved in the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
that report. But beyond taking stock, we must
recognize that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has made a remarkable effort to go above
and beyond the new challenges identified since then.

It is a fact that the steps taken since the release of
the Brahimi report have largely contributed to
streamlining practices for the planning, deployment,
conduct and drawdown of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations are increasingly perceived as
part and parcel of a broad programme of normalization,
reconstruction and post-conflict reconciliation, and
they include the long-term development concerns of
the countries concerned.

We have also unanimously agreed that
peacekeeping operations should not be concluded
before they have helped provide the countries
concerned with solid, democratic institutions and an
environment that is favourable to sustainable
development. Dialogue between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries has
become a common practice, and it is essential to the
improvement, the preparation and follow-up of
missions.

We also agree on the importance attached to
training and logistics support, which enables greater
effectiveness of field contingents. The success of all
peacekeeping operations necessarily depends not just
on the quality and professionalism of troops, but also
on available resources. In general, the complex nature
of situations that peacekeeping operations are called on
to meet requires improved coordination between the
activities of the military and civilian police, as well as
civilian training, including the feasibility of
establishing a single multidimensional training
programme.

Regarding challenges to be met, I would also
mention the request that has increased following the
growing number of peacekeeping operations and the
increase in non-traditional aspects of peacekeeping.
The United Nations will need to make considerable
efforts to bring together the energy and resources of the
international community in order to fully assume its
responsibility in consolidating a fragile peace process.

Among the financial considerations, we would
like to draw attention to difficulties that some missions
are facing. We believe it is important to clearly define
financing machinery that will allow for the necessary
resources for missions to carry out their mandates.
There are also increased risks, to which the complexity
of the international situation exposes the staff of
peacekeeping operations, whose inviolability is being
increasingly threatened by repeated targeted attacks.
Today's open debate gives us the opportunity to
condemn those attacks with the utmost vigour.

This situation requires that the Organization be
better able to proceed to a correct evaluation of the
threats and the risks linked to the conduct of those
operations. In that regard, we must strengthen the
capacity and the means for action of the United
Nations security coordination unit so that it can inform
troop-contributing countries of the types of situations
to which peacekeeping staff are exposed.

We note with satisfaction the efforts to enhance
African peacekeeping capacity, and we look forward
with interest to the results of the assessments now
under way. We welcome the decision taken by the
African Union summit in Maputo last year to establish
a standing African force, as well as a military staff
committee, within the context of developing
peacekeeping capacities in the African continent. This
initiative, fortunately, has benefited from the support of
the Group of Eight (G-8), which adopted at its summit
in Evian in June 2003 a joint African-G-8 plan to
strengthen African capacity to conduct peacekeeping
operations over a 10-year period. This joint plan will
ultimately allow for greater synergy between the
United Nations and subregional organizations.

Once again, we underline the importance of
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and the usefulness of strengthening their
capacity for action in the area of peacekeeping, as has
been proven so well by the outstanding experience of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

From another standpoint, we welcome the
Secretariat's receptiveness to new ideas, such as
adopting a regional approach to the settlement of
conflicts, something that has shown itself to be
particularly relevant in West Africa. This approach has
considerably influenced the mandates and new
practices developing within the framework of the three
peacekeeping operations under way in that subregion.

Peacekeeping operations could be further
improved in the following areas: increasing the
coordination of United Nations missions at the
subregional level; making joint border patrols in
conflict areas more systematic and widespread;
strengthening disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR)
programmes in their repatriation and reintegration of
former combatants into civilian life in their countries
of origin, in order to address the real risks which they
represent - in this regard, the employment of young
people is a priority; the deployment, as soon as
possible, and the mobilization of adequate financial
resources; the development of a regional training
programme for peacekeeping operations; providing
contingents with equipment that is up to par; and the
adoption of a flexible exit strategy, to the extent that a
conflict, due to its inherent instability and the
instability it generates, might not allow us to rigorously
determine and foresee developments in the situation on
the ground.

Finally, I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to all of those men and women who, within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and in the
various missions, have tirelessly devoted their energy
and intelligence to the service of peace.

