Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
too would like to start by joining other colleagues in
thanking you for convening this meeting on Timor-
Leste and in thanking our good friend Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma for coming back to us with a very good report
on the situation in Timor-Leste.

Angola greatly appreciates the progress
accomplished by Timor-Leste since national
independence, in all spheres of life. Those important
achievements show the unequivocal will and
determination of the people of Timor-Leste for peace,
democracy and a future of progress and prosperity. By
showing real commitment and flexibility in dealing
with the situation in Timor-Leste, the Security Council
has been making an outstanding contribution to the
stabilization and consolidation of the territory's
independence. Timor-Leste will need to count on the
unwavering support of the international community,
and it is our expectation that the Security Council will
remain in the forefront of the efforts to make Timor-
Leste a modern, democratic and stable society.

Important developments took place in Timor-
Leste during the past month, on which we were briefed
this morning by Mr. Sharma. The political situation has
improved steadily; political institutions are functioning
normally and have expanded to the local level. This is
shown by the elections of village leaders and the "open
presidency" policy, which brings political power to
grass-roots dialogue.

My delegation welcomes the improvement of
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. The joint
discussions that are taking place on various important
questions, such as border delimitation on land and at
sea and the reform of the judicial institutions, are
palpable contributions to the strengthening of the
political situation in Timor-Leste.
The improvement in the security situation is
another important development which we hope
becomes a sustained fact of life in Timor-Leste. In that
regard, my delegation fully supports the efforts of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and of the National Police of Timor-
Leste's institutional strengthening committee in their
administrative and legislative work towards improving
the efficiency of the National Police and expanding its
role to include the entirety of the national territory. We
support the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/944) with regard to
making further efforts to develop appropriate
institutional and legal frameworks and thereby to
assure an open and democratic police force, in which
recruitment is based on merit.

We fully support the efforts of the Government of
Timor-Leste to ensure the presence of the rapid
deployment police unit for as long as necessary and
until the Timorese are sufficiently confident to perform
the task that this unit has been performing. This is an
investment that the international community should
continue to make in order to ensure that the investment
made in the building of the State of Timor-Leste
succeeds fully.

The key issues of external security and territorial
integrity also provide positive elements in the overall
assessment of the situation. Nevertheless, a lot remains
to be done in developing the Timorese armed forces,
through an increase in their contingent and through
capacity-building. The cooperation of UNMISET's
military component remains a vital element and should
be stepped up, with a view to guaranteeing the internal
security of Timor-Leste after UNMISET's departure.

Great challenges still face the young nation of
Timor-Leste. The difficult economic situation,
aggravated by drought, is a cause of serious concern to
which special attention should be paid. It is vital to
maintain the continued commitment of bilateral donors
and assistance from other institutions, such as the
World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme, and the World Food Programme, to
promote the rehabilitation of the infrastructure, to
enhance public services and to ensure food security.
We join the appeal of the Secretary-General to the
international community for support in implementing
the efforts of UNMISET for the successful conclusion
of its mandate.

The economic and social policies pursued by the
Government of Timor-Leste with a View to establishing
suitable economic legislation, the incentives for job
creation, the development of vocational training, the
strengthening of investor confidence and the
encouragement of economic growth are indeed sound
policies that have already produced rewarding results.
It is our conviction that, in the medium and long term,
they will have a great impact on the economic and
social life of the population of Timor-Leste.

It is our expectation that the United Nations will
continue the sustained peace-building efforts in Timor-
Leste, in particular by addressing the most pressing
issues of security and stability, by increasing the
capacity of democratic institutions, by ensuring the rule
of law and freedom of movement and by strengthening
the economy and a sustained civil administration.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity once
again to commend the Government of Timor-Leste and
to reiterate our friendship to the people of that
country - a people whose aspirations and dreams are
deeply shared by the people of Angola.

