Mr. Ward (Jamaica): As a member of the
Security Council mission, I endorse fully the statement
made by Ambassador Levitte in introducing the
mission's report. I pay tribute to his leadership and I
join in the commendation he offered to the Secretariat
and to the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
giving special emphasis to a number of the issues
highlighted in the mission's report. I would like to
emphasize a few basic points.

As Ambassador Levitte has pointed out, there are
serious human rights and humanitarian concerns
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is particular concern with regard to areas being
evacuated by the disengagement of forces and to areas
to which the forces will withdraw. The deployment of
human rights observers and MONUC, as indicated by
the Secretary-General, should help to assure the people
of our concern and of our determination that peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must also mean
that they can live in safety and security. Our concerns
are duly reflected in paragraph 123 of our report.

We have also emphasized in paragraph 126, as
further elaborated by Ambassador Levitte, the
importance of the national dialogue's moving forward
as rapidly as possible. The national dialogue will no
doubt move quickly to determine the nature and
organization of civil administration in the areas of
withdrawal.

I should like to place special emphasis on
paragraph 131 of our report. We insist that all parties
fully respect the human rights of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have called for
the immediate demobilization of child soldiers and for
their reintegration into society. The recruitment of
child soldiers must end. Actions taken by the parties in
this regard must be verifiable. It should also be clear to
all that impunity for war crimes will not be tolerated
and that war criminals must be held accountable.

I had dared to hope that Member States engaged
in the conflict, some of whose representatives spoke
before us today, would use this opportunity to give us
some assurances that the issue of child soldiers will
receive their immediate attention. Quite frankly, I am
disappointed that some delegations here have used this
most important milestone in the peace process to be
belligerent rather than to seek ways to advance the
process. The peace process is far too advanced for
parties to the conflict to be hurling verbal darts at each
other. I urge them to calm their rhetoric and to speak of
peace and reconciliation. This is not an occasion for
recriminations. As the representative of South Africa
clearly stated this morning in her statement:

"as the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo trade their guns for peace, they will be
able to focus their energies on the reconstruction
of their country" (supra).

Peace and security in the region are our objective.
I welcome the withdrawal plan detailed by Uganda and
urge others to follow. I support MONUC in providing
whatever assistance is needed to facilitate Uganda's
early withdrawal.

In conclusion, I would like to confirm that no
party to the conflict and no country in the region must
be allowed to create obstacles to or otherwise hinder
the progress of peace. Any negative response to the
peace process must be dealt with firmly and decisively
by the international community. There must be no
equivocation where this is concerned. We must all
work together to end the suffering of the Congolese
people.

