Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation wishes to
congratulate the Republic of South Africa on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of October. We wish them every success, while
assuring them of Equatorial Guinea's full support. We
would also like to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its impeccable presidency throughout the month
of September. We also extend our thanks to all our
speakers today - the Special Adviser, Youth Envoy
Chebbi, Ms. Ahmed and Mr. Ochen - for their
excellent briefings.

The issue at hand today - Peace and security in
Africa: Mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns by
2020 - is of great concern and a priority for Equatorial
Guinea. On behalf of the African Union and under our
presidency of the Council in February, we presented
resolution 2457 (2019), on silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020 (see S/PV.8473) and, in November, we will be
hosting a conference in Malabo on the same theme, to
which everyone present is invited. Those demonstrate
Equatorial Guinea's readiness to contribute to achieving
that goal.

We are concerned about the proliferation of armed
conflicts in Africa, as well as the instability and the
advance of terrorism in our region. Armed conflicts
pose a serious obstacle to African development because
they condition all aspects of life of our continent - as
long as they are active, sustainable development will
remain a fantasy. Armed conflicts have a negative
impact on the trajectory of sociopolitical and economic
development in Africa, weakening the capacities of
affected Governments to function effectively and
preventing their populations from realizing their
potential. Young people and women are the worst-
affected victims in those situations.

Africa must therefore address both the symptoms
and the root causes of conflict. When focusing on the
current peace and security problems, we must also work
to eliminate the source of those problems and bolster
efforts to accelerate development, reduce poverty and
fight youth unemployment, thereby eliminating the
breeding grounds for conflict and violent extremism.

The critical points here involve complex national,
ethnic, religious and social tensions. Fundamentalist,
criminal, terrorist and mercenary organizations take
advantage of those problems in order to sow terror
throughout our lands. Moreover, they often prey on our
young people. The monitoring of small arms and light
weapons is an equally important element of the effort
to eradicate armed conflicts in Africa. We encourage
continued advocacy for the inclusion of African young
people in all spheres of society, as established in article
11 of the African Youth Charter.

Africa's biggest resource is its young people.
Their participation represents a powerful opportunity
to accelerate the implementation of this project.
Resolution 2457 (2019) reaffirms the important and
positive contribution of young people to the efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security
and the role young people play in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. In the same way, Sustainable
Development Goal 16 aims to ensure inclusive,
participatory and representative decision-making at all
levels. Ensuring the inclusion of young people will help
maintain a range of perspectives that may prove useful
for understanding the distinctive experience of young
as peacebuilders and could significantly improve the
effectiveness of peace processes.

As a key factor in the sustainability, inclusiveness
and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, as well as in post-conflict situations, young
people are encouraged to be involved in the planning
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
which should take into account their particular needs,
especially the needs ofthose affected by armed conflicts,
including the problem of youth unemployment, thereby
investing in developing the skills and abilities of
young people to meet labour needs through relevant
educational opportunities that are designed to promote
a culture of peace.

It is important to create local incentives and
opportunities to ensure that our strongest, smartest
and most capable young people, who would normally
take the path of no return, remain in their countries
and contribute to their societies instead of applying
themselves in societies that are already developed.
Instead of there, it is better that they do so in their own
countries, where they are most needed. To compete in an
ever more competitive global market, silencing the guns
also means creating the necessary structure to allow our
young people to realize professional accomplishments,
pursuing lives as dignified and valuable as those of any
other young people in the world.

I would like to reiterate in conclusion that silencing
the guns means the complete, effective, controlled,
verifiable and transparent elimination of weapons
through international and regional legal instruments.
That goal is of vital importance to Africa, and Africa
must be able to count on the support of the international
community in that regard.

Silencing the guns in Africa should not be just a
wish or a desire but must become a reality because
our lives depend on it. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea therefore calls on the international community,
in particular on Africans themselves, to join forces to
help Africa implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, together with the 2063 Agenda of
the African Union, as avenues towards sustainable
economic development, an important aspect of which is
to tackle decisively the problems affecting young people
and women. To leave those pending issues unresolved
would expose us to the risk of interminable conflict.

