Mrs. Albright (United States of America): One year
ago today, this Council took the historic decision to
authorize Member States to use all necessary means to
restore legitimate constitutional authority in Haiti. Since
then, we have come a long way. The former de facto
authorities have left Haiti, President Aristide has returned
to office, a multinational force established a secure and
stable environment in the country and parliamentary
elections have been held. President Aristide's return to
Haiti marked the end of a long dry season of tyranny and
abuse, and marked the start of Haiti's own journey toward
full, institutionalized democracy.

Today, we have acted to renew the commitment of
the international community to assist the people of Haiti
on this journey. We have shown our support by extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) through February 1996. At that time, UNMIH
will conclude its mandate as foreseen in resolution 940
(1994). UNMIH's contribution to the beginnings of a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Haiti fulfils the best
aspirations of the community of nations.

We pay special tribute today to the courageous men
and women who have committed themselves, as part of
UNMIH, to the future of Haiti. Their work must continue.
We also give special thanks to the Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi. That is why the United States proudly
joined with the Friends of Haiti in sponsoring the
resolution we adopt here today to extend UNMIH's
mandate through February 1996.

Thanks to the support of the international
community, Haiti held its first democratic elections in
five years last month, and is preparing for the completion
of those elections. While there were some serious
problems, the election was a positive step toward the
consolidation of Haiti's democracy. International
observers saw few examples of electoral fraud, and no
evidence of any large-scale or systematic effort to subvert
the elections or skew the results. However, in many cases,
the process was, in the words of one observer, "free, fair
and fouled-up."

None the less, it required great courage and faith for
2 million Haitians to go to the polls on 25 June and join
the march toward democracy. UNMIH, along with the
International Civilian Mission (MICIVIH), contributed to
the people's sense of security on the morning of 25 June.

The Haitian people are approaching another
milestone on the journey of democracy: next February, a

 

transition from one elected Government to another. While
many nations take this for granted, Haiti has never seen
such an event. The Haitian people have suffered for
decades under despots; they are now embracing their new
ability to choose their leaders. This is a transition made
possible by the presence of UNMIH.

UNMIH's mandate - to assist the Haitian
Government in maintaining a secure and stable
environment, to protect the Government of Haiti and key
installations, to assist in the holding of elections and to
professionalize the security forces - is an effective one,
which we have extended in the spirit of our original
commitment in resolution 940 (1994). UNMIH has made
significant progress and, with this extension, will be
allowed to finish what it has started.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General's
observation that effective policing capabilities and related
institution-building efforts are urgently required in Haiti.
President Aristide has expressed similar concerns. The new
Haitian National Police will be in place by early next year,
and my Government is cooperating extensively with efforts
to train and equip this new force. The recent deployment of
700 members of the new police and continuing efforts in
Haiti to train new judicial personnel are important first
steps. The role of UNMIH's civilian police contingent in
this effort has been noteworthy. We echo the
Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to contribute
additional funds for this vital undertaking.

Our task now is threefold: first, to ensure completion
of free and fair elections. To achieve this, we must
encourage the people of Haiti to remain committed to the
electoral process; we must encourage Haiti's electoral
authorities to improve that process, and we must encourage
Haiti's political parties - whether they be losers or
winners this time around - to stay in the game. Most
importantly, we must help strengthen the mechanisms
needed to make sure that this electoral milestone leads to a
duly constituted and freely elected system of government.

Secondly, we must vigorously continue all efforts to
complete the creation of a professional civilian police force
and an effective justice system. Thirdly, we must continue
to ensure coordination of effective technical and economic
assistance to help Haiti rebuild. Here we underscore the
pivotal role of international financial institutions, the United
Nations specialized agencies, and Member States' economic
and technical assistance.

These efforts in Haiti signal the broader commitment
of the international community, spearheaded by the
United Nations, to build democracy. This will be a long
road for Haiti, but our renewal of UNMIH today is
another step forward in this historic endeavour. Our
destination is clear and within reach: a democratic and
independent Haiti, where peace is sustained, human rights
are respected and prosperity is possible.

