Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Angolan delegation
commends the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. We thank the Secretary-
General for his insightful opening remarks and welcome
and thank Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov for their presentations and for
sharing their views with the Security Council on the
relevant activities undertaken by the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), which have become relevant
actors in the maintenance ofregional peace and security
and important partners of the United Nations.

Experience demonstrates that cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations strengthens the
United Nations efforts in the prevention of conflicts in
the maintenance of peace and in restoring stability in
post-conflict situations in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
the framework for the establishment of regional and
global partnerships in matters related to international
peace and security. The involvement of regional and
subregional organizations offers invaluable competitive
advantages in complementing the work of the United
Nations bringing to bear, as they do, specific knowledge
of regional conditions, a better understanding of the
genesis of conflicts and their prevention and resolution
in the maintenance of peace and in upholding the rule
of law.

The United Nations, on the other hand, brings to
bear its universal membership and legitimacy, broad
experience and operational capacity in the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security. This relationship is
even more virtuous since it facilitates swifter responses
to crisis situations and permits a longer-term combined
engagement in resolving critical situations.

The current security challenges require a
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, which no country
or organization can undertake by itself. In Eurasia and
Central Asia, that cooperation has been of significant
importance in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as in countering international
challenges that are real threats to the livelihoods of the
people of these regions and to peace and security. We
greatly value the involvement of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States in countering threats to peace and security,
including terrorism, illegal flows of small arms and
light weapons, cyberterrorism, illegal migration, drug
trafficking and organized crime, and in addressing the
issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
in Central Asia, Eastern Europe and the Far East.

We warmly welcome developments regarding
the commitment for enhanced cooperation between
the CSTO and United Nations specialized bodies, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee, at a time
when terrorism has become a real threat to Central Asia;
the cooperation of the United Nations on the issue of
drugs and crime, which is a living curse on the region;
and the development ofthe peacekeeping capabilities of
United Nations peace operations.

We acknowledge the support of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization to the United Nations aimed
at restoring peace in Afghanistan, and the current
cooperation in preventing and resolving conflicts, in
the fight against terrorism and non-proliferation of
weapons, in countering transnational crime and illegal
drugs, and in the exchange of security intelligence. We
also appreciate the cooperation in methods of security
between the States members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and other international
organizations, especially the United Nations.

We note that the CIS is party to all of the most
important international instruments related to
cooperation in the field of security, disarmament and
countering terrorism; the intense relations that the CIS
maintains with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies; the work of the CIS countries in countering
new threats; and their considerable contribution to
joint efforts to ensure regional and international peace
and security.

As the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex) for this
debate states, the strengthening and deepening of
interaction between the United Nations and CSTO,
SCO and CIS, on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is a constructive element
in the promotion of United Nations goals. Through
a functional partnership, the United Nations and
these organizations can strengthen the international
community's efforts in facing contemporary challenges
and in building capacities to address current threats with
a comprehensive and long-term perspective, as a key
factor in sustaining peace and attaining greater stability
in an ever-more dangerous and challenging world.

We conclude by encouraging CSTO, SCO and CIS
to use their influence, and their members to pursue
cooperation among themselves, with the United
Nations and other international and regional partners
in collective efforts to find lasting solutions to global
threats and challenges that affect the international
community - such as terrorism, drug trafficking,
international organized crime, the non-proliferation
of weapons, despicable violations of human rights,
and the aggressive behaviour of many international
actors, including non-State actors - and to build a
more just and peaceful world based on a community of
shared interests.

