Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): Let
me first of all express a word of thanks to
Mr. Kouchner for his extraordinary work. Let me say
how pleased the Government of Canada is with
everything that he has accomplished in those difficult
circumstances.

(spoke in English)

I will turn to this situation in Kosovo in a
moment. I would also like to make a few points on the
issue of the election. The Yugoslav people have
spoken. It is now clear that their voice will be
respected by Mr. Kostunica. The question is whether
the judgment of the Yugoslav people will now be
respected by the regime in Belgrade.

We call upon the Belgrade regime to recognize
that the situation has now changed. It is time to respect
the views ofthe ordinary Serbs who have voted in such
massive numbers. It is time to stop the games. Canada
hopes to be able to welcome the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia back into the community of democratic
nations. We remain hopeful that the elections on 24
September will lead to peaceful and democratic change
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

As soon as a Government committed to reform
and reconciliation is firmly in place, Canada will join
the international community in removing sanctions and
ending the isolation of Yugoslavia.

On a related point, I would like to thank again
Mr. Kouchner, to commend his effort and that of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), who did such an excellent job in
making sure that, at least as regards Kosovo, it will not
be possible for mass fraud to be perpetrated.

I have listened carefully to the words of
Mr. Kouchner. I heard him say that we are in a low-
conflict, but not yet a post-conflict situation. Compared
to a year ago, we have made enormous progress. A
million refugees returned. Schools reopened. A
semblance of normal life for many people has returned.
We have made a lot of progress, but we are certainly
not in the homestretch yet. Particularly, it is appalling
to us that any minority, and in this particular case the
Serb minority, could be targeted with violence. It is
unacceptable. We are grateful to UNMIK and to the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) for their efforts to stop it and to
prevent it.

As for the Kosovo elections, a word about that.
We are also dismayed by the increasing intra-Albanian
Kosovar criminality and the impact that that could have
on the upcoming municipal vote.

Here again we are grateful for the work of
Mr. Kouchner aimed at preventing violence and
intimidation and at keeping them from being factors in
the elections.

In this context, the recent promulgation of the
print code of conduct by United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
especially welcome. Independent, responsible and self-
regulatory media outlets are strongly needed. We hope
that the implementation of this code will contribute to
fostering a democratic political culture as we approach
the election and beyond.

We also welcome the recent appointment of a
Special Envoy for missing and detained persons. We
reinforce Mr. Kouchner's point that pressure from the
international community will be critical to the
resolution of this issue.

On a different plane, I can only refer to the
comments made by the British Ambassador and by the
Dutch delegation with respect to the detainees who are
British, Dutch and Canadian citizens. It has been two
months now, I think, that these people have been
detained - since the Canadians were detained. The
detainees have not been charged. They are as innocent
today as they were the day they were arrested, and in
fact it is perfectly clear to the Belgrade regime that
they are innocent. It remains only for that regime to
release those detainees.

In summary, we are very glad for this opportunity
to hear from Mr. Kouchner, we are extremely
impressed by the work he has done, and all that
remains to be said is that we must all persevere in
bringing this project to a democratic end. The election
in Belgrade is a major step in that direction.

