Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured that
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, are presiding over this
important meeting, and we congratulate the Greek
delegation for convening an open debate of the
Security Council on the Council's role in humanitarian
crises. We were enriched on this issue by your concept
paper and your statement, as well as by the statements
of the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno.

Recent developments have shown that the
Council is increasingly involved in humanitarian issues
in the context of its mandate to protect and enhance
international peace. Our meeting today is therefore
timely and relevant.

We agree that the promotion of the rule of law,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process and security sector reform are key
pillars to be addressed during the post-conflict
peacebuilding stage in order to arrest humanitarian
crises and prevent the resumption of conflict. To
appreciate and understand the importance of addressing
those three pillars, it is best to look at the historical
experience of the conflict situations that the Council
has been asked to consider. There are multiple realities
and lessons learned from past and current
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
First, as stated by the Russian Federation
delegation, there are no quick fixes or one-size-fits-all
formulas for addressing the issue. Responses vary
among conflict situations. The Under-Secretary-
General referred to best practices and best models; it
would be helpful to share those experiences and that
expertise.

Secondly, the response to and the assistance in
conscience-shocking humanitarian crises are more
immediate than is the case in other crises. As a
corollary, the response to and the assistance in those
crises become effective when humanitarian and
strategic interests coincide. Selective responses could,
and did, occur in the past.

Third, it is best that the mechanisms and the
processes for responding to humanitarian crises
accompany an internal process with roots in the
specific experiences of the society concerned. The
complex reality of socio-economic circumstances on
the ground cannot be ignored. In that connection, the
participation of local players is indispensable in the
planning and the implementation of strategic and
critical objectives related to those three pillars. Local
ownership greatly increases the chance of success of
those initiatives.

Fourth, flexible, adequate and timely funding that
enables rapid reaction and sustained support for
programmes is necessary to ensure that early
challenges are addressed immediately and that
medium- to longer-term concerns are properly covered.

Lastly, local capacity-building must be an integral
part of all responses. Attention to local capacity-
building has positive implications for financing,
particularly for relations with donors and aid agencies.
Prioritization in the strengthening of local institutions
encourages local actors to become involved in the
design and the implementation of programmes. The net
effect is shared decision-making and accountability.

The role ahead for the Security Council in
humanitarian crises is fraught with challenges and
opportunities.

First, institutional innovation, along the lines of
what the Secretary-General referred to, is needed with
regard to how crises are handled. That will involve
strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
agencies in such areas as logistics and communications
in order to ensure predictable, efficient and effective
assistance.

Secondly, the Security Council should continue
and enhance its support for regional organizations,
because they contribute to the strengthening of the
three pillars of post-conflict peacebuilding.

Thirdly, the Security Council could embark on
targeted assistance for vulnerable groups such as
refugees, internally displaced persons, child soldiers,
ex-combatants and unemployed youths. Broad policy
frameworks should be applied to specific projects such
as infrastructure development.

Fourthly, the Security Council has an important
part to play in making sure that the rule of law, the
DDR process and security sector reform are tackled in
an integrated manner in order to establish and enhance
their relevance to each other and to the overall goal.

Fifthly, in drawing up the mandates of
peacekeeping missions, the Council should, in its
resolutions, carefully provide very clear objectives and
tasks for achieving goals in those three areas,
individually and in relation to one another.

The Security Council has recognized the link
between security and human rights. The peacekeeping
mandates for El Salvador, Cambodia, Angola, Liberia
and Georgia included a human rights component, and
the protection of civilians has been enshrined in
resolution 1296 (2000), among others.

The challenge for the Security Council and the
international community as a whole is to free some
current responses and assistance to humanitarian crises
that arise out of armed conflicts from what one author
calls "political evangelism". There is a more ideal role
for the Council, to which the Secretary-General
referred: to prevent the onset of humanitarian crises.
That will require attention to the root causes of
conflict. The proposed Peacebuilding Commission
could very well strengthen the Council's ability to
approach humanitarian crises within the larger
framework of peacebuilding efforts.

