Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Allow me first
of all, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, to
extend to you and the Mexican delegation our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month. You can rest assured of my
delegation's full cooperation. I also wish to extend
warm congratulations to Ambassador Dabbashi and
Ambassador Shalgham and the Libyan delegation for
effectively leading the work of the Council last month.
I join others in extending to the Government of
Haiti our deep gratitude for the cooperation and
hospitality offered the Council mission in March.

I thank the Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. He'di
Annabi, for his detailed briefing before the Council
today. The report on the recent Security Council
mission to Haiti and the report of the Secretary-
General on MINUSTAH (S/2009/129) present a
comprehensive picture of the situation on the ground.

My delegation is encouraged by incremental
advances in four of the five benchmarks that are
significant parts of a sine qua non for the achievement
of political stability and security in Haiti. We note with
appreciation indications of renewed readiness among
the country's political leaders to work together to
address a series of consequences of the four
devastating hurricanes, which are being aggravated by
the global food and financial crisis and, more recently,
by re-ignited tensions related to the upcoming partial
senatorial elections.

However, without social and economic
development, the progress thus far recorded in the four
benchmarks will remain fragile. It is imperative for the
Haitian Government, in coordination with MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team, to act
simultaneously on all political, security and socio-
economic fronts.

On the political and security front, there is an
urgent need, on the one hand, to promote national
consensus to ensure stability and, on the other, to
continue to move forward with programmes on security
sector reform and institutional capacity-building. The
violence in Port-au-Prince and some other cities last
April and the increased trafficking in drugs and
weapons throughout the country clearly show that the
Haitian National Police must be further reinforced if
they are to be capable of maintaining public order and
responding to threats to the country's stability and
security.

In the socio-economic field, consequences of the
natural catastrophes that hit the country severely in
2008, coupled with inherent economic problems, have
not only worsened the already dire economic
conditions for a large majority of Haitians, but have
also hindered the full implementation of the
Government's strategy and the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. At this critical
juncture, we hold that the full engagement of the
Haitian leadership and people and the execution of a
sound and comprehensive socio-economic strategy
which seeks to mobilize domestic resources, generate
growth, create employment, reduce poverty and
improve living conditions are of paramount importance
to Haiti.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Core
Group to continue to support development projects in
Haiti through bilateral and multilateral partnerships.
We commend the continued involvement of regional
and subregional stakeholders, such as the Organization
of American States and the Caribbean Community, in
assisting Haiti to stimulate its economy and achieve
long-term security. We appreciate the initiative of the
Inter-American Development Bank to convene an
international donor conference for Haiti this month in
Washington, D.C., and look forward to the success of
the event.

At the same time, we wish to emphasize that, in
seeking to ensure Haiti's durable peace, security,
stability and sustainable development, international
involvement in Haiti can be successful only when it
has full Haitian engagement at all stages of the process
with a view to ensuring that, finally and soon Haitians,
will be able to run their own country.

In conclusion, we recognize the enduring efforts
of the MINUSTAH leadership and staff to provide
extensive assistance to the Haitian authorities in many
areas ranging from institutional support, the
strengthening of the State, border management and the
rule of law to humanitarian relief and development
activities. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that, while the Haitian National
Police is still developing the capacity to better its
performance, MINUSTAH should continue to play a
critical role in helping maintain stability and security
in Haiti as well as in the country's political
reconciliation process.

