Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
the briefings of Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, and the Ambassador
of Switzerland, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, in his capacity as
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission. We fully support their efforts.

Peru takes note of the results of the referendum,
but regrets that it was organized without independent
observers amid complaints of intimidation of the
opposition and restrictions on the freedom of the press.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that the
constitutional amendments promoted by the Government
of Burundi and approved in a disputed referendum may
undermine important commitments made in the Arusha
Accords, which are recognized and supported by the
Security Council, designed to safeguard the rights of
the Burundian minorities and affecting the delicate
governmental balance achieved between the country's
various communities after a tragic civil war. In that
regard, we should encourage the authorities of Burundi
to protect the entire population, including minorities,
and to put an end to the violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms that unfortunately continue. We
also want to underline the need to reject hate speech,
to keep all parties committed to the delicate balance
that has maintained peace and stability in Burundi for
more than a decade, and to prevent any recurrence of
acts of violence, especially those that have taken place
since 2015.

In the current circumstances, we consider it
urgent to ensure that the process of inter-Burundian
dialogue can move forward and that the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights can resume its
activities in Burundi.
Finally, we believe it is important to ensure that the
Council follows developments in the country carefully,
and that regional organizations and neighbouring
countries can also follow developments there more
closely and support the inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community.

