Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): There were two
draft resolutions on the table today. The humanitarian
penholders' draft resolution (S/2019/756) would have
protected civilians. The Russian and Chinese draft
resolution (S/2019/757) imperils them.

We thank the humanitarian penholders, Belgium,
Germany and Kuwait, for their considerable efforts
to incorporate the views of all Council members in
drafting the text on which we have just voted. This was
a balanced text that reflected the dire situation in Idlib
and rightly called for a lasting ceasefire, the protection
ofcivilians and civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
access. The draft resolution was vitally needed. Since
the Council's first emergency humanitarian session to
discuss Idlib on 10 May, we have focused repeatedly
on the indiscriminate violence against civilians there.
Civilian deaths and displacement continue to increase.
There is little time left to prevent a catastrophic

worsening of the humanitarian situation.
As well as establishing an unequivocal ceasefire,
the text that Russia and China today vetoed set out
clearly the importance of adhering to international
legal obligations. A vetoed draft resolution does not
alter the fact that there can be no excuse for targeting
civilians. Indeed, the deliberate targeting of civilians is
a war crime.

By contrast, the Russian and Chinese text on
which we will vote next pretends that the humanitarian
situation in Idlib is caused solely by terrorists rather
than by the indiscriminate aerial bombardment that is
being carried out with scant regard for the principles
of distinction and proportionality. The exemption for
counter-terrorism activity, which Russia proposes,
seems designed to allow indiscriminate attacks to
continue. We have heard Russia's explanation that
it is striking at terrorists, but, even if that were true,
it still has legal obligations, including to ensure the
proportionality of its actions.

I am afraid that over the years in Syria, we have
seen the reality of the Al-Assad regime's military
action and that of its Russian ally, in particular its
use of air strikes. We all saw what happened after
the Security Council adopted resolution 2401 (2018)
and the deaths of civilians that followed. Russia's and
China's text would be of no service to those on the
ground who so desperately need the protection of the
international community.

The fight against terrorism cannot be an excuse
for indiscriminate attacks or, worse, targeted attacks
on civilians. We cannot in good conscience support a
text that would allow this. We appeal to all Council
members to join us in voting against the Russian and
Chinese text.

