Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin by
congratulating our close friend, Colombia, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. We are honoured by your
presence here, Mr. Minister, at today's open debate on
small arms, which signifies the importance we should
attach to the issue before us. I appreciate the
background paper prepared by the Colombian mission,
which is focused and useful.

The debate on small arms could not have been
more timely. Only last month, we agreed on a global
Programme of Action to combat illicit trade in small
arms in a concerted manner. This debate sustains the
impetus generated by the Conference.

Much has been said in recent years about the
horrors of small arms as the principal instruments of
violence. It is time we joined hands to bring about the
dawn of a new era where the glory of life prevails over
the glory of guns.

The menace of guns has shown its ugly face in
schools, on streets and in civil wars in different parts of
the world. Out of more than 500 million small arms in
circulation, a sizeable number are in the hands of non-
State actors. If our own recent experience is any guide,
once violence has broken out, the distinction between
legal and illegal civilian possession of small arms loses
much of its meaning. They simply remain the
horrendous tools of death.

The impact of small arms has been deep and
wide: rapes, broken families, traumatized lives,
violated human rights, overstretched health services,
undermined education, misused scarce resources,
impeded development, destabilized States, undermined
peace, maimed youths and colossal loss of lives. The
majority of victims have been innocent and defenceless
women and children. Most unconscionable is the
growing number of child soldiers, whom people of
unscrupulous ambition or greed harness to kill and be
killed.

Small arms are indeed as much a security
challenge as they are a development problem. Parochial
political interests, criminal motives and social
discontent fuel the proliferation of small weapons,
making them likely to be indiscriminately used.

Humanity ought to strive for durable peace and
security for everyone in the world. To achieve this, we
must pursue the peaceful resolution of conflicts as well
as disarmament and security at a lower level of
armament, stimulate development that is also
environmentally sustainable, and promote justice that
gives each of us equal opportunity to excel.

There has been considerable progress in
controlling, and in some cases outlawing, weapons of
mass destruction, and we need to further strengthen and
accelerate the process. The international community,
however, has just broken the ground of disarmament in
small arms and light weapons, and we have yet to
devise a coherent and effective global strategy to
prevent the flow of small arms into conflict-prone
zones, to reduce our reliance on them for our safety,
and to evolve a culture of peace. The United Nations,
as in the case of weapons of mass destruction, can play
a significant role in this endeavour, too.

Clearly, the global accord on small arms is just a
modest, but good, beginning. We still have to confront
the challenge of implementing the agreement, and,
more importantly, of moving beyond it to address the
remaining issues, in order to make the world safer for
all from the scourge of small arms.

The United Nations has a threefold obligation to
confront the problem of small arms. First, it must work
with other stakeholders to implement the recently
agreed Programme of Action on the illicit trade in
small arms. Secondly, in conflict situations, it mustjoin
forces with Governments to impose and enforce arms
embargoes, to check illegal local production and to
prevent legitimately owned weapons from getting into
the wrong hands. Thirdly, it must encourage the
international community to remove the threat of small
arms from the face of the earth by taking additional
measures.

Nepal appreciates the fact that the United Nations
has already devised an effective approach to
demobilizing, disarming and reintegrating combatants
in post-conflict situations. This approach must be
further refined and incorporated, where appropriate, in
Security Council mandates to make peace sustainable.
The United Nations must help evolve a workable
global strategy to prevent the proliferation of small
arms through, inter alia, marking and tracking
measures.

Information, as we all recognize, is of critical
importance to shaping a prudent policy and executing it
effectively. No source of information could match the
keen observations of United Nations development and
humanitarian workers, who can keep an eye on
smouldering social discontent and its facets, or of Blue
Helmets manning United Nations observer and
peacekeeping missions. Of late, civil society has
emerged as a strong partner of this world body and a
rich and additional source of information for United
Nations agencies and processes.

High-level panels could be helpful if they focused
on reinforcing and furthering international consensus,
rather than sidetracking or eroding it. Occasional
United Nations fact-finding and advisory missions
could also be explored as additional sources of
information, based on need rather than as a matter of
course. These could also prove counterproductive if
overused, because of their inherent visibility, in cases
where a quieter track 2 approach is critical to striking a
deal to resolve an involved inter-State or intra-State
conflict.

There is tremendous potential yet to be tapped in
regional and subregional organizations, whose physical
and cultural proximity can help tremendously to
accurately identify and analyse the problem, to forge
workable solutions, and to devise effective follow-up
measures. The United Nations must take them on board
in a more meaningful fashion to optimize the benefits
they offer.

The Secretary-General's report must be the
linchpin of institutional information, both generic and
specific, for the Security Council to act. The Council
should therefore request him to furnish as
comprehensive a report as possible, including
information on the existence of small arms, sources of
supply and their possible impact on United Nations
peacekeeping missions, so that the Council could
formulate its mandates in an informed and appropriate
manner. But we must not lose sight of the fact that he
often has to work under severe resource and time
constraints and that parties in conflict seldom share
sensitive information, thereby limiting his capacity to
produce the kind of report the Security Council would
like to see on its desk. If objectively considered, the
lessons learned from past experience could provide
additional and invaluable insight to the Council.

Having said this, I must confess that Nepal is not
in favour of reinventing the wheel. We must try to
make the best use of the available resources and
mechanisms in a more coordinated and effective
manner in order to achieve our goals.

To be sure, an immediate symptomatic treatment
of the malady associated with small arms is essential.
But a lasting peace will remain a pipe dream until we
tackle the root causes of social discontent: poverty,
lack of opportunity and injustice.

Often, poor, frustrated and unemployed youth
seeking jobs and a station in life succumb to the glory
of guns and fall prey to the self-serving designs of
thugs, criminals and myopic political leaders. We must
empower the young with education, skills and jobs so
that they can say no to guns.

This calls for reversing the vicious circle of
poverty and conflict, making democracy work for
people, defeating crime, accelerating sustainable
development, creating employment opportunities, and
opening schools and hospitals in poor countries.

We must give our youth hope and opportunity.
The international community must come forward to
make this happen by assisting the poor countries to
develop and by making technology and markets work
for the poor.

In essence, it will take social transformation to
wipe out the menace of small arms. The Security
Council, cooperating with other competent
stakeholders, must contribute to this transformation to
the best of its capacity.

