Mr. Konishi (Japan): My delegation is pleased to
observe the steady progress made recently in the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The introduction of the
new national flag, passport, common currency and licence
plate for vehicles, as well as the adoption of important laws
related to the economic activities of the country, are
examples of this progress. Also, a positive trend is
discernible, for example, in the general economic situation
throughout the country and in the political climate in
Republika Srpska.

Having said that, we must also admit that many of
those developments have been achieved mainly through the
affirmative will and initiative of the international
community, and there remain a number of issues yet to be
resolved. Ultimately, the responsibility for the establishment
of lasting peace lies with the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves. In this regard, my delegation
endorses the view set out in the declaration of the
Ministerial Meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which was held on 9 June in
Luxembourg:

"the implementation of the Peace Agreement is
characterized by both substantive progress but also an
inadequate rate of implementation".

Promotion of the return of refugees and displaced persons,
more effective functioning of the common institutions,
fostering free and fair media, greater cooperation with the
Hague Tribunal - these are the main issues which must be
addressed, primarily by the parties themselves, without
further delay. The parties in Bosnia should redouble their
efforts in this direction.

The nationwide elections, to be held in September this
year under the supervision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, will be a significant milestone
towards the achievement of a peaceful future Bosnia. But
free and fair elections can be conducted only if a safe and
secure environment is ensured by the parties, in cooperation
with the relevant international institutions. Japan will
dispatch supervisors and observers to the September
elections, as it did at the time of the two previous
nationwide elections.

Under these circumstances, the Government of Japan
believes that the continued presence of UNMIBH,
including IPTF, in Bosnia is indispensable. Japan highly
appreciates the role played by UNMIBH, and especially
by IPTF, in monitoring the activities of the local police
forces, in their restructuring and in other fields. My
delegation also considers it meaningful that UNMIBH
will be engaged in an aspect of judicial reform in the
country and appreciates the positive consideration by the
Secretary-General of this issue.

Japan is also convinced that the presence of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) remains an essential factor in
the maintenance of stability in Bosnia. SFOR is providing
safety and security not only to the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also to UNMIBH and IPTF, as well as
to other international workers. We therefore welcome the
recent decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
to continue the activities of SFOR.

Based upon these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us, which
extends the mandate of UNMIBH, including IPTF, and
authorizes the activities of SFOR for one additional year.

I should like to close by expressing the deep
appreciation of my Government to all the men and
women working for UNMIBH, IPTF, SFOR and other
international bodies and non-govemmental organizations
for their efforts and dedication in carrying out their
important mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

