Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): Allow me to
first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate on the role of States, regional arrangements
and the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.

The Republic of Moldova aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
and would like to add some remarks from a national
perspective.

It is widely recognized that the nature of
contemporary conflicts is changing rapidly and has
become more complex. The prevention and resolution
of conflicts, particularly protracted ones, is not the
sole responsibility or prerogative of one multilateral
organization or one country. It is a responsibility shared
by the entire international community. The Republic
of Moldova fully supports the further development of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements in that field.

The United Nations and regional arrangements
can work together more effectively by gathering,
consolidating and sharing good practices and lessons
learned. Effective conflict prevention and resolution
requires building coherent and proactive partnerships
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
The focus on conflict prevention and resolution is
already a notable feature of the existing partnerships
between the United Nations and some regional
arrangements, including the European Union and the
African Union. In line with their respective mandates
and comparative advantages, the United Nations and
regional arrangements should strive to share the burden
of their efforts by pooling resources and creating
new synergies. We encourage the establishment of
coordination mechanisms at the Secretariat level to
operationalize cooperation among organizations in the
field of conflict prevention and resolution.

The current restructuring of the peace and security
pillar of the United Nations, with conflict prevention
and sustaining peace at the core, offers an excellent
opportunity to enhance the Secretariat's capacities to
work on regional issues and strengthen the interaction
between the United Nations and the regional
arrangements. We commend the Secretary-General's
efforts in that direction and thank him for his insightful
briefing today and related reports.

In pursuing their agendas and applying their
distinctive approaches to conflict prevention and
resolution, regional arrangements and their member
States must act in good faith and in strict compliance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular when it comes to ensuring respect for the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.

States have the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention, a prerogative that has been stressed several
times in Security Council resolutions. Nonetheless, the
constructive potential of regional organizations in that
area is often undermined by the limited interests of
individual members that use their authority to obstruct
important initiatives or to limit the scope of cooperation
between regional arrangements and the United Nations
that could be valuable to settlement processes. It is
our firm belief that there is much more that can be
drawn from regional partnerships, so long as all actors
involved abide by Charter principles.

The deteriorating security situation and lack of
progress in the settlement of protracted conflicts in the
post-Soviet space cannot go unnoticed. In that regard, a
question arises as to the actual role and effectiveness of
relevant regional arrangements and their coordination
efforts with the United Nations. We believe that no
conflict in the world should be disregarded by the
United Nations, irrespective of whether or not they
are on the Security Council's agenda. The protracted
conflict situation in the eastern part of the Republic
of Moldova - a problem that is also complicated by
an illegal foreign military presence on our national
territory - is one such conflict.

By adopting a resolution in June on the complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Russian military
forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova
(resolution 72/282), the General Assembly renewed
the linkage between regional efforts at the level of
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on the matter and on the United Nations platform. The
withdrawal of foreign troops is essential for creating
the prerequisites for conflict prevention and conflict
resolution in the Republic of Moldova.

The lack of progress in the settlement of protracted
conflicts and the continued illegal foreign military
presence on the national territories of some Member
States require not only more direct involvement from
the appropriate United Nations bodies and regional
organizations but also common action that takes into
account both the prevention and resolution aspects of
the problems. We clearly need productive partnerships
that can prevent conflicts, address the root causes of
conflicts and end them.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional entities is not merely an alternative
approach to multilateralism. It is a necessity of today's
world, requiring all those involved to apply United
Nations principles and call for accountability when
they are violated.

