Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing to the Council
today. My delegation associates itself with the statement

to be delivered later today by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
also thank the representatives of Palestine and Israel
for their contribution to the briefing this morning.

The blockade of Gaza by Israel has now entered its
sixth year. There does not appear to be even a glimmer of
hope that the Israeli Government will lift the blockade
that has stifled socio-economic growth and affected
the humanitarian conditions of the Gazan population.
Despite repeated calls for Israel to lift the blockade,
it has continued its defiance of international law
with impunity. Israel must adhere to the international
community's demand for it to end the illegal blockade
that has exacerbated the suffering of ordinary civilians.
Such a blockade and the attendant restrictions imposed
on essential materials entering Gaza are in violation of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and are contrary to the will of the
international community, as expressed in resolutions
242 (1968), 338 (1973) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
Arab Peace Initiative.

We welcome the socio-economic progress in the
occupied Palestinian territories mentioned in the 2012
report of the Director-General of the International
Labour Organization, entitled "The situation of
workers of the occupied Arab territories". However,
we are deeply concerned about the report's worrying
conclusion that the overall framework remains grim,
primarily because of the realities of the occupation and
the unabated expansion of Israeli settlements.

In that regard, we believe that it is the obligation
of the international community, especially the Security
Council, to use the variety of measures at its disposal
to ensure that the occupation of Palestine, in general,
and the blockade of Gaza, in particular, be immediately
stopped. The Palestinians deserve better. South Africa
applauds the various United Nations agencies for their
efforts to assist the Palestinians as they struggle to
survive the Israeli military occupation.

South Africa once again condemns the continued
settlement construction in the West Bank, and in East
Jerusalem in particular, which violates international
law and the resolutions of this Council. Again, it is
deplorable that the Council, which has moved with
commendable speed on conflict situations elsewhere in
the world, has been unable, and sometimes unwilling,
to end those illegal actions.
Equally, we condemn the continued demolition of
Palestinian property and the violence carried out by
Israeli settlers against the Palestinian population in
the occupied Palestinian West Bank. Manifest to that
illegal practice are the recent reports of Israel seeking
the authority to demolish eight Palestinian hamlets in
the South Hebron Hills, opening the way for Israeli
military training operations. The latest figures released
by the United Nations, which indicate a significant loss
of farmland and fishing waters in Palestine, further
undermining sustainable economic activity, are also a
cause for great concern.

On the issue of Palestinian political prisoners,
South Africa welcomes Israel's decision to allow family
visits to Palestinians held in Israeli jails. The efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
facilitating those visits are commendable. However,
we urge the Israeli Government to fulfil its obligations
under international humanitarian law by ensuring the
prisoners' safety and welfare, including by respecting
their basic human rights.

We condemn the assault, torture, killing and
deportation of African migrants in Israel, which
constitute human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law. Gravely concerned
about such atrocities, the Assembly of the African
Union, at its nineteenth ordinary session held recently,
reminded Israel of its obligation under the 1951 United
Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the 1961 United Nations Convention on the
Reduction of Statelessness. We hope that the Israeli
Government will prosecute those responsible for abuses
against African migrants and adhere to its international
humanitarian law obligations.

Regarding the political process, South Africa
remains concerned about the lack of significant
progress. However, we note the ongoing low-level
talks between Israelis and Palestinians, especially on
confidence-building measures, which, if successful,
may lay the ground for the resumption of the
long-awaited direct negotiations.

We have heard expressions of concern, including
by some members of the Council, about the efficacy
of the Quartet. The United Nations is a member of the
Quartet but it is unclear to us what value it adds to its
equation. We believe that there is a serious need to take
a step back and assess the utility of the Quartet in its
current make-up with a view to consolidating its gains,
correcting its mistakes and weaknesses, and possibly
reconfiguring or even disbanding it, if needs be.
We encourage the Palestinian parties to forge
ahead with their reconciliation efforts. The role that
Egypt continues to play in that regard is most welcome.
We encourage the parties to proceed rapidly with
preparations for the upcoming local elections, which,
we hope, will enhance democracy and ensure that
internal Palestinian unity is sustained.

The brutal attacks on Israeli tourists in Bulgaria on
18 July are deplorable. South Africa strongly condemns
them. We support the call to bring to justice those
responsible for the attacks.

On Syria, we remain extremely concerned that the
violence continues unabated, with no sign of adherence
to the Annan plan. South Africa reiterates its position
that the only hope for the people of Syria is a Syrian-led
dialogue, aimed at a peaceful political transition that
reflects the will of the people. The only way forward is
the six-point plan as proposed by Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. Again, we call on the parties to stop
the fighting and violence and to immediately begin
negotiations. Failing to start negotiations immediately
will result in the already dire situation further spiralling
out of control. Such a development would have a severe
impact on the stability of the entire region.

In conclusion, we welcome the Arab League's
decision to revive Palestine's bid for United Nations
membership. Restating the continent's support of the
Palestinian cause, the Assembly of the African Union,
at its nineteenth ordinary session, underscored that
"full membership of the United Nations is a right to
be enjoyed by all sovereign States" and reaffirmed
Africa's support to the two-State solution.

Evidently, it is not enough that the Security Council
meets every few months in the Chamber merely to
restate our widely known positions on this agenda item.
South Africa calls on the international community to
seriously exert its energies and channel its resources
towards a permanent and sustainable political solution,
namely, the implementation of a two-State solution,
providing for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State, existing side by side in peace with Israel within
internationally recognized borders, based on those
existing on 4 June 1967, prior to the outbreak of the
so-called Six-Day War between Arab States and Israel,
and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

