Mr. Du Xiaocong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome and
thank Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura. Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, for her presence at today's
meeting. We would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador John McNee,
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings on the situation in Sierra Leone.

We are pleased to note that the national political
reconciliation and economic reconstruction processes
in Sierra Leone have made progress. Following the
conflict last March over local election disputes
between the ruling party and the opposition, both sides
demonstrated calm and restraint. Through international
mediation and dialogue and consultation, they were
able to prevent escalation in the violence. We
appreciate those efforts and welcome the joint
communique agreed by the two parties on 2 April, as it
is conducive to rebuilding mutual trust between them
and among political factions in Sierra Leone. We hope
that the communique will be observed and
implemented in earnest.

The Government of Sierra Leone issued its
Agenda for Change last December as a document to
guide the peacebuilding process in the country. The
relevant United Nations agencies and international
partners have also refocused their work in line with the
Agenda. We welcome the courageous choice made by
the people and Government of Sierra Leone to once
again embark upon the path of reconstruction.
However, they still face grave challenges in the areas
of economic recovery, social development and
rebuilding the judicial system. We expect that the
political factions of Sierra Leone will continue to build
consensus and strengthen cooperation in the area of
nation-building. We hope that the relevant international
assistance will be provided on the basis of full respect
for the priority development areas and focus chosen by
the people and Government of Sierra Leone, in order
that the limited relief resources available will be used
to genuinely address the pressing concerns of the
people of Sierra Leone.

In a few days, the Government of Sierra Leone
and the Canadian Chairmanship of the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission will co-host a high-level meeting to
discuss peacebuilding in the country. We call upon all
parties to continue to follow with interest the
peacebuilding process in Sierra Leone, as well as to
provide financial and technical assistance for youth
employment, economic and social development and
other priority areas in the country. We support the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund continuing their positive role in helping Sierra
Leone resume its development process.

