Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Qazi for his
briefing, as well as the representative of the United
States for the report on the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF).

The circumstances under which we are meeting
today are critical for Iraq. The situation has gotten
worse and it could get even worse. There has been an
intensification of the sectarian violence. We are far
from a reconciliation. Reconstruction is not advancing
and hopes are turning into desperation. We are a long
way from a stable, sovereign, united, democratic and
pluralistic Iraq that we wanted to build after the
transition established by Security Council resolution
1546 (2004).

The report of the Secretary-General and all of the
information provided by independent sources from the
area indicate clearly that, given the external
intervention and the internal political situation, the
outlook in Iraq is very gloomy. The level of
deterioration of the situation should lead to significant
changes in the strategic orientation and in the
identification of new ways and means that are

necessary to bring about stability in Iraq. It is
necessary to act to deal with this reality.

The security and humanitarian situation, the
social conditions and the political landscape are all
areas which show extensive deficiencies. The result is
that the predominant social sentiment in the civilian
population is that of helplessness and despair. The
reconstitution of social fabric and credibility for the
Iraqi people are essential to move out of the crisis.

It is obvious that we need to address
simultaneously all of these aspects. We need to give a
greater space for political dialogue to promote
participation and commitment, even beyond the
territory of Iraq, without forgetting the protection of
the civilian population, in order to avoid open conflict
which some extremists are trying to precipitate. The
Iraqis, first and foremost, their Government, and the
neighbouring countries and the main players of the
international system present in Iraq and the
international community should be involved urgently
in the current situation to support stability in Iraq.

In this respect, Peru supports all initiatives that
will contribute to restoring trust between the various
sectors of Iraq, whether that be of domestic origin,
such as the Constitutional review process, or measures
promoted by the League of Arab States or the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, for example.
All of these initiatives can contribute to bringing about
national reconciliation.

Peru condemns the sectarian violence and the acts
of intolerance. We reject all terrorist acts that have
been committed in Iraq. We consider that those
responsible for security in Iraq should fulfil their duty
to protect civilians and maintain the rule of law as well
as the fundamental rights of citizens. We must
remember that there will be no democracy in Iraq if
impunity continues. We also hope that the
establishment of institutions such as the national
human rights commission will be able to be brought
about as soon as possible in order to move forward
towards building the rule of law and a legal system.

The reconstruction task in Iraq is another central
aspect. Unfortunately, in that area, once again, there
are significant delays. There is a lack of investment
that has an impact on the economy and public services,
such as health, which has given rise to some disturbing
indicators. The international community must continue
its support to restore the economy. The International
Compact with Iraq is a positive initiative that is
moving in the right direction.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI). We believe that it should continue in
accordance with its mandate and to the extent possible
on the ground, to support and consolidate all activities
that will lead to political and legal stability, to
institutional and economic reconstruction, to the
provision of humanitarian assistance and to ensuring
that human rights are respected in Iraq.

