As of this morning, Syrian Government authorities have confirmed 256 cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria, including nine fatalities. Six cases have been recorded in the north-east, including one fatality. That is a more than four-fold increase in recorded cases since my last briefing (see S/2020/427). So far, overall infection numbers have, thankfully, remained low. That must be read cautiously, however, since testing remains extremely limited. Little over 8,000 tests have been conducted to date. Moreover, we can see the scale of the risks ahead from what has been happening recently elsewhere in the region, including in Iran, Saudi Arabia and, in particular, Yemen. The United Nations continues to support COVID-19 preparedness and response measures across Syria, including the expansion of testing capacities. But significant gaps remain, including in personal protective equipment, medical case management supplies and isolation and quarantine capacity. Syria's health system is not prepared for a large-scale outbreak. We need only to look at Yemen to see how quickly COVID-19 can collapse a health system devastated by years of war. Even as the number of recorded infections remains low, the threat of a broader COVID-19 outbreak is aggravating the economic downturn and constraining the humanitarian response. That could have serious consequences across the whole region, not just in Syria. It is against that backdrop that I will brief the Council today on three areas: first, the human cost of the economic downturn; secondly, the situation in north- west Syria; and, thirdly, the humanitarian response under way from within Syria, including assistance delivered cross-line. The prices of food, medicines, fuel and other essential commodities are soaring across the country. The volatile exchange rate has seen the Syrian pound lose more value in the last six months than in the first nine years of the crisis. This month, the Central Bank adjusted the official exchange rate from 704 pounds to 1,256 pounds against the United States dollar - a 78 per cent devaluation. The unofficial rate fell to its lowest point on record, at 3,120 pounds against the dollar. Food prices have reached unprecedented levels. Market monitoring by the World Food Programme shows a 200 per cent increase in the price of the national average food basket since last year. A growing number of Syrians are no longer able to provide for themselves and their families. Many report going into debt and eating less to survive. As I briefed the Council in May, the World Food Programme now estimates 9.3 million people to be food insecure. This is the highest level ever recorded in Syria, and it is increasing. An estimated 4.6 million children and pregnant and breastfeeding mothers are in need of nutrition assistance - 3.7 million in acute need. We estimate that almost half a million children under five suffer from stunting - a condition likely to irreversibly impact their physical and cognitive development. Across the country, people who have struggled through nine years of devastating conflict are telling us that they have now reached their breaking point. I note again the public assurances by the United States and by the European Union that their sanctions programmes relating to Syria neither ban the flow of humanitarian supplies nor target medicines and medical devices. I welcome their commitment to fully and expeditiously apply humanitarian exemptions. I reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal for the waiving of sanctions that can undermine countries' capacity to respond to the pandemic. I am particularly concerned about the situation in the north-west, where an estimated 2.8 million people - 70 per cent of the region's population - require humanitarian assistance. The mass-displacement of almost 1 million people earlier this year and new economic hardships, aggravated by the regional impact of COVID-19, have left civilians in the north-west among the country's most vulnerable. Displaced families make up two thirds of the current population of the north-west. The vast majority of displaced people sheltering in last-resort sites are concentrated here. Last-resort sites are what we call camps and informal settlements that fall short of even the minimum emergency standards for shelter, water and sanitation. Just last week, rainstorms and flooding in rural Idlib uprooted hundreds of tents and swept away many people's few remaining belongings. In that environment, malnutrition rates have unsurprisingly been rising over the past months. Almost three of every 10 children in the north-west under the age of five suffer from stunting. Under the cross-border operations, authorized by the Council under resolution 2504 (2020), 1,781 aid trucks crossed the border from Turkey into north-west Syria in May. The majority of that cross-border aid is food - enough for 1.3 million people every month. Still, more and more children and infants are arriving at nutrition centres showing signs of chronic and acute malnutrition. Mothers arriving at the centres say they have long been priced out of food staples and medicines, leaving them solely reliant on the food packages delivered across the border. Some also say they are cooking weeds to supplement the food rations. Such is the level of desperation. I want to be clear on this point - current levels of assistance delivered across the border are far from sufficient. The north-west continues to face a major humanitarian crisis. The cross-border operation needs to be scaled up further. A failure to extend cross-border authorization would sever the United Nations operation currently under way. It would end United Nations food deliveries and the support to nutrition centres. It would cause suffering and death. As the Secretary-General states in his latest report (S/2020/576), efforts will continue to be made to deliver cross-line assistance into the north-west. However, currently, it is simply impossible to replicate what is being delivered through the cross-border operation with cross-line assistance. Planning has progressed for a cross-line mission to Idlib, which has been on hold since April, when United Nations movements into the north-west were paused due to concerns over COVID-19 transmission. Our operational planning has now resumed and is proceeding with careful consideration of those risks, as well as the complex security environment. A concept of operations is being finalized to share with the parties. The Secretary-General's report further states that continued cross-border operations require an additional 12-month renewal of authorization for the Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa border crossings. Both border crossings are required to sustain delivery. While the trans-shipment capacity of Bab Al-Salam is lower than that of Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam provides direct access to parts of northern Aleppo that host some of the highest concentrations of displaced people in the country. Some 1.3 million people live in the area accessed from Bab Al-Salam, of whom 62 per cent are internally displaced persons. I now turn to the massive aid operation continuing from inside Syria. In the first four months of 2020, humanitarian operations inside Syria reached more than 5.5 million people with humanitarian assistance, including cross-line assistance into the north-east. That includes food assistance for 3.2 million people, nutrition support for half a million children, critical water and sanitation for 1.3 million people, 4 million medical procedures and 2.5 million treatment courses. Due to the deteriorating economic situation, we have expanded humanitarian cash assistance. So far this year, more than $40 million dollars in cash and vouchers have been distributed to highly vulnerable persons, including people living with disabilities, single-parent households and the elderly. UNICEF and educational partners are also supporting students currently taking their national exams across the country by preparing safe examination centres and implementing COVID-19 preventative measures. Thousands of students have been travelling cross-line to Government areas, joining a quarter of a million of their peers to sit for their national exams. I wish all the students currently doing that across Syria the very best in their exams. The World Health Organization (WHO) has dispatched two shipments of medical supplies to the north-east over land, in addition to continued deliveries by air. However, more than five months on from the removal of Al-Yarubiyah, distributions of WHO medical items have not reached the majority of facilities that previously depended on cross-border supplies. As the Secretary-General stated in his review of cross-line and cross-border assistance back in February (S/2020/139), and as he reiterates in his sixty-seventh report on the humanitarian situation in Syria, a combination of more cross-border and cross-line access is required to sustain current levels of humanitarian assistance into the north-east, and preferably an increase to that assistance. Should adequate steps not be taken for cross-line deliveries to work effectively - and in the absence of consent from the Government of Syria or neighbouring countries to use border crossings into the north-east that are safe and logistically feasible - the Security Council would need to authorize the United Nations and its implementing partners to use additional crossings. Some 90,000 people remain in overcrowded displacement camps in the north- east, including Al-Hol camp. About 58,000 of them are children from more than 60 different countries. High Commissioner Bachelet last week expressed her concern that thousands are unable to return to their countries of nationality or origin. I join her in calling on States to assume responsibility for their nationals, in accordance with their obligations under international law. Our humanitarian operations in Syria rely heavily on our front-line partners, including national non-governmental organizations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. I call on all parties to facilitate humanitarian access and protect all civilians and civilian objects, including humanitarian workers and assets, in line with their obligations under international humanitarian law. The humanitarian assistance we provide across Syria also depends on the support of the international community, including the assistance provided by neighbours in the region hosting millions of refugees. Tomorrow is the fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, and we will be asking for that critical support to continue. On 23 June, the Russian Federation informed the United Nations that it will no longer participate in the humanitarian notification system, which the United Nations and its humanitarian partners use to share information with the parties to the conflict. We will discuss the situation further with our humanitarian partners in Syria and with the Russian Federation. Humanitarian notification aims to facilitate the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance by informing the parties to the conflict of facilities and movements that fulfil a humanitarian function. Whether or not they participate in the humanitarian notification system, the parties to the conflict remain bound by international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution. Security Council resolution 2504 (2020) expires in 11 days. I will conclude by reiterating the Secretary-General's appeal, and my own numerous appeals, to extend the cross-border authorization. That authorization provides a lifeline for millions of civilians in north-west Syria. We cannot reach them without it.
