Ms. Drobic (Slovenia): Let me join others in
conveying our sincere condolences to the Russian
delegation on the passing of Ambassador Churkin.

We welcome the opportunity to address the Security
Council on issues related to regional and international
peace and security. Although most of the conflicts in
Europe might not be very high on or at the top of the
Security Council's agenda, that does not mean they are
any less important or even irrelevant. Many of them
have the dangerous potential of escalating into threats
to peace and stability in a wider region.

It is very important that we recognize the negative
effects that some of these conflicts have, especially
with regard to the principle of respect for territorial
integrity and the sovereignty of States. It needs to
be continuously made clear that the disregard of
the international order built through the decades is
unacceptable. It may be imperative to address ongoing
conflicts, but it is even more important to prevent them.
Preventing disputes from escalating into conflicts
must be accompanied by other endeavours to create an
environment characterized by cooperative relationship.
It is crucial that the resolution of conflicts be done
through dialogue, using diplomatic and political tools
and instruments.

The Security Council and the States Members of
the United Nations should make better use of Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter. Prevention and the timely
peaceful resolution of potential conflicts are by far
the most cost- and resources-efficient approaches.
In this regard, it is also important to further enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which should be utilized for preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping, peacemaking and post-
conflict peace-building.

Slovenia has always been a staunch supporter of
the principle of the peaceful resolution of conflicts
through dialogue, cooperation and mediation. We wish
to stress that the most important precondition for the
resolution of the conflicts is respect for international
law and implementation of international agreements in
good faith.

I would like now to turn to some specific issues. We
are very concerned by the worsening situation in eastern
Ukraine. The peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Ukraine is a non plus ultra. Talks within the Normandy
format and the efforts of the OSCE must continue, and
we appreciate the constructive roles of Germany and
France in resolving the crisis through an open dialogue.
It needs to be made clear that freezing the search for
a solution is not an option. It would only protract the
conflict and the suffering of the local population.

Slovenia, as a member of the European Union,
supports the Union's common position on the necessity
of a peaceful resolution of the Armenian-Azerbaijani
conflict over Nagorno Karabakh in the framework of
the OSCE Minsk Group and through respect for all
relevant Security Council resolutions. We welcome
and support the direct talks between Armenia and
Azerbaijan as well as the activities engaged in by all
other international community members that might lead
to an agreement and contribute to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict.

Regarding the resolution of the conflicts in
South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Slovenia attaches great
importance to the format established within the
framework of the Geneva talks. Their continuation
is essential for ensuring the security and stability of
the region. We believe that Georgia should continue
to cooperate with civil society in South Ossetia
and Abkhazia.

Slovenia also welcomes the continuation of 5+2
talks on the Transnistrian settlement process, where we
positively assess the constructive commitment of both
sides to engaging in dialogue. It is good that there is
continuity in the efforts of the parties involved and in
the efforts of the international community.

Constructive commitment and dialogue are always
the best paths to follow, as we have seen in the progress
regarding the issue of Cyprus and in the dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo.

We continue to be faced with numerous ever-
changing challenges to international peace and
security. Throughout history, but especially in the last
70 years, the international community has agreed on
many instruments and tools to address challenges and
prevent their escalation. It is therefore up to us to use
them, individually and collectively.

