Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the Chairs of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their briefings and commend them
for their astute leadership.

Nigeria commends the Chairs for the continued
cooperation among their Committees in the areas of
information-sharing, joint meetings, outreach activities,
country visits and participation in the broader counter-
terrorism framework. That cooperation has allowed the
Committees to share ideas on new challenges and share
experiences on compiling effective implementation
practices. The regular coordination by the three groups
of experts of outreach activities, country visits and
participation in the work of other entities dealing with
counter-terrorism has allowed them to work together
in a coherent and consistent manner. That is clearly
a win-win situation for the three Committees, as it
allows them to benefit from their relative strengths
and competencies, thus improving their overall ability
to achieve their different mandates. What really
counts is the delivery of results, and we see merit in
the Committees strengthening their coordination and
cooperation with a view to improving their performance.

Turning to the issue of terrorism, I would like to
state that Nigeria remains resolute in its determination
to meet that challenge, which is a clear and present
threat to our national security. It was in that context
that, in March 2014, the federal Government launched a
four-point plan aimed at deradicalization, reaffirmation
of the national ethos, reorientation of the security
services and economic revitalization of a part of the
country where poverty is endemic in order to address
terrorism at home. That plan, which is part of the
national counter-terrorism strategy, is expected to
boost the efforts by Nigeria and its partners to root out
terrorism in the country.

Nigeria appreciates the cooperation and assistance
of United Nations counter-terrorism entities, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which has been engaged in Nigeria since
2006. That cooperation has led to the establishment of
the office of a national counter-terrorism coordinator in
Nigeria and the evolution of a proactive deradicalization
effort. The contributions of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in the criminal justice track in
Nigeria are also significant. We acknowledge the role
being played in the fight against terrorism by the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) and the
synergy evolving between the Centre and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

Capacity-building in the fight against terrorism
has become even more imperative. Terrorists are using
the Internet to advance their cause and are exploiting
modern technology to plan and launch attacks. They have
developed expertise in many areas, including command
and control, logistics and mobility, as evidenced by the
operations in Nigeria and other parts of the world. In
that regard, we thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
its generous contribution to the UNCCT. We urge other
Member States to also contribute to funding the Centre
in order to enhance its responsiveness to the capacity-
building needs of Member States.

Nigeria appreciates the universality of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, which is in place to serve Member
States in the global fight against terrorism. It is our
hope that the recent listing of Boko Haram will aid
our counter-terrorism efforts. We remain committed
to implementing the sanctions, resolute in assisting the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) deliver on its mandate and keen to render
on-reserve support to the Office of the Ombudsperson,
who strives hard to ensure fairness and transparency in
the listing and delisting process.

We take this opportunity to acknowledge the support
of friendly States in our fight against terrorism. We are
determined to work with our neighbours to strengthen
coordination of our counter-terrorism efforts.

I will now make a few remarks on nuclear
non-proliferation. Nigeria recognizes the need for all
States to continue to take effective measures to prevent
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery. In the interest
of international peace and security, it is particularly
crucial for us to ensure that non-State actors in
particular are prevented from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. That underscores the importance of
the work of the 1540 Committee. The decision of the
1540 Committee to strengthen its cooperation with
other committees and with international, regional and
subregional organizations, including in the compilation
of effective practices, will enhance the attainment of
its mandate.

That multidimensional approach also serves as a
viable means of achieving the objective of resolution
1540 (2004). We welcome the steps being taken by the
Committee to promote universal reporting under the
resolution and encourage the planned collaboration
between its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs to engage with and
assist Member States in the submission of their initial
reports. The fight for non-proliferation can be greatly
aided when requests for assistance are matched by
offers. We therefore urge the Committee to continue
to facilitate that form of matchmaking as it works to
strengthen its assistance mechanism.

Finally, terrorism and the risk of non-State actors
acquiring weapons of mass destruction remain real
threats to international peace and security. As Member
States, we must unite in the face of those threats and
continue to give our full support to the 1373 Committee,
the 1540 Committee and the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee.

