Mr. Jallow: Members of the Council now have
before them the revised completion strategy document
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), which is based on developments as of 30
November 2006 and which was submitted by Judge
Erik Mose, President of the Tribunal, in consultation
with the Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry. The
ICTR continues to make steady progress towards the
completion of its mandate, in accordance with the
deadlines set by Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004). We remain committed to the
deadlines and confident of the Tribunal's ability to
comply with the completion dates that have been set by
the Security Council.
Since our last report to the Council, five cases
have been completed - as mentioned by the President
of the Tribunal. Of those five cases three accused were
convicted, one of whom pleaded guilty, and two were
acquitted. As planned, in the past six months the
Prosecution was able to commence trials in three new
cases. Those cases are proceeding steadily and
satisfactorily. The trials of 25 accused persons are in
progress before the Trial Chambers, with 22 accused
being tried jointly in five multiple-accused cases.
While those cases present a major challenge, they are
nevertheless all expected to conclude at various times
during 2007 and 2008. None of them is projected to go
beyond the end of 2008. The conclusion of any of those
multi-accused cases will provide an opportunity to
enhance the capacity of the Tribunal to proceed with
the trials of additional single-accused cases.

The commencement of the rule 11 bis transfer of
indictees to national jurisdictions for trial received a
temporary setback when both the Trial Chamber and
the Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal rejected the
request of the Prosecutor for the transfer of Michel
Bagaragaza to Norway for trial. That decision was
based on the Chamber's view that Norway lacks
jurisdiction to prosecute Bagaragaza for the offences
on which he had been indicted. However, I have now
filed a second request for the transfer of his case to
another European country, which has agreed to take the
case and which, in our View, is able to exercise
jurisdiction over the offences in the indictment. A
decision is pending on the application. Meanwhile,
another European country has agreed to take on cases
on transfer from the ICTR. Accordingly, I propose,
early in 2007, to request the transfer of three other
indictees to that country.

The option of transferring cases to African
countries other than Rwanda is not likely to be viable.
All the African countries that I have approached in that
respect -while in principle supporting the sharing of
the Tribunal's workload - have pleaded capacity and
resource constraints and overloaded national judicial
systems as obstacles to their participation in that
exercise. Rwanda therefore remains the only African
country willing, although not yet ready in the sense of
fulfilling the conditions for transfer, to receive from
the ICTR cases ofindictees for trial.

Unfortunately, despite the increased activity of
the Tribunal's tracking team, in the past six months we
have not been able to apprehend and transfer to the
ICTR any of the 18 fugitive indictees who continue to
evade the ICTR. The evasive strategies of the
fugitives - including their constant mobility across a
large belt of East, Central and Southern Africa, their
refuge in inaccessible areas of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and changes in personal
identity - have posed severe challenges to the efforts
to track them down. So also has the matter of State
cooperation and the level of such cooperation.

In the past six months I have continued
consultations with officials of the Kenyan Government
regarding the case of Felicien Kabuga, who remains at
the top of the list of fugitives. Members will recall that
in resolution 1503 (2003) the Security Council
requested Kenya to cooperate with the ICTR in the
matter of his arrest and transfer to the Tribunal for
trial. The information available to us continues to
confirm Kabuga's connection with the territory of
Kenya. In September 2006, I undertook a mission to
Kenya to discuss that matter with Government
officials. I was assured by officials and ministers of the
Government's commitment to collaborate with the
Tribunal in searching for the fugitive in Kenya, to have
him arrested if found and to investigate his assets in
Kenya. A number of measures were agreed upon as a
result of our discussions. I was to be advised of the
status of the implementation of those measures by the
Government of Kenya by 15 November 2006. I am
awaiting the report of the Kenyan Government in that
respect. The Council's encouragement of Kenya to
intensify its collaboration with the ICTR in the matter
of Felicien Kabuga continues to be necessary.

I wish to take this opportunity to place on record
our appreciation to the group of ambassadors in Kenya
known as the friends of the ICTR, which is largely
comprised of ambassadors from the United States of
America, the European Union and Canada, for their
active support in our discussions with the Government
of Kenya. I look forward to their continued
involvement in this matter.

Looking ahead to next year, our focus will
continue to be on the timely and efficient conclusion of
the cases of those currently on trial, the preparation
and commencement of new trials, the intensification of
the tracking programme for the arrest and transfer of
fugitives for trial and the referral of cases of indictees
to national jurisdictions for trial.
Of the 11 indictees currently in detention
awaiting trial, five have been identified for transfer to
national jurisdictions. In the meantime, guilty-plea
negotiations are ongoing with some of them. The
remaining cases from that category will be made trial-
ready by my Office, with up to three cases being ready
to commence in the first half of 2007, should
courtroom space be available.

Of the 18 fugitives who remain at large, a
maximum of six, including, of course, Felicien
Kabuga, will be prepared for trial in Arusha in the
event of arrest. The cases of those 12 accused
people- that is to say as of today, six who are
currently in custody and six who are currently at
large- can, we believe, conveniently be concluded
over the two-year period 2007-2008. The policy of
single-accused trials, together with the space and
resources which are progressively becoming available
over the same period with the conclusion of the multi-
accused trials, would provide an additional advantage
in dealing with the remaining caseload.

The Appeals Chamber of the ICTR, in its
decision in the case of The Prosecutor v. Karemera et
al., delivered earlier this year, ruled that Trial
Chambers should now take judicial notice of the
occurrence of the genocide in Rwanda as a notorious
historical fact that requires no proof. It has recently
reaffirmed that decision. By eliminating the need for
such proof, that judicial decision has the potential to
shorten the proceedings in the remaining cases.

Twelve fugitives have been earmarked for
transfer to Rwanda, together with five of the detainees
currently in custody. The indications, following
consultations in Rwanda, are that the death penalty, a
major obstacle to the transfer of any case to Rwanda,
will be abolished not just in relation to the cases of the
ICTR, but across the board. As soon as that is
accomplished, I shall be requesting the transfer of the
cases of those 17 indictees - the 12 who are at large
and five who are in custody - to Rwanda for trial. I
hope that can be done in the first half of 2007. The
number of cases - 17 - for referral to Rwanda may
rise to include any of the six top-level fugitives
currently earmarked for trial in Arusha, if they are not
arrested by the end of 2007.

If, for any reason the referral of cases to Rwanda
becomes impossible, then the cases so earmarked will
fall back within the workload of the Tribunal, either to
be prosecuted in Arusha or to be transferred to another
jurisdiction. We hope that the former will not arise and
that referral to another national jurisdiction in that
event will still be feasible.

Council members are aware that capacity-
building is crucial to a successful strategy of
partnership with national jurisdictions. Indeed, the
Council has, in its resolutions and statements, called
for capacity-building assistance to those countries
which are willing to share the burden of the struggle
against impunity. As members will observe from
annex 5 to the completion strategy document
(S/2006/951, enclosure), the ICTR in its own limited
way has been assisting Rwanda in that respect through
its outreach programme. The efforts of the
Governments of the United States of America and of
the European Union member States to improve the
legal system of Rwanda are also to be commended.

I have indicated to the Security Council in my
previous reports that my Office has felt it necessary to
carry out further enquiries after our evaluation of the
material relating to alleged violations of humanitarian
law by the Rwanda Patriotic Front. I expect that, in the
course of 2007, those enquiries should conclude,
enabling us to decide which way to proceed.

The Tribunal has continued to receive substantial
cooperation and support from Rwanda and other States
Members of the United Nations in many matters.
Increasingly, and happily, many States are now willing
to share the burden of prosecuting alleged
ge'nocidaires. The United States, Canada and several
States in Europe have now established special offices
to prosecute suspected genocidaires who may have
taken up residence within those countries. My Office
has been collaborating with such offices by providing
them with material evidence and other support to
ensure that impunity does not prevail in these
instances. I wish to assure them all of our continued
cooperation.

As we draw nearer to the end of our mandate, the
ICTR will also be paying particular attention to legacy
issues, staff retention and residual matters which will
remain after closure. The Security Council will receive
proposals in due course on some of those matters. Staff
retention is, however, a matter of immediate concern.
Whilst we do not envisage any need for additional
resources beyond current budgetary levels, and may
indeed anticipate a decline in some areas eventually, it
is probable that the Tribunal will lose some of its most
experienced staff, who may naturally be looking for
greater security elsewhere. This will come at a critical
period of our mandate. It is necessary and urgent that a
system of incentives be put in place to enable the
Tribunal to retain the staff that it requires from 2007 to
completion. We look forward to the understanding and
support of Member States in respect of proposals for
staff retention which are currently under consideration
within the United Nations.

Let me conclude by extending my appreciation to
the Security Council, other organs of the United
Nations and the Secretariat for the support they have
provided to the Tribunal over the years. In that respect,
I must single out His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, the
Secretary-General, who has been a pillar of
encouragement, understanding and support not just for
the ICTR and the other Tribunals, but for the wider
cause of international criminal justice. His commitment
to this cause has been a source of great strength to the
Tribunals. The Action Plan to Prevent Genocide,
launched by the Secretary-General on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the Rwanda genocide, provides
the international community today with an opportunity
and a mechanism to carry the struggle against impunity
further, in a holistic way combining preventive and
remedial strategies. We look forward to the continued
support of the international community in the
implementation of the Action Plan.

On behalf of my staff and on my own personal
account, I wish to sincerely thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his leadership, and to wish him
well in his retirement. I also wish to seize this
opportunity to congratulate and welcome the incoming
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and to wish him all the best in the execution of his
mandate.

