Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would also like to
thank all the briefers here this morning and take this
opportunity to welcome Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov to his new post, wish him every success and
tell him how much we are looking forward to working
with him during his time.

As all of us in this Chamber know only too well,
international terrorist groups like Da'esh and Al-Qaida
seek to divide us. They seek to divide our communities
and tear apart our countries, attacking our values and
our institutions. But in the face of their attempts to
divide us, one of our greatest weapons is our ability
to come together and work together, and the Security
Council is united in our desire to protect people across
the world and defeat terrorism.

Our shared multilateral counter-terrorism system
has never been so needed. Each constituent part is
crucial. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum and the
Coalition against Da'esh helped to forge our strategies
and technical capabilities. The United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the newly created United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Office marshall the resources of the United Nations
to tackle both terrorism and violence extremism. The
Council has a vital role to play, producing ever most
sophisticated measures and guidance for States. I
would like briefly to highlight two opportunities to
improve and recalibrate the United Nations counter-
terrorism approach.

First, we must maximize the impact and effectiveness
of CTED. I would like to congratulate CTED for its
work to date. It is a well-functioning United Nations
entity with real expertise and knowledge. CTED's
proactive approach to new counter-terrorism issues
has been welcome. Its guidelines on foreign terrorist
fighters and counter-narratives, for example, are
excellent benchmarks. Further, CTED's work on public-
private partnerships on the Internet has been vital, for
example, working with the ICT4Peace Foundation and
the world's largest tech firms in addressing terrorism
and violence extremism content online. Governments
have also built new relationships with the private sector
as demonstrated last week when my Prime Minister
along with partners from Italy and France for the first
time hosted the world's largest information technology
companies at the United Nations to address terrorist
use of the Internet.

The CTED mandate renewal at the end of this year
is a chance to enhance its impact. This should include
learning lessons on how to address emerging security
issues, improving country assessments and making sure
they are acted upon, ensuring that technical expertise
is fully used, and providing guidance on prioritization.
We look forward to welcoming Michele Coninsx as the
new Executive Director and hearing her ideas for how
to further improve this important office.

The second opportunity we see is to give priority to
prevention, addressing the root causes and the violent
extremism that spawns terrorism. For every person
who is radicalized into terrorism, there is first an
environment in which ideology, economic factors and
grievances are bent to a violent end by opportunistic
leaders. This can happen. I am afraid, in schools, places
of worship and prisons. States can address a terrorist
case with all of the intelligence, police, judicial and
even military means at their disposal. But as Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov says, until we break the
life cycle ofradicalization and terrorism and address the
environments in which calls to terrorism are espoused
and take hold, there will always be another would-be
terrorist waiting to emerge. That is why preventing
violent extremism is a vital investment for peace and
security and why I think Secretary-General Guterres
highlighted it when he established the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Office.

I therefore believe that the strategic leadership and
coordinating function of the Counter-Terrorism Office
is vital in this context. The Office should use its central
coordination role to look outside traditional peace and
security analysis and draw on United Nations expertise
in human rights, development, gender issues and
education, to name just a few. Only then can the United
Nations help countries address a violent extremist
threat before it explodes into a threat to international
peace and security. The United Nations potential to
help States prevent violent extremism is unique and
rightly lies at the heart of the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Office.

I would like to pose a question ifI may to Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov. I found his description of
his strategy extremely helpful when he set it out in his
briefing, and I wonder if he might take the opportunity,
either now or later, to say more about how he sees the
Counter-Terrorism Office delivering the vital mandate
from the General Assembly for the preventive pillar
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and how he might use his chairmanship of
the Secretary-General's High-Level Preventing Violent
Extremism Action Group to coordinate this. It would be
really good to hear some more about that.

Multilateral cooperation must continue to
effectively counter terrorism and violent extremism.
A smoothly functioning CTED, a newly-established
Counter-Terrorism Office and a truly strategic United
Nations approach to prevention coordinated by the
Counter-Terrorism Office are two concrete ways to
assist in this endeavour.

