Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish to join others in
expressing appreciation for Ambassador Mufioz's very
convincing and comprehensive oral report, which we
fully support. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Mufioz on his successful leadership in
making the 1267 Committee one of the most dynamic
of the Security Council's sanctions committees. In
particular, his initiative and, not least, his resilience in
connecting the Committee to the outside world are
highly commendable.

I wish also to associate myself with the statement
that the Permanent Representative of Ireland will make
later on behalf of the European Union. I shall thus limit
myself to a few remarks.

First of all, I note the importance of today's
meeting. It offers us the opportunity to focus again on
one of the most important instruments available to the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism. We
believe that, since the previous similar meeting, in
January, much progress has been made in dealing
worldwide with the Taliban and Al Qaeda. At the same
time, many threats persist, and new challenges are
arising.

Having held a vice-chairmanship of the
Committee since January this year, Romania
participated with keen interest in the recent visit to
selected countries, which took place between 1 and 8
May 2004. We were encouraged to note that all
countries visited form part of the global front of the
combat against terrorism; such a front is the only way
to face the evolving modus operandi of the global
network in which Al Qaeda and other terrorists operate
today.

Undoubtedly, such field missions generate
concrete added value for both the Security Council and
the countries visited. They are a way to make the 1267
Committee play more effectively one of its most
important roles: that of an interface between the
Security Council and the Members of the United
Nations, which are called upon to implement its
resolutions.
Since the Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 1526 (2004) on 30 January 2004, the
Committee has entered a new stage - that of full
maturity - as it is now endowed with a coherent and
comprehensive set of tools enabling it to better carry
out its mandate. But the degree of success depends also
on the capabilities on the ground to apply the measures
adopted by the Council. The oral report of the
Committee Chairman was particularly telling in that
regard.

The fight against Al Qaeda and the Taliban must
have a solid global texture; any weak component will
reduce the effectiveness of the entire system. It is
therefore in the interest of the Security Council, the
relevant United Nations agencies and international
donors to provide assistance to countries which need
specific help, for instance in border control. We should
also encourage and support the permanent substantive
dialogue and exchange of information among countries
which are situated in different regions but which today
are bound together by their having to face nefarious
terrorist activities.

As Ambassador Mufioz rightly pointed our, the
collection of reports is not an end in itself but is a
means for identifying the action to be taken by the
Committee to assist States in their implementation
efforts. The reporting cycle required by resolutions
1455 (2003) and 1526 (2004) is now coming to an end.
From now on, we should focus on incentives we might
consider extending with a view to assisting those States
which have had difficulties in fully implementing the
sanctions regime.

