Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Let me also thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. The Syrian chemical file has been dragging in the Security Council for far too long. It is high time that we make headway and ensure accountability. We have carefully examined the eighty-fourth report (S/2020/961, annex) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The report is yet more proof that there is still a lot to do to ensure accountability for the Syrian regime's well-documented crimes against humanity. For seven years, since the first sarin-gas attack in Ghouta, the Council has not been able to achieve that objective. We take note of the fact that the Declaration Assessment Team continues its work to resolve outstanding issues caused by the regime's deceptive declaration of its chemical-weapon stockpiles and production facilities. We expect that effort to yield concrete results soon. That is crucial in order to prevent the regime from repeatedly resorting to chemical weapons. Likewise, the Investigation and Identification Team and the Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic are working on the remaining investigations on chemical-weapon use in Syria. We look forward to the early completion of those investigations. As I emphasized during the previous Council meeting onthisissue, heldin September (see S/2020/902), we have confidence in the professionalism, integrity and impartiality of the OPCW's Technical Secretariat, Declaration and Assessment Team, Investigation and Identification Team and Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic. Their efforts need to be fully supported, instead of hindered. The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstance is unacceptable and constitutes a crime against humanity. Those responsible for these crimes should be brought to justice. A lack of response or inertia only encourages the Al-Assad regime to blatantly continue with its current course. The United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) confirmed the regime's culpability for the chemical attacks in Talmenes in 2014, Sarmin and Qmenas in 2015, and Khan Shaykhun in 2017. Turkey fully supported the JIM's efforts and regretted the politically motivated move by the regime's backers that led to the non-renewal of its mandate at the end of 2017. With the occurrence of new chemical attacks in Syria, the need for a mechanism to identify the perpetrators continues to be evident. The OPCW's Fact- Finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic reported the use of toxic chemicals in Ltamenah, in March 2017, and in Douma, in April 2018. The decision adopted in June 2018 at the Conference of the State Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was a crucial step, as it established the Investigation and Identification Team. Turkey fully supported this decision. The first report of the Investigation and Identification Team in April 2020 concluded that the Syrian regime's air force was the perpetrator of the three chemical-weapon attacks that took place in Ltamenah on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017. This is an important step towards ensuring that those responsible for the chemical-weapon attacks in Syria are held accountable for their crimes. To that end, we also fully support the continuation of the important cooperation between the OPCW secretariat and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The efforts of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry are also valuable, as the Commission substantively contributes to investigating the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Last July, the Executive Council of the OPCW took an important decision, providing for the possibility of overcoming the current impasse caused by the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies stemming from the initial declaration of the regime. The decision sets a 90-day deadline for the regime to declare to the OPCW all of the chemical weapons it currently possesses. The regime has yet to positively respond. The Security Council should strongly urge the regime to fulfil its obligations. This is essential for the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We cannot let the regime perpetuate the illusion that it possesses no chemical-weapon stockpiles. The regime must fully and unconditionally cooperate with the OPCW without delay. It is our collective duty to strengthen the norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction. For the past nine years, the Al-Assad regime has waged a war against its own citizens, including children. Conventional weapons and chemical weapons have been used indiscriminately. The Security Council cannot afford to sit back and keep watching this tragedy. If we fail to act now, urgently and decisively, there is no guarantee that the regime will not use chemical weapons again, at the expense of the lives of innocent civilians. Particular responsibility falls on those who have influence on the Syrian regime in this regard. The Security Council must act in unity and enforce the implementation of its resolution 2118 (2013). We owe this to the victims of chemical attacks who had the courage to rise up to tyranny and express their legitimate demands for freedom, democracy and human dignity.
