Ms. Juul (Norway): The situation in Timor-Leste
has continued to improve in spite of the regrettable
attacks on the Government in 2006 and most recently
in February 2008. The United Nations plays a vital role
in supporting stability and economic development in
Timor-Leste.

Norway commends the Government of Timor-
Leste for its handling of the attacks in 2008. The
Government moved decisively to assert its authority
and rapidly re-established law and order. In the
aftermath of the attacks, the Government took steps to
resolve the problems of internally displaced persons
and to reintegrate the petitioners into civilian life.

Yet stability in Timor-Leste remains fragile. The
underlying challenges that contributed to the recent
crises, such as growing poverty, unstable security
institutions and a weak judicial system, remain to be
addressed. Norway supports the Secretary-General's
assessment that, until these challenges are tackled,
there is a danger that any progress could be derailed.

Economic development in Timor-Leste will
contribute to national stability. Norway will continue to
support the Government and the United Nations in
building a democratic State and fighting poverty. We
recognize the progress made in including women and
youth in the nation-building process and urge the
Government to pay continued attention to these groups.

Attaining durable peace and stability in Timor-
Leste requires reform of the security forces. There is a
need for clear separation of internal and external
security responsibilities between the national police
and the military. While the process must be led by the
Timorese Government, Norway supports the continued
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to strengthen discipline and
enhance civilian control. The Government must also
ensure cooperation between the defence forces and
their Indonesian counterparts in securing their common
border.

Norway believes further efforts are needed to
solve the problem of the internally displaced persons.
The judicial sector, which continues to be weak and
overburdened, needs to be strengthened. Any political
interference in the justice system must be avoided, as it
may undermine public trust in the judiciary and
jeopardize the separation of powers, as guaranteed by
the constitution.

Norway is concerned that parliament again has
postponed the long-awaited debate on the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation on the Indonesian occupation.
It is our hope that parliament will set a new date for the
debate as soon as possible. Solutions to the
recommendations of both this Commission and the
Commission of Truth and Friendship must be found
within the framework of applicable law and
international human rights. A criminal justice approach
needs to be complemented with a non-formal system of
truth and reconciliation, as we have seen in other
countries. Impunity runs the risk of undermining public
trust in the rule of law.

Norway supports an extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a period of 12 months, at the Mission's
current composition and strength. Other peacebuilding
mechanisms, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and Peacebuilding Fund, should be assessed for a later
stage. We pay tribute to the nations participating in the
UNMIT operation, as well as to those contributing to
the International Stabilization Force.

