Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate, you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. I very much appreciate your
personal knowledge of the Afghan situation. I also
wish to pay tribute to Ambassador John Bolton of the
United States, your predecessor, for the excellent
manner in which he led the work of the Council during
the month of February.

The Afghan delegation wishes to join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, on his first briefing to the
Council since he assumed leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We also commend the Special Representative for his
comprehensive briefing on recent developments
pertaining to the situation in Afghanistan. We wish him
continued success in carrying out his duties.
Just over a month ago, representatives of more
than 75 countries and international organizations
gathered in London to convene the international
Conference on Afghanistan, at which the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan agreed
on a new form of engagement beyond the Bonn
process. In adopting the Afghanistan Compact,
Afghanistan and its international partners renewed
their commitments to achieve sustainable progress in
key areas of security; governance; the rule of law and
human rights; and social and economic development.
Afghanistan is grateful to the international community
for having pledged, in London, financial assistance
amounting to $10.5 billion for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of Afghanistan. The generosity displayed
by the international community in London is a clear
indication of the international community's sustained
commitment to the development and reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

With the presentation of the interim Afghanistan
National Development Strategy at the London
Conference, the Government of Afghanistan has
provided a clear and comprehensive blueprint for the
implementation of the Compact. For its part, the
Government of Afghanistan stands ready to fulfil its
responsibility towards achieving the objectives of the
Afghan National Development Strategy. In that respect,
I am pleased to inform the Council that the Afghan
Government recently appointed the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, Justice, Finance and Economy, as well
as the National Security Adviser, to serve on the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB). The
Board's work will be conducted under the
chairmanship of Professor Ishaq Nadiri, senior
economic adviser to President Karzai.

Afghanistan continues to make significant
progress towards the establishment and consolidation
of its State institutions. Allow me to briefly refer to
some of the positive developments that have transpired
since the Council's previous open debate on the
situation in Afghanistan, which took place on
23 August 2005.

Perhaps the most significant development has
been the formation of Afghanistan's National
Assembly and provincial councils. Subsequent to the
inauguration of both houses of parliament,
representatives elected their respective chairmen and
adopted the rules of procedure for the Assembly.
Women hold 27 per cent of the 249 seats allocated to
the people's house. Furthermore, 121 women were
elected to provincial councils. Both branches of the
legislative body are now operational and have engaged

in lively debates on issues relating to national security
and to the political, economic and social development
of the country. In accordance with a constitutional
provision, the people's house of the National Assembly
is now preparing to cast a vote of confidence on the
Cabinet.

The Afghan Government continues to make
progress in enhancing the capacity of the security
institutions. The Afghan national army and national
police are engaged in joint combat operations with
international forces to secure peace, stability and
public order. Having successfully concluded the
disarmament and demobilization process, the Afghan
Government remains committed to achieve the final
phase of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process of former combatants. In
addition, considerable progress has been made with
regard to the disbandment of illegal armed groups.

Despite the successful implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, much remains to be accomplished in
order to overcome the remaining challenges
confronting Afghanistan.

The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan remains
concerned about the ongoing terrorist activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists groups,
particularly in the south and south-east of the country.
Such attacks not only terrorize the Afghan people in
their daily lives, but also jeopardize the noble task of
achieving the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. In that context, I would like to refer to the
previous report of the Secretary-General, dated
12 August 2005, in which he stated:

"It is time for the security situation to be
addressed resolutely The insurgency's sources
of funding, training and safe havens must also be
effectively addressed" (S/2005/525, para. 82).

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General has
once again reiterated that assessment in paragraph 66
of his recent report.

The heinous suicide attack of 12 March 2006 on
the life of Mr. Sibghatullah Mojaddedi, Chairman of
the Upper House of the National Assembly, was yet
another desperate attempt by the enemies of
Afghanistan to destabilize the situation in the country.
Mr. Mojededdi escaped from the attack, but let me
seize this opportunity to state that the practice of
suicide attacks has been virtually unknown in Afghan
history. Even during the years of resistance against
foreign occupations, the people of Afghanistan never
resorted to that abhorrent practice. It is therefore
evident that the phenomenon has come to Afghanistan
from abroad. In that respect, allow me to also to state
that such activities will not hinder the resolve of the
Afghan people in their quest for a peaceful, stable and
democratic Afghanistan.

The Afghan Government is of the conviction that
the threat posed by extremist and obscurantist groups is
not limited to Afghanistan. Rather, it remains a threat
to the peace, prosperity and development of the region.
Therefore, it is of the utmost importance that the fight
against terrorism receive the sincere and honest
commitment of all the countries in the region. We
acknowledge the vital contribution of the international
coalition forces and the NATO-led International
Security Assistance Force in the effort to enhance the
security situation in Afghanistan. In that context, we
welcome the phased expansion of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force to the South
and East of the country.

The cultivation, production and trafficking of
narcotic drugs are yet another challenge facing
Afghanistan. In that regard, the Afghan Government
acknowledges the magnitude of that threat to the
stability of the country and remains resolved to tackle
the issue.

In recognition of our responsibility to eradicate
the illicit cultivation and production of illicit drugs, the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan presented its updated
national drug control strategy at the London
Conference on Afghanistan. The comprehensive
strategy encompasses the following key pillars: the
fight against drug trafficking, assistance to farmers
through alternative livelihoods, drug demand
reduction, and institution-building at the central and
provincial levels.

Furthermore, the Afghan Government also
adopted a new counter-narcotics law in December
2005, establishing the Central Narcotics Tribunal to
prosecute drug traffickers and those associated with the
production and cultivation of illicit drugs. In order to
achieve the objectives of the national drug control
strategy, we reiterate the need for the enhanced
coordination and cooperation of the countries of the
region and the international community with
Afghanistan.

We have mentioned on numerous occasions
before this Council and the General Assembly that high
priority should be accorded to the social and economic
development of Afghanistan. Progress in terms of
social and economic development will have a direct
impact on the overall security situation, given the
interconnection between development and security.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
the continued support of the international community
and the United Nations for Afghanistan is vital to the
full implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. We
extend our appreciation and gratitude to all countries
and international and regional organizations for the
support rendered to Afghanistan. Finally, I would like
to express the sincere appreciation of my delegation to
Mr. Jean Arnault, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his dedicated service and
contribution to the consolidation of peace, security and
development in Afghanistan. We are also certain that
Mr. Tom Koenigs will successfully and ably continue
those endeavours.

