Mrs. Alhright (United States of America): The two
draft resolutions before us today will further advance the
peace process in the former Yugoslavia. The United
States firmly supports the resolution the Security Council
has adopted on Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium. A peaceful solution in Eastern Slavonia is
essential to a lasting peace in all the regions of the former
Yugoslavia.

In the 12 November Basic Agreement, the Croatian
Government and local Serbs committed themselves to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium. In that Agreement, the
parties appealed to the international community to assist
in its implementation. The resolution we have just voted
on responds to that request.

The United States played a facilitating role in the
negotiations that led to the 12 November Agreement. We
believe that the Basic Agreement provides an opportunity

 

to resolve the conflict over Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, in a manner consistent with previous
resolutions of this Council and international law. It calls for
the peaceful reintegration of those territories with the
Republic of Croatia after a clearly defined transitional
period. It also protects the human rights of all residents,
including the local Serb population, while providing for the
return of refugees and displaced persons.
Eastern Slavonia has been the scene of horrible abuses
of human rights. Strict implementation of the Agreement
will lead to a peaceful solution in which human rights are
respected and the people of the region are allowed to
choose their leaders through free and democratic elections.
The international community is prepared to do its part to
help implement the agreement. But in the final analysis it
will be up to the parties to put aside the hatreds of the past
four years and together begin to build a new future.

The resolution we have just adopted establishes a new
peace-keeping operation that will assist in the
demilitarization of the region, facilitate its return to
Croatian control and help promote a return to normal life.
As requested by the parties, its mandate ensures that the
new operation, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES), will be able to "govern" the region in
an authoritative fashion. The parties have clearly expressed
their intention to entrust the region's short-term future to
our leadership. The resolution we are now adopting
provides us with the means to reward their trust with the
kind of stewardship that the region and its people deserve.

In agreeing to undertake this complex responsibility,
the international community will demand that both the Serb
and Croat sides fully implement the 12 November
Agreement. UNTAES will not be expected to implement
the Agreement by force, nor will it be expected to defend
the region from an armed incursion. The international
community will not tolerate actions that endanger the lives
of the peace-keepers we are sending to the region. Anyone
contemplating such actions should think twice. The
meaning of paragraph 14 of the resolution we have just
adopted is clear - UNTAES will have the right to ask for
assistance if its personnel are in danger. The presence just
across the border in Bosnia of the implementation force
(IFOR), and the presence of other powerful military forces
nearby, should make it clear that the international
community has the capability to punish anyone who
endangers the lives of UNTAES personnel. Further, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has already
decided to provide close air support if requested by
UNTAES.

The second resolution before us today authorizes
United Nations military observers to continue to monitor
the agreement on the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula and surrounding territory. My Government has
no doubt that the Prevlaka peninsula is sovereign Croatian
territory. Nevertheless, we call on both sides to continue
to comply with their agreement to demilitarize that
strategically important area. We note that the resolution
calls on the Secretary-General to submit by 15 March a
report which would comment on the possibility of another
international organization's assuming the task of
monitoring the Prevlaka peninsula. My Government looks
forward to that report, and expects that the Council will
act on it as appropriate.

The adoption of these resolutions culminates a
period of intense diplomatic activity. Yet it is only the
beginning of a process. Much essential work remains to
be done. We salute those States that have offered to
contribute to UNTAES. At the request of the Secretary-
General, an American citizen, Jacques Klein, who is both
an experienced diplomat and a general in the Air Force
Reserve, is poised to assume leadership of the operation.
The United States will continue to search for ways to
assist the operation.

In closing, I would like to express our appreciation
for the rapid response the United Nations and the
international community have made to this complex and
sensitive issue. The Balkans have been the scene of far
too many tragedies in recent years. Today's resolutions
are two more indications that the peoples of the former
Yugoslavia might be ready to embrace a future based on
peace and respect for international law. The United States
remains committed to the work that lies ahead and urges
all like-minded States to join in that effort.

