Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too commend
the delegation of Viet Nam for organizing this open
thematic debate on children and armed conflict. We
particularly wish to thank the Deputy Prime Minister
for coming to New York to preside over our meeting
today. We thank all those who have participated earlier
on in this debate, but we particularly wish to highlight
the efforts of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and thank her for the work that
she has been doing for children around the world.

In 1996, Graca Machel compiled the first report
on children affected by armed conflict
(A/51/306.Add.1). Since the release of her report,
significant progress has been made in the development
of international legal and policy frameworks for the
protection of children in armed conflict. Of importance
are the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child relating to the
involvement of children in armed conflict, the Statute
of the International Criminal Court and Security
Council resolutions that address the issue of children
and armed conflict thematically or in country-specific
situations. In addition, the 2007 Paris Commitments to
protect children unlawfully recruited or used by armed
forces or armed groups provides a children's rights
approach to programming.

Despite these developments, children remain the
worst affected population group, since parties to armed
conflict continue to commit egregious violations
against them. The Security Council has identified six
grave violations committed against children in armed
conflict that my delegation believes require equal
weight and attention by the Council. These six
violations are the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict in violation of applicable international
law, killing and maiming of children, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, abductions, denial of
humanitarian access to children, and attacks on schools
and hospitals by parties to armed conflict.

There is still much to be done to protect children
from these grave violations. However, we are
encouraged by the fact that the active involvement of
the Security Council on the issue of children and armed
conflict has been translated into concrete results.
Today, a number of parties to armed conflict, though
not many, have formal action plans in place to halt
recruitment and identify and release children from their
forces. We remain optimistic that more action plans
might be prepared in the coming months.

Efforts to include specific provisions relating to
children in peace processes and agreements are
beginning to gain momentum. It is important that
provisions such as the release of children and
reintegration into their communities be included at all
stages of peace negotiations and in the final documents
of peace agreements. The incorporation of child
protection requirements in United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, including through the
appointment of child-protection advisers, has become
more systematic.

Since 2005, the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict has reviewed reports
of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict and made recommendations to the Council that
have yielded some positive results on the ground. The
Special Representative on Children and Armed

Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, has been
actively involved in eliciting concrete child protection
commitments through her engagement with
Governments, parties to conflict, United Nations
partners and the international community. Her efforts
are to be commended.

It is vital that we not forget the long-term needs
of children that have been affected by armed conflict.
Ensuring the well-being of those children is an ongoing
process and therefore more attention should be paid to
the reintegration and rehabilitation of children
associated with armed forces and groups. Successful
reintegration requires the participation of children
themselves and their communities. Children identify
safety, acceptance, being valued and having a future as
central to their reintegration.

Furthermore, children identify education, skills
training and equipping themselves to be constructive
members of their community as essential for their
continuing welfare. Successful reintegration is also
dependent on the promotion of sustainable
development and poverty eradication. In that regard,
the international community should provide early
support for economic growth in post-conflict situations
and continue to provide resources for reintegration and
rehabilitation programmes, as well as social services
such as education and health care. Such assistance
would ensure that children who have left armed forces
and groups do not become re-recruited, but have a
chance for a dignified future.

Lastly, special consideration of girls is needed
when developing programmes for children associated
with armed forces and groups. Girls often experience
gender-based violence and discrimination during their
recruitment or use and within communities to which
they return. Therefore, it is important that reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes include measures to
address all forms of violence and discrimination
against girls. United Nations agencies and civil society
organizations on the ground should continue to make
every effort to assist authorities to find and help such
girls. Through such concerted efforts, we would ensure
a better life for all children who have been affected by
armed conflict.

