Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Let me also say how
impressed I am, Madam President, by your performance
as the President of the Security Council, and that despite
all the complex time- and energy-consuming debates you
thought of us on Valentine's Day. Thank you very much.
At the outset allow me to point out that the Polish
delegation associated itself with the statement on Haiti
delivered by the Italian delegation on behalf of the
European Union.

It was with great hope that we welcomed on 7
February 1996 the first democratic presidential succession
in Haiti's turbulent history.

We acknowledge the enormous tasks that the duly
elected President is faced with, and we judge his request
for a further extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to be particularly well
grounded.

We strongly believe that such an extension would
contribute to strengthening the fragile institutions of
Haitian democracy and to making the Haitian Government
more functional. It would allow the UNMIH forces to
complete the work that they have embarked upon, and
thus it would enable the Government of Haiti to profit
 

fully from the efforts of the international community to lift
Haiti out of political, social and economic destitution.

Since lasting democracy requires the solid foundation
of law, the process of building a functioning judicial system
and a professional civilian police force in Haiti is of
paramount importance for the future of that country. In this
respect, the assistance of the United Nations Mission in
Haiti continues to be indispensable, and it is precisely for
this reason that the renewal of the UNMIH mandate is
specifically aimed at giving the new Haitian National Police
more time to gain experience and at attending to the
revitalization of Haiti's system of justice. Since these are
principally peace-building tasks, we think that the extension
of the UNMIH mandate may also be regarded as a useful
exercise in the transfer from mainly peace-keeping to
essentially peace-building activities of United Nations
operations.

A successful completion of the operation in Haiti is
badly needed - most of all by its people, who have
suffered so much and who have just been given more than
hope. The success is also needed by the international
community, which has desperately tried to help the Haitian
nation at a time of dramatic transition.

And lastly, we, the United Nations, need a democratic
and properly functioning Haiti among us. This is still to
quite an extent a matter of our responsibility and - also
very important - of our credibility. We have an excellent
chance to show the world that the United Nations is
effective in a difficult and sensitive area of maintaining
international peace and security, and we must not miss that
chance.

The Polish delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. We want to emphasize that the burden
of the tasks assumed by UNMIH must not be
underestimated. I would like to express here our sincere
gratitude to the Governments of those States that have
already contributed and that will contribute their troops to
the operation in Haiti. They deserve our highest praise.

