Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Secretary Kerry and the United States for convening
today's meeting and for preparing the resolution that
we adopted today (resolution 2254 (2015)). We also
acknowledge and thank the other Foreign Ministers for
coming to our meeting today.

We appreciate that this meeting and the resolution
were convened and drafted, respectively, under
significant time pressures and, for that reason, we were
prepared to go along with the resolution even if we did
not entirely welcome the short time that we were given
to consider it.

The collapse of Syria into the nightmare of civil
war has resulted in the spread of insecurity throughout
the world. Al-Assad's cruel response in 2011 to peaceful
civilian protest and ongoing breaches of international
humanitarian law have fuelled extremism and
terrorism. They have precipitated the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon. For Syrians, the conflict has
meant death, suffering, destruction and displacement
on a scale that is difficult to comprehend. The conflict
has produced the biggest exodus of people since the
Second World War. Syria's neighbours, especially
Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, have borne the brunt. The
conflict has further destabilized Iraq and given rise to
appalling atrocities, and the destabilizing impacts have
now reached Europe.

The international community and the Security
Council must accept a share of the blame. The
devastation in Syria demonstrates beyond any doubt
the need for effective conflict prevention, and for
Council unity in achieving it. The fact that we could
today come together at last and adopt this landmark
resolution in a short time reflects the determination of
the international community to end the conflict. We
welcome in particular the continued close engagement
between the Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group.

As we move forward, it must be a time for
acceptance. Everyone involved in the Syrian tragedy
must accept that no side can win militarily. The
Al-Assad Government and the opposition fighters must
accept that, however much more death and destruction
they inflict on their country, there will be no victory.
They and those external actors who have serious
political stakes in how the Syrian conflict is resolved
must accept that political solutions mean political
compromise. Anyone who insists on political red lines
that block the necessary compromises will have to
measure the delay that they cause in terms of more lives
lost, more refugees and more suffering. Delay plays into
the hands of the extremists, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Compromise requires a
willingness to take difficult decisions, to give and take,
to ultimately accept an outcome that may be short of
initial positions. A political solution will be imperfect,
but it is necessary.

In July, six countries came together with Iran and
found a political solution to one of the most difficult
issues of the past decade. My Foreign Minister, who
was presiding over the Council at the time of the
adoption of the resolution on the Iran nuclear issue,
challenged Council members to apply the same courage
and commitment to a political solution for Syira.

The establishment of the Support Group and its
meetings have given us hope that there is at last a way
out of this conflict. The Support Group benefits from
its inclusive membership and from the ambition and
capacities of the major Powers involved. It has also
benefited from focusing on the issues that all agree
upon - working together to counter terrorism, ensure
the survival of State institutions in Syria and end violent
conflict. That is positive, but big questions remain.

First, there is the need for a comprehensive ceasefire.
Secondly, offensive operations must be immediately
and exclusively focused on ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front
and any other terrorist organizations designated as
such by the Security Council. Those operations must
be carried out in a way that protects civilians. Thirdly,
we recognize the Jordan-led process to expand the list
of designated terrorist organizations, as envisaged in
resolution 2249 (2015). But until there is agreement,
we should proceed on the basis that peace in Syria will
not be served by a hasty approach that defines far too
many people as terrorists. Fourthly, Al-Assad's future
is an issue for the intra-Syrian process to decide. We
agree with the Secretary-General that it is unacceptable
to let one person take the political-negotiation process
hostage.

Answers to other difficult questions will also be
needed. They include the sequencing of the ceasefire
and the mechanics of the transition, including ceasefire
monitoring, long-term mechanisms for guaranteeing
security and coalescing the Syrian opposition. We
welcome the efforts of Saudi Arabia on that last point.
On all of those issues, New Zealand encourages
key players to prioritize pragmatism and an end to
the conflict over their other interests. New Zealand
supports a Syrian-led political transition process that
is fully inclusive, representative and provides for the
protection of groups within Syria. The Council also
has a role to play in reminding everyone that political
solutions do not mean giving up core values. It is clear
that the Syrian Government's resistance to the core value
of inclusiveness has been a key factor in perpetuating
recruitment conditions for violent extremist groups.

We firmly believe that the day will come - and
must come - when there will be accountability. In the
meantime, we must do all we can to reduce suffering,
open humanitarian access, build trust and protect
civilians. Ending indiscriminate attacks and releasing
political prisoners are also critical.

An immediate next responsibility for the Security
Council is to renew the mandate for cross-border and
cross-line humanitarian assistance. The arrangements
in place have facilitated the United Nations and others
to help millions of people. The draft resolution that
has been prepared by New Zealand, Jordan and Spain
reflects developments over the last year. Its adoption is
urgent, and we call on all of our Council colleagues to
join us in adopting the draft resolution very soon.

Finding a solution has taken too long, but we
finally have an opening. Let us make the year 2016 the
year when we end the fighting, work together to counter
terrorism and start to rebuild Syria.

