Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The subject
before us today is, to some extent, linked to that of the
open debate on justice and the rule of law held last
September, but it certainly deserves our attention in its
own right. Because the issue of reconciliation is almost
overwhelmingly multifaceted, it is therefore a
pragmatic necessity to focus our discussion on the role
of the United Nations.

While the United Nations has in recent decades
contributed on many occasions to the transition from
armed conflicts to post-conflict situations, the focus
has traditionally been on the first stages of the
transition process: peacemaking, peacekeeping,
especially peace-building, and, increasingly, on aspects
of individual transitional justice. National
reconciliation, on the other hand, is a long-term process
that requires a sustained commitment going far beyond
those initial stages. It is a process that is not primarily
directed at determining individual responsibility, but,
rather, at overcoming the root causes and underlying
structures of a conflict, and thereby preventing its
resurgence.

Reconciliation addresses the political and societal
levels of conflict and is therefore clearly different from
individual justice, which can at times even divert
attention from the collective level of the process.
Reconciliation is also a far more complex undertaking
than the delivery of individual justice, and it is much
more deeply linked to the very specific circumstances
of a conflict situation as well as to the structure of the
societies involved.

Thus, while reconciliation processes as such
promote the primary purpose of this Organization -
namely the maintenance of international peace and
security - it does not automatically follow that the
United Nations must always play an instrumental role
in such processes. Each and every situation must be
looked at individually, assessing the need for United
Nations involvement in the light of current
circumstances, bearing in mind previous experiences as
well as the distinctive nature of the situation under
consideration.

Reconciliation cannot be imposed, as the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in a report to the
Council two years ago. Instead, it must originate from
within the societies involved. Each post-conflict
society must find its own avenues of reconciliation and
feel ownership of the process if the latter is to have the
desired long-term effect. In most cases, the United
Nations will therefore play a role of assistance in such
processes, according to the prevailing circumstances.

Ownership is also a key concept when it comes to
striking a balance between the ideals of justice on the
one hand and reconciliation on the other. In some
cases, these two are simply complementary. To our
mind, justice must always be rendered for the most
serious crimes under international law, as defined in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
and there must be no amnesty for such crimes. But very
often, these are two competing ideals, and the society
concerned must make a decision - invariably a painful
and difficult one - on how a balance can be struck for
its specific purposes. Again, the United Nations and
other organizations can very usefully assist in such
processes.

This also provides a framework for concrete
action to be undertaken by the Organization, apart from
activities in the context of peace-building which foster
the preconditions for reconciliation in an indirect
manner. The United Nations can act as a catalyst for
post-conflict reconciliation processes and help societies
find their way to lasting reconciliation while adopting a
flexible approach.

In this regard, impartiality with regard to the
different groups and interests involved is crucial if an
outside actor is to contribute to the long-term success
of the process. It is thus the United Nations that can
assist post-conflict societies through its expertise, for
example by providing an analysis of best practices
from other countries and concrete technical assistance.
It can assist in the concrete set-up of particular
mechanisms and institutions, such as Truth and
Reconciliation Commissions - tailored to the needs
of, and finally to be governed by, the society in
question - and offer cooperation through its often
already established presence on the ground. Such
cooperation can extend in particular to the provision of
relevant data and evidence, in support of the search for
truth.

Such assistance must be based on a substantial,
in-depth knowledge of all the relevant political,
cultural, historical and other parameters of the
situation. Therefore, increasing the analytical
capacities of the United Nations, in particular within its
Secretariat, is an important step towards a strengthened
role of the Organization in post-conflict reconciliation.

Liechtenstein has great interest in such increased
capacity, and has in the past supported similar
initiatives, such as efforts directed at establishing a
peace-building unit within the Department for Political
Affairs. Furthermore, capacity-building within the
United Nations should not be conducted in a vacuum,
but should benefit from the great attention that the
academic world has devoted in recent years to all
aspects of post-conflict societies, as well as from the
experience and expertise of other international and
regional organizations.

An increased expert-level capacity on issues of
reconciliation must evidently be complemented by an
increased awareness of such issues at the decision-
making level of the United Nations. Reconciliation
must be the final goal of all multilateral efforts in
conflict situations, and decisions made at earlier stages
of a transition must be carefully thought out so as not
to hamper the inception of such processes. We all must,
therefore, increase our sensitivity with respect to these
questions.

Today's debate is an important step in that
direction, and we thank you in particular, Madam
President, for this initiative. We look forward to future
activities on this issue.

