Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefings
delivered today by the main briefers and listened closely
to the information provided us on the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement as well as to the detailed and
alarming briefing on the humanitarian situation. Last
year the whole world welcomed the news of the signing
of the Stockholm Agreement as the path towards peace
in Yemen. The parties must maintain the same spirit of
commitment shown in December and translate words
into tangible action on the ground by demonstrating the
political will required to resolve the conflict.

Protecting the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure are basic principles under international
humanitarian law. That is why we view with concern
the attacks carried out in the past few weeks across the
country, in contravention of the rules of war. Civilians
are often denied the protection to which they are
entitled and once again are paying the highest price for
the conflict in Yemen. It is for that reason that we call
on the parties and on States to support civilians through
greater focus on their protection during the planning
and implementation phases of military action.

We have already heard here that almost
80 per cent of Yemen's total population - 24 million
people - require some type of humanitarian assistance
and protection. Ten million people are but a step away
from starvation, and 7 million are undernourished.
These are catastrophic levels and require a response
commensurate with the situation. In a food-disaster
situation such as the one being experienced in Yemen,
it is unacceptable that so far humanitarian workers have
not been ensured access to the Mills in Al-Hudaydah.
We call for this situation to be resolved as soon
as possible.

Ms. Luqman brought to the table perhaps one of the
most critically important elements oftoday's discussion.
In a humanitarian context of unprecedented scale, the
role of Yemeni women as negotiators of humanitarian
access, confidence-builders in affected areas and even
as care providers is absolutely essential. That is why we
must focus on them and on local women's organizations
a large part of humanitarian action in Yemen, from
the planning stage to the implementation of relief
operations, along with the necessary financing.

It is crucial that, given the progress made towards
peace in Yemen, we continue to do everything possible
to pursue a political solution that would include the
significant participation of women and young people in
the process of resolving the conflict there.

Apart from the appalling humanitarian food crisis,
which is for the most part man-made, there is another
equally important factor: access to safe drinking water.
In Yemen, the lack of sanitation has led to an increase in
waterborne diseases. Hundreds of thousands ofpersons
were affected by cholera in 2018. As Mr. Lowcock quite
rightly pointed out, since the beginning of 2019 that
rate has increased, with more than 120,000 potential
new cases of cholera. We therefore believe that there
must be a robust response in this sector as a critical
element in improving the living conditions of the most
vulnerable Yemenis, especially children.

We have not seen any appreciable change in the
lives of children since the signing of the Stockholm
Agreement. Children are the ones who are continuing
to pay the high price of war in Yemen. Parents have
to watch their children die in their arms, and vehicles
transporting food are being attacked. The children of
Yemen have been robbed of their right to life, health
and education. How many more children will have to
be affected before we put an end to the conflict? We
ask the parties to prioritize the protection of children
at all times. That must go hand in hand with the
identification and punishment of the perpetrators. The
international community must lend its expertise to
develop the tools necessary to ensure that victims of
human rights violations find justice - justice that is
impartial, respectful of due process and safe.

The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to contributing, through the Council, to efforts to
implement the Stockholm Agreement, as well as
the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. The lives of millions of Yemenis have
become unsustainable. The resurgence of violence
perpetrated by both parties in some areas ofthe country
as led to more displacements. The safety and well-
being of hundreds of thousands of war-weary Yemenis
continue to be compromised as we enter the fifth year
of the conflict.

Finally, the Security Council maintains its unity
in its pursuit of a political solution to the conflict in
Yemen, and we would like to reiterate our delegation's
strong support for Mr. Griffith's tireless efforts to
find a solution. We call on the parties to participate in
those negotiations in good faith and to maintain their
commitments in the same spirit they demonstrated in
Stockholm in December, 2018.

We do not want to end without highlighting the
heroic work being undertaken on the ground by the
personnel of the United Nations and its agencies,
together with non-governmental organizations, who
tirelessly face the human dimension of that conflict
every day to ensure the survival of millions of victims
of that humanitarian catastrophe. They need to know
that their work will not go unnoticed. The Security
Council is with them.

