Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting today.
My delegation would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Vieira de Mello for providing us with an overview of the
current situation surrounding the provision of humanitarian
assistance. Indeed, it confirmed our concerns about the
overall humanitarian situation, which is worsening,
especially in Africa, despite concerted efforts by the
international community. In our view, it is indeed the
primary responsibility of each Government to provide for
the socio-economic needs of its people. In an emergency
situation, however, the primary responsibility must rest with
all of us.

We are all aware that conflicts create situations for the
most outrageous conditions in the world, since the most
vulnerable in society - women, children and the elderly -
are often targeted and deprived of the most basic human
right, the right to life. Furthermore, impeding access to
those vulnerable groups for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance has become a tactic in conflict. Recent reports of
massacres in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Kosovo are but two examples. Overall, it is however
imperative for efforts to be devoted to the elimination of
conditions that provoke the violation of human rights.

Namibia is particularly disturbed by reports that
children remain specifically targeted for attack by warring
factions. Furthermore, they are recruited, sometimes
forcibly, into militia forces and are used as war instruments.
They are subjected to hunger, famine and malnutrition and
deprived of education and basic medical services, such as
vaccination. The situation of girls is even more precarious.
We urge those who are engaged in such conduct to refrain
from those activities.

My delegation commends the efforts of humanitarian
organizations and their personnel, both international and
national, who work tirelessly under extremely difficult
circumstances, sacrificing their comfort and, increasingly,
their own lives, to provide humanitarian assistance to the
affected population. It is disheartening to know that those
men and women are often targeted in the performance of
their duties. We therefore deplore the increased level of
violence against humanitarian personnel.

We are also disturbed by the fact that it has become
a regular phenomenon for those who are fighting to deny
humanitarian personnel access to those in need. This
obvious disregard for international humanitarian law
should not and cannot be condoned.

The recent debate of the Security Council on the
safety and security of humanitarian personnel is a step in
the right direction and should be taken further with the
aim of adopting measures that should be adhered to by all
parties concerned. Here we would like to stress that
deliberations of the Security Council on humanitarian
activities should be confined to the proper context. The
technical role of coordination of humanitarian activities in
the future should remain with the Economic and Social
Council.

The time has now come for the international
community to turn words into concrete action by ensuring
that necessary steps are taken to protect the providers of
aid and assistance. We must pool our efforts together to
ensure that instruments are put in place to punish those
who are violating those laws in the name of war. In this
regard, Member States must ensure that attacks committed
against humanitarian personnel are investigated and that
the perpetrators are brought to justice.

Finally, I wish to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for the
concrete proposals advanced in his statement. We hope
that the Security Council will give them serious
consideration. My delegation, for one, will support serious
measures aimed at improving the conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

