Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Swedish presidency for organizing today's open
debate. Bangladesh welcomes the Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018). The briefers shared
grim realities about the fact that children's rights,
including their right to protection, are being trampled
and ignored in many parts of the world. They also
highlighted some positive achievements in the area
of protection, particularly in protecting children from
recruitment as combatants. Such gains make a sobering
yet compelling case for sustaining our efforts with
renewed determination.

The Security Council recently witnessed issues
related to the protection ofchildren in their most pressing
manifestations in the Rohingya camps in Cox's Bazar,
Bangladesh. Children constitute 58 per cent ofthe more
than 700,000 Rohingya who have entered our territory
from Myanmar's Rakhine state since August 2017. So
far, 36,373 of them have been found to be orphans,
with 7,771 having lost both parents. Without parental
care, they remain particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
sexual exploitation and other forms of criminal activity.
On average, 60 babies are being born in the camps
every day. Some of them are born to mothers who were
subjected to sexual violence in what now appears to
have been its premeditated use as a weapon of war. We
made a point of addressing the status of such children in
the bilateral arrangement we concluded with Myanmar
on facilitating the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of forcibly displaced Rohingya to Rakhine state.

It may be an illusion to assume that violence
against the Rohingya and their children has subsided.
Ms. Yanghee Lee, the United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, talked to
some recently arrived Rohingya in Cox's Bazar. This is
part of what she told the press:

"I was horrified to be told by one woman that
her 12-year-old son had been chopped to pieces
when he visited the family's fish hatchery, after
the family had been told by security forces that
they could not go there unless they accepted the
National Verification Card. Such brutality, and to a
child, is deplorable."

What concerns us most is that such accounts hardly
attest to a stable situation on the ground and could only
be a further deterrent to the Rohingya in their prospects
for a voluntary return. There have been reports that
non-State actors in Rakhine state were also involved
in violence inflicted on children. It will be critical to
ensure that the crimes committed against these child
victims are accounted for and their perpetrators brought
to justice, in order to help the children reconcile with
such harrowing memories. Meanwhile, along with our
humanitarian partners, we are in a race against time to
give these hundreds of thousands of Rohingya children
the protection and assistance they need, including mass
immunization, nutritional supplements, non-formal
education, skill development, psychosocial support
and recreational facilities. Their vulnerability to
natural disasters, child marriage, forced labour, violent
extremism and other forms of exploitation remains a
major area of concern. Without a durable solution to
their situation, their vulnerabilities will most likely
exact a price on the future peace and security of the
region and beyond.
There is no way that the Council and the
international community should allow Myanmar to
avoid its responsibility for creating a favourable,
sustainable and credible situation for ensuring
protection for these children and their rights, starting
with their right to return home. We urge the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
make concrete recommendations for the Council's
consideration in that regard in her updated report
focusing on the situation in Myanmar.

The image of our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina,
consoling a distraught Rohingya child with a ghastly
wound across his face has become iconic, but we expect
the Myanmar leadership to help make such images
things of the past.

