Mr. Amendola (Italy): Italy welcomes the Security
Council's unanimous adoption today of resolution
2357 (2017), which extends the legal framework in
place for inspecting vessels suspected of violating
the arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. In speaking with one voice today, the Council
has once again highlighted its strong commitment to
Libya's stability and security and has emphasized the
importance of working together to protect Libya from
the threat posed by a combination of terrorism and arms
proliferation. The Mediterranean Sea, especially offthe
Libyan coast, has been the scene of multiple challenges
in the form of human trafficking and the smuggling of
weapons, oil and other related products. All such flows
benefit from the country's volatile situation and have
the potential to increase the intensity, duration and
complexity of the crisis in Libya.

As we know, stabilizing Libya is the best way
to tackle the problem. Italy is pursuing that strategic
goal by supporting the Presidency Council and the
institutional framework validated by the Libyan
Political Agreement, and helping to broaden its base of
support through wider reconciliation.

At the same time, no effort should be spared to
enhance security in the Mediterranean Sea. In that
respect, the European Union Military Operation in the
Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED)
is providing an important tool for the international
community in terms of information-gathering on
situations in the most complex and unstable areas of
the Mediterranean Sea. It plays a role as a security-
provider both for the neighbouring countries and for
Europe. In addition to its core task, EUNAVFOR MED
is playing a significant role in helping the important
implementation of the arms embargo in Libya that the
Security Council itself has set, acting as a deterrent
against flows of weapons being transferred by sea.

Let me conclude by thanking the United Kingdom
for its leadership in the negotiation of resolution
2357 (2017) and all Council members that engaged
constructively on it, including during the helpful
interactive dialogue held a few days ago by the Security
Council with Commander Credendino and Deputy
Secretary General for Common Security and Defence
Policy Pedro Serrano.

