Mr. Oshima (Japan): In the weeks following the
elections in Palestine and Israel, the prospect of peace
and the peace process in the Middle East have been
facing complex challenges, which require delicate
handling and the utmost restraint on both sides if a
further dangerous deterioration of the situation is to be
avoided.

Japan expresses its grave concern about the
continued violence that has been taking place since the
week before last, including rocket attacks launched
against Israel from Gaza and the escalation of Israeli
military operations, especially the shelling of Gaza,
both of which resulted in casualties among innocent
civilians. We strongly condemn the suicide bombing
that occurred in Tel Aviv earlier today, causing even
more deaths and casualties. We would like to express
our deepest condolences to the victims and the
bereaved families, who are suffering as a result of the
recurrence of Violence on both sides.

We cannot but remain deeply concerned that this
resurgence of attacks and counter-attacks may
seriously impair future efforts for dialogue and
cooperation towards peace. We therefore call on both
sides, the Israelis and the Palestinians, to exercise the
utmost self-restraint to prevent the further escalation of
violence and restore calm.

Japan strongly expects that the new Palestinian
Government, led by Hamas, will adopt a policy that
will advance the peace process in accordance with
existing agreements and obligations, including the road
map. At this very delicate time, political wisdom and
courage, as well as restraint, are required more than
ever for the advancement of the peace process in the
Middle East. We place high hopes in the new
Palestinian Government, which has been elected
through the democratic process, trusting that it will
exercise commensurate governing responsibility in full
cooperation with President Abbas, and that it will
unequivocally repudiate violence and follow a path of
peace, peaceful coexistence and mutual prosperity with
Israel.

At the same time, the international community
should continue to send a strong, positive message to
the new Government of the Palestinian Authority, in
order to encourage it to initiate the necessary moves to
restart the peace process. We must also encourage
Israel to make greater efforts to realize peace through
dialogue with the Palestinian side. Japan hopes that
both sides will take steps to bring about direct talks
between President Abbas and interim Prime Minister
Olmert as early as possible, as an essential part of their
common effort to move towards peace.

With regard to the question of Palestinian
assistance, Japan, as one of the major donors to
Palestine, will carefully monitor the policy
development of the new Palestinian Government on the
key issues of concern to us. In the meantime, we will
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to avert
the deterioration of the living conditions of the
Palestinian people.

One year ago, at the time of President Abbas'
visit to Japan, the Japanese Government announced an
assistance package of approximately $100 million for
the immediate future, in support of the President's
peace efforts and for the well-being of the Palestinian
people. To date, more than 70 per cent of this pledge
has been disbursed, including recent food aid for
Palestinians in the amount of approximately $6 million
announced in mid-March, to be delivered through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm Japan's
commitment to a continued active role in the efforts to
promote peace, development and prosperity in the
Middle East. We will continue to work with all
stakeholders for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, respecting the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted by the League of Arab States summit
in March 2002 in Beirut.

