Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, may I express deep condolences to the
Governments and the peoples of India and Pakistan on
the occurrence of the tragic earthquake.

I would like to endorse the words of previous
speakers and thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
comprehensive briefing, in which he stressed the long-
term tasks that lie ahead of the Transitional
Administration in solving the problem of East Timor's
transition to independence. We are grateful to the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Harri Holkeri,
for the important statement that he made today in the
Council. We are also pleased to see here the
representatives of international financial and
development institutions. The information that they
presented was extremely interesting and useful. We
believe it is significant that at this meeting of the
Security Council we have a member of the Transitional
Cabinet in the person of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta.

In view of the impressive list of speakers, and
also in View of the fact that many of the important
issues have been very extensively covered in previous
statements, I would like to touch only upon certain
important points. We fully share the View that it is
necessary to concentrate on a smooth transition to
legitimate power in East Timor and on a satisfactory
administration in the context of the attainment of
independence. In this respect, we would like to support
the measures taken to strengthen the potential of what
is vitally important for East Timor in certain spheres.
These were mentioned by Mr. Vieira de Mello and Mr.
Brown of the United Nations Development Programme
today.

An important contribution to strengthening the
potential for the management of East Timor was the
establishment of the Transitional Cabinet of the
National Council. At the same time, it is necessary to
recognize that in order to set up a fully fledged
administrative structure, much time and effort will be
needed. Undoubtedly the implementation of the
measures on the political calendar that has been agreed
to for East Timor will be a key political event on the
path to the achievement of independence. It is
necessary to ensure the holding of democratic and
transparent general legislative elections. This will spur
the political organization of East Timorese society and
be a concluding stage in the process of national
reconciliation.

We believe that an indispensible step towards
independence and an important aspect of the transition
to self-rule is the establishment of an East Timorese
defence force, of local police and of an effective
system ofjustice. If these tasks are not accomplished,
all the other efforts to move towards East Timorese
independence may be threatened. Many delegations
have already pointed out that the development of good-
neighbourly relations and cooperation with Indonesia is
of great importance to the territory, as is support for
achieving stability on the common borders and in the
refugee camps. We were very pleased to hear this View
confirmed in the statement of Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta.

Substantial progress in establishing the economic
foundations for independence is among the priorities
that will require further international efforts. In this
regard it is gratifying to see the revitalization of the
economic life of the territory. We share the View
expressed by the representatives ofthe World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund that East Timorese
independence must be founded on a viable private
sector, which must be supported and stimulated in
every possible way. Special attention should also be
given to the development of agriculture, which
represents the largest share of the gross national
product. We should also take into account that
approximately 180,000 people still receive food
assistance in East Timor.

Last week the Council considered the question of
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
We agree with other delegations that the international
presence in East Timor needs to be extended at this
stage and into the period of transition to East Timorese
independence. In this connection it seems to us
important that the financial plan, as well as the
corresponding programmes and projects that are being
implemented or are getting under way in East Timor,
be focused on the future and adapted to the conditions
that will prevail under independence. Ukraine will
continue to support the fulfilment of UNTAET's
mandate, so that an independent democratic
Government can be established in East Timor.

In conclusion we would like to note the
impressive results produced by the activities of
UNTAET - results that members of the Security
Council were able to observe firsthand during their
visit to the region in November of last year. My
delegation would like to pay due tribute to all the
personnel of UNTAET, and in person to Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for their outstanding efforts to carry
out the complicated mandate entrusted to them by the
United Nations.

