Mrs. Sucuoglu (Turkey): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the United Kingdom
presidency for scheduling this important debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their insightful briefings.
Today's debate is not only is timely but also has
symbolic value. As we commemorate the centenary of
the start of the First World War this year, the eruption
of episodes of violence around the globe, the surge
in terrorism and violent extremism and the increase
in atrocity crimes, coupled with the growing number
of displacements and humanitarian emergencies,
are becoming increasingly widespread. Those
worrisome developments hamper the capabilities of
the international community, the United Nations and
the Security Council to ensure timely and effective
responses. I would like to take this opportunity to touch
upon a number of key points that Turkey sees as crucial
to consider in the framework of this debate.

The first issue that I want to stress is mediation. It
is an effective cross-cutting tool that is consent-based
and applies to all stages of the conflict cycle. It is the
most cost-effective and efficient way to prevent and
resolve conflicts. The United Nations has successfully
supported a wide range of mediation efforts since its
inception and has taken important steps to enhance its
mediation capabilities in recent years. It is necessary
to continue to develop such United Nations capabilities
with political, technical and financial support.

The Group of Friends of Mediation, founded in 2010
and co-chaired by Turkey and Finland, has expedited
its efforts to contribute to the United Nations in that
respect. I would also like to underline that promoting
intercultural and interreligious dialogue is one of the
most effective ways to prevent conflicts. With that
understanding, Turkey, together with Spain, launched
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations initiative
in 2005.

Our second point is related to regional organizations.
Although the primary responsibility remains with
the Security Council, regional and subregional
organizations play an important role in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in their
respective regions. Regional organizations have unique
perspectives and a local understanding of the conflicts,
cultural norms and security challenges within their
regions, which gives them a comparative advantage.
The most recent General Assembly resolution 68/303,
initiated by the Group of Friends of Mediation and
adopted only a few weeks ago, is the first resolution
on mediation that recognizes the key role that regional
and subregional organizations play in that field. In
addtion, Turkey welcomes the cooperation between the
Secretariat and regional organizations on mediation,
specifically capacity-bulding.

Turkey also attaches great importance to the United
Nations regional offices. They are crucial tools for
early warning, prevention and mediation. At the same
time, they are essential mechanisms that provide the
United Nations with direct access to information from
the field. In addition, the idea of preventive missions
mentioned in Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/1999/34 could be further explored as an
innovative conflict prevention mechanism.

Our third point is on the importance of national
ownership. The peaceful resolution of disputes is a
sovereign responsibility embedded in the Charter of the
United Nations. Yet, especially in the present climate,
where the growing number of conflicts and the increase
in violent extremism and terrorism, which take their
toll on innocent civilian populations, the international
system also needs to provide appropriate responses
for the protection of civilians. The best way forward
is to prioritize support for the building of local and
national capacity. Such endeavours must be supported
by the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and other actors when the need arises.
The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund are two very important tools that can be used to
support national capacities in that respect.

Finally, security is a precondition for development
and development generates more security. Conflict
prevention should therefore be seen as a comprehensive
approach that integrates security, development and
human rights. In that regard, we would also like to touch
upon the interface between security and development
and the role that women can play in that respect. As we
embark upon a process to develop a set of sustainable
development goals for post-2015, we believe that gender
equality and the empowerment of women should be at
the centre of all our solutions and commitments. That
will also further our agenda on women, peace and
security.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the best
way to combat threats to global peace and security
and to prevent conflicts is through a unified display of
determination and the cooperation of the international
community. Political divisions within the United
Nations, particularly in the Security Council, deprive
the world of its most important guarantee for global
peace.

Finally, this body is a serious platform, which
compels us not to respond to the voice of one delegation.

