Judge Agius (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for the support given to the Tribunal.

(spoke in English)

It is both an honour and a privilege to once again
address the Security Council in my capacity as President
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
which just two weeks ago commemorated 24 years
since its establishment by the Council pursuant to
resolution 827 (1993). As Council members are aware,
the Tribunal will close its doors on 31 December.

This is therefore one of the last occasions I will have
to address this body, and I am here today to present
the Tribunal's penultimate completion strategy report
(S/2017/436, annex II).

Beginnings and endings are one shared aspect ofthe
human experience across the great diversity of peoples
and cultures of the world. Endings provide us with a
chance to reflect on achievements and challenges alike,
as well as on how far we have come. While the Tribunal
remains on track to complete the mandate it was given
by this body many years ago, back in 1993, there are
significant obstacles that require the urgent attention
of the Council. In the Tribunal's final year, we are all
the more aware of the legacy that we share with the
Security Council and of what will be written in the last
pages ofthe Tribunal's history. Any unfinished business
will remain a disturbing footnote in an otherwise
successful - indeed, groundbreaking - attempt to
hold persons accountable for the most heinous crimes
that can be imagined. History will certainlyjudge us.

In relation to the remaining judicial workload,
the Tribunal has made considerable progress towards
completing the final trial and appeal proceedings. At
trial, the case of Prosecutor v. Rat/co Mlaclic' remains
on schedule and the Trial Chamber is fully engaged in
deliberations and drafting of the judgement. Similarly,
on appeal, the case of Prosecutor v. Prlie et al. is on
schedule, with the Appeals Chamber in full deliberations
and judgement-drafting mode. Judgements in both
cases are planned to be delivered in November, as
previously forecast.

As outlined in the completion strategy report,
the Registry continues to provide full support to the
Tribunal's judicial activities through the effective
management of various sections, such as those
concerning communications and outreach, victims
and witnesses, conference and language services, as
well as the United Nations Detention Unit, which runs
a programme in line with or exceeding international
humanitarian standards and is visited and monitored
by the International Committee of the Red Cross on a
regular basis.

The Tribunal, however, continues to face serious
challenges. In the pending contempt case against Petar
Jojie, Vjerica Radeta and Jovo Ostojie, the Republic
of Serbia has failed to comply with its duties under
the Tribunal's statute by refusing to cooperate with
the Tribunal and to execute the arrest warrants of the
accused that were issued almost two and a half years
ago - I repeat, almost two and a half years ago. I
remind the Security Council that I have raised this
issue on a number of occasions - in my address of
8 June 2016 to this Council (see S/PV.7707) and to the
General Assembly on 9 November 2016 (see A/7l/ PV.44), as well as in the Tribunal's completion strategy
reports of May and November 2016 (S/20l6/454, annex II, and S/20l6/976, annex II)). More recently, I formally
reported the Republic of Serbia's non-compliance in
my letter of 1 March 2017 to the then-President of the
Security Council.

I must emphasize once more that the charges against
these individuals are extremely grave and that any
interference with the Tribunal's witnesses undermines
the nature and effective functioning of a judicial
institution, especially one established by this very
Council. Such allegations must be swiftly adjudicated.
To speak plainly, the Republic of Serbia is in violation
of its international obligations every day that these
arrest warrants and orders for transfer are not executed.
The Security Council has the capacity to tackle this
issue, and it is imperative that it take decisive action.

Time is ofthe essence for the Tribunal to adjudicate
these contempt proceedings before the end of its
mandate, and they will - concluded or not - be an
element of the shared legacy of the Tribunal and the
Council, and of the efforts of the United Nations
to end impunity. The Tribunal was created by the
Security Council as part of these efforts, and the
alleged interference with witnesses must not - indeed,
cannot - go unanswered. We are ready and willing
to try these individuals if they are delivered to The
Hague, but we await the Council's urgent action. Let me
be clear. I do not play games. As I have demonstrated
throughout my presidency, I do what I say and I say
what I mean. Neither I nor anyone at the Tribunal seeks
to use this case to prolong the Tribunal's life.

Turning to other challenges, despite the fact that
we are optimistic about completing alljudicial work by
31 December, I must warn once again that the Tribunal
continues to struggle to retain staff. Staff attrition will,
in the final six months, pose a substantial - indeed,
critical - threat to our ability to complete the
remaining work on time. Although the Tribunal has
done everything it can to retain staff, key staff members
are leaving for more stable and long-term employment
elsewhere in light of the Tribunal's imminent closure.
This does not call their loyalty into question, but
reflects the simple reality that our staff members seek a
continued livelihood beyond 31 December.

I take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge all
the staff members and Judges of the Tribunal - one of
whom is present here next to me - and to thank them
for their outstanding work and dedication. Our talented
staff members are integral to the Tribunal's ability to
function, and it is only through much personal sacrifice
on their part that we are making strong progress in the
remaining cases and will be able to complete all work
before our closing date. The Tribunal is deeply grateful
for their service on behalf of international justice.
Incentives to retain staff would enable us to ensure
that our mandate is completed in an optimal manner.
The Tribunal urgently needs the support of the United
Nations in that regard.

In addition to the judicial workload, the Tribunal's
liquidation efforts are continuing full-steam as
we approach our end date. Those efforts include
the scheduled downsizing of staff at various times
throughout this year; the disposal or sale of Tribunal
assets; the transfer or finalization of all commercial
and non-commercial contracts; the disposition of all
physical and digital records; and the handing over of
any residual activities to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I can assure all
Member States that the Tribunal remains committed
to a timely and efficient liquidation process and to
learning from the experience of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

Finally, I turn to the Tribunal's legacy, which, as
I noted at the outset, will be shared by the Security
Council. The last year of the Tribunal's operations
presents a unique opportunity to ask what our enduring
legacy will be, as well as to cement that legacy by
engaging with those most impacted by the Tribunal's
work, and ensure that it will continue to have an impact
in the future. For those reasons, while the primary
focus is on concluding the remaining judicial work
and a successful liquidation, the Tribunal is this year
hosting a number of legacy and closing events designed
to mark the end of a historic chapter in international
criminal justice and to enable others to build upon the
Tribunal's achievements and experience. Those events
are completely reliant upon external funding. I wish to
publicly acknowledge Austria, Finland, Germany, Italy,
my own country of Malta, the Netherlands, Switzerland
and, last but not least, the European Union, which have
pledged funds and support thus far.

It is to that end as well that the Tribunal is involved
in an ongoing project of establishing information
centres within the region of the former Yugoslavia, as
requested by the Council in resolution 1966 (2010). By
providing local access to the Tribunal's public records
and information about the Tribunal's work, the centres
will play an invaluable role in continuing the legacy of
the Tribunal in the region. The first information centre
will open in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
Tribunal has re-initiated discussions with Croatia to
establish a similar centre in Zagreb. Those discussions
are at an advanced stage. The setting up of a third
centre, in Srebrenica-Potocari, is awaiting the signing
of a memorandum of understanding. It is my hope, and
that of the Tribunal in general, that an information
centre will also be established in Belgrade, Serbia.

As we look to the closure of the ICTY, in only a
few short months, and to the Tribunal's final annual
and completion strategy reports, we can be immensely
proud of what we have achieved together since those
early days in 1993. No institution can restore what was
lost in the Yugoslav wars, or undo the terrible crimes
committed during them. However, the Tribunal has
demonstrated that, when the international community
has the will to cooperate and to stand for what is right
and just, those responsible for the most egregious
violations of international humanitarian law can be
held to account.

I ask that all members of the Security Council
continue to stand for what is right and to support the
Tribunal in the last six months of its life. We cannot
conclude our mandate without the Council.

