Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Nigeria commends you,
Madam President, for your leadership here in New
York and that of your President on the world stage in
response to the threat posed by the Ebola virus disease
to the entire globe. Today's open debate underscores
the seriousness with which the Ebola virus disease
outbreak is viewed by the international community.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership and for marshalling global action against
the outbreak. We also thank Ms. Margaret Chan of the
World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Nabarro and
Mr. Jackson Niamah for their briefings.

The unanimity showed by the Council today in the
adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) sends a clear message
that the world will, indeed, react in concert and with
the determination to halt the spread of this apocalyptic
virus and to find a lasting cure for it.

As we speak at this very moment, the Ebola virus
is said to be spreading exponentially. Each passing day
brings with its fresh infections and challenges in the
fight against the disease. Indeed, the world has yet to
see the spread ofa killer disease at such a rapid rate. We
could not agree more with what the Secretary-General
concerning the various ramifications of the spread of
this deadly disease in the affected countries. The gravity
and scale of the emergency call for speed, coordination
and innovative responses. It is no ordinary crisis. It is
a global wake-up call about an invisible enemy that we
hardly know and which is spreading faster than all of
our responses.

Three countries - Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia - are in the eye of the storm, literally. They
are now faced with a grave threat that, even at the best
of times, would prove too daunting for any nation to
deal with single-handedly. Those countries desperately
all assistance that the rest of the world can render. Their
health systems cannot cope with the overwhelming
emergency. Their people need food, water and other
necessities. Their hospitals urgently require the supply
of personnel, protective gear, drugs, beds, specialized
laboratory equipment, technicians, doctors, nurses
and other essential facilities, including generators,
ambulances and fuel.

Time is ofthe essence. Already, some see the battle
against Ebola as unwinnable because of the rate at
which it is spreading. We, on the other hand, want to
take a more optimistic View of the situation from our
experience in controlling and, indeed, in reversing the
outbreak in Nigeria. We therefore welcome with much
appreciation the announced support given or to be given
by several Governments around the world.

We also welcome the suggested initiative of the
Secretary-General for the establishment for a special
mission on Ebola. We support the idea and will assist in
any way we can to assist its success. Nigeria has already
provided bilateral assistance to the three affected
countries. For instance, we gave $3.5 million towards
meeting their urgent essential needs and supporting
the Ebola Coordination Centre in Conakry. We are also
training laboratory technicians and other specialists
from Liberia at this moment.

We note that some countries have imposed travel
bans and other measures against the countries affected
by the outbreak. We believe that is not the right way
to go about meeting the challenge. We believe it is
important that the affected countries be given all the
assistance they need to overcome the calamity, rather
than being injudiciously punished.

Nigeria will continue to support the protocols
approved by WHO, which do not advocate border
closures, travel restrictions or the stigmatization of any
individual on the basis of his or her nationality or the
passport he or she carries. We also have obligations
in the context of the Economic Community of West
African States to observe and to respect regarding the
free movement of persons. We shall continue to remain
vigilant and strengthen screening at our ports of entry
and exit and to render all possible assistance to our
sister countries in the region to rid themselves of the
pestilence.

