Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States extends its sincere appreciation to President
Meron, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings today on the ongoing work to achieve
justice for victims of the vicious atrocities committed
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda that stained the
history of humankind. As we look towards December
and the anticipated closure of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
merging of essential functions with the Mechanism
for International Criminal Tribunal, the United States
wishes to underscore that it remains as committed to the
work of the Tribunal as it was when it was established
nearly a quarter-century ago.

The completion of the Tribunal's mandate
is essential. We applaud the completion of trial
proceedings in the case of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic'
and look forward to the delivery of a judgement later
this year. While we can never undo the horrors of war,
bringing cases to their conclusions, as was done last
year when former Republika Srpska President Radovan
Karadzie was found guilty and sentenced to 40 years
in prison for genocide, crimes against humanity and
violations of the laws and customs of war, goes a long
way towards closing a dark chapter of history and
creating a legacy of showing would-be perpetrators of
atrocities elsewhere in the world that they cannot act
with impunity.

The United States has consistently emphasized that
the Tribunal and the Mechanism establish facts through
judicial process. This process is critical to countering
those who seek to distort facts, revise history, engage
in genocide denialism or rewrite reality. The United
States continues to be greatly concerned about the
detrimental impact of increasingly divisive political
speech in the region on the pursuit of justice for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. Such
inflammatory rhetoric harms regional cooperation
among the States of the former Yugoslavia, which is
essential to promoting accountability for war crimes.
In this regard, the United States would like to express
our sincere appreciation for the contribution of these
Tribunals, including the Office of the Prosecutor, to
developing a historical record of the facts to counter
those who seek to deny the nature of the widespread
crimes, including genocide, that took place.

The kinds of hateful ideologies that led to these
horrific acts persist to this day, and together we must
continue our efforts to relegate them to the past. The
United States also remains concerned that three arrest
warrants for individuals charged with contempt of
court in relation to witness intimidation in the case of
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj' have remained unexecuted
in Serbia for nearly two and a half years. Cooperation
with the Tribunal is an ongoing, binding obligation.
The United States calls on Serbia to execute these
arrests without further delay, and we look to the newly-
appointed Serbian war-crimes prosecutor to play a
constructive role in that process.

The Security Council should be unified in the
message to Serbia that failure to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with its statutes and
the resolutions of the Council compromises the core
functions of the international justice system and must
be addressed with appropriate urgency. The United
States commends the ongoing work of the Office
of the Prosecutor to reshape the fugitive-tracking
programme, so that the eight remaining fugitives from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda may be
swiftly located, arrested and brought to justice.

We are happy to see these changes. This effort is
not window dressing. The restructuring that has been
done appears capable of having a significant impact on
tracking efforts, both by improving information-sharing
and placing a renewed emphasis on timely and effective
intelligence and analysis. We remain committed to
the apprehension of the remaining fugitives and look
forward to engaging with the two new Task Forces
focused on Africa and Europe in this effort. We call on
all States, especially those in the Great Lakes region, to
cooperate with efforts to apprehend these fugitives. To
that end, the United States continues to offer a reward
of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest
or transfer of these eight men.

With regard to management and the transition,
the United States appreciates the careful planning
and ongoing work of both the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and Mechanism Registrars to navigate a
complicated issues during this period of transition
for both institutions. We are happy to hear of the
significant progress made to downsize offices and
reduce costs, as the Tribunal looks to close at the end of
the year. We also note the ICTY's concerns about staff
attrition and we thank it for its considerable efforts to
retain core staff, including by providing training and
making other accommodations, and urge it to continue
these initiatives. We are grateful for the personal and
professional sacrifices the staff of both Tribunals
have made.

In addition, we are glad to hear that the four audit
reports of the Mechanism, issued by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services during the reporting period,
found satisfactory management and controls and that
the Mechanism is striving to take necessary actions
where recommendations for improvement were made.

The United States remains deeply concerned that
the mechanisms case work is being severely impaired
due to the situation of Judge Aydin Sefa Akay. We
continue to emphasize the need for this matter to be
resolved fairly and expeditiously. The mandate of the
Tribunal may be nearing an end, but its work to end
impunity and promote justice will be enduring. Even
more, the work of the Mechanism and Tribunal reminds
us daily of the critical need to seek accountability
where atrocities against civilians have so far been met
with impunity in places like Syria and South Sudan.

