The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.

Earlier today, we heard a cry from the heart of a
child: a cry on behalf of millions of children around the
globe affected by armed conflict; a cry for a better life;
a cry for peace. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh's Vision must
guide the Security Council as it seeks to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
has put a face on the report of the Secretary-General so
ably presented to us today by his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict; on
the work of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), graphically described by its Executive
Director; and on the provisions of the resolutions that
the Security Council has adopted on specific conflict
situations.

Today's debate, which is being held on Universal
Children's Day, which we observe as a day of
worldwide fraternity and understanding among
children, and of activity promoting the welfare of the
world's children, also reminds us of the important role
that States Members of the United Nations, individually
and collectively, must play if we are to reduce the gap
between norms and practice.

It is true that over the past five years greater
attention has been focused on the plight of children
affected by armed conflict. That has stimulated a
number of innovative and practical initiatives,
strengthened the advocacy work of UNICEF and of the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and enhanced the ability of the United
Nations to implement programmes at the international
level and in affected countries and regions. As a result,
the issue has now been placed squarely on the
international peace and security agenda.

Nevertheless, despite the commitments made and
the actions taken, children are still being killed,
maimed, used as combatants, uprooted from home and
community and forced to live in conditions of extreme
deprivation. There is no doubt that armed conflict
exacerbates poverty, reduces progress in human
development and increases children's vulnerability to
sexual abuse and physical exploitation. The challenge
before us is how to change that tragic reality.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2001/852)
presents us with a balance sheet on the implementation
of existing Security Council resolutions and identifies
areas where further action is still required. We must
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the initiatives which have been
implemented since last year's report. I wish to
highlight some issues which my delegation believes
must be taken account of in the pre-conflict and post-
conflict phases, and during conflicts, to address the
plight of children in a comprehensive and integrated
manner.

First, attention must be given to the prevention of
armed conflict, as the best way to reduce the harm done
to children is to prevent armed conflicts from breaking
out.

Second, addressing the root causes of conflict
must therefore be a matter of priority for the
international community.

Third, the international community must also
encourage respect for human rights and encourage
specially designed post-conflict peace-building and
rehabilitation programmes that can reduce the
likelihood of the re-emergence of armed conflict. In
that regard, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programmes must receive adequate
funding.

Fourth, the promotion of a culture of adherence to
humanitarian norms and standards is of critical
importance, especially in the light of increased
Violations of humanitarian law in conflict situations. A
component of any effective strategy must be an end to
impunity through the prosecution of those who
deliberately violate the rights of children. Genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
egregious crimes perpetrated against children must be
excluded from amnesty provisions contemplated during
peace negotiations. By the same token, child ex-
combatants should be regarded primarily as Victims
rather than as perpetrators, and should be exposed to
rehabilitative treatment.

Fifth, appropriate monitoring and reporting
mechanisms must be established to ensure the
compliance of armed groups and non-State actors.

Sixth, better and more effective cooperation and
coordination with regional and subregional bodies must
be developed. In that context, we wish to express
appreciation for the work of the non-governmental
organizations in the field.

Seventh, the impact on children of the illicit trade
in small arms and the illegal exploitation of and trade
in natural resources must be forcefully addressed.

Eighth, we must replicate successful initiatives to
protect children affected by war at the community
level, make education an essential component of
humanitarian assistance, and include information on
the security of children in all reports prepared for the
Security Council on conflict situations. In that regard, I
wish to highlight that we would wish to see these and
all other so-called generic resolutions mainstreamed.

Among the recommendations made in the
Secretary-General's report, I wish to highlight the
launch of an international research network on children
and armed conflict as being most timely, because
appropriate responses can only be based on accurate
data. We also express appreciation to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for the initiatives taken on
the training of peacekeepers.

This year's report of the Secretary-General is the
culmination of nearly a decade of work that began with
the seminal work of Ms. Graca Machel, to whom the
international community owes a debt of gratitude. The
provisions of the draft resolution to be adopted at the
end of this debate are addressed, inter alia, to parties to
armed conflict, Member States, the Secretary-General
and regional and subregional organizations. The draft
resolution also requests the Secretary-General, in his
next report, to list parties to armed conflict that recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
applicable to them. It is important that this draft
resolution be used as a guide for reporting on conflict
situations.

In conclusion, let me first of all express my
delegation's appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to the Executive Director of
UNICEF and to their staffs for keeping the focus of the
international community on the children who are
Victims of armed conflict: children whose lives are put
in jeopardy by actions beyond their control. We also
wish to express our appreciation to the delegation of
France for having so ably coordinated work on the
draft resolution before us. Our future actions will
determine whether we have heard the cry from the
heart of Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for peace and for a
better life.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of
Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

