Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2201 (2015).
We applaud the role played by Jordan and the United
Kingdom in the Council, and the members of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in facilitating that
outcome.
For New Zealand the two main purposes of the
resolution are, first, that it emphasizes the centrality of
the agreed transition framework - the GCC Initiative,
the National Dialogue Conference outcomes and the
Peace and National Partnership Agreement - to the
political transition in Yemen. Secondly, it condemns
recent unilateral action by the Houthis, which
undermines that agreed framework.

This resolution is overdue. We regret that, despite
several opportunities, this has been the first product the
Council has been able to adopt since an armed group
captured the presidential palace on 20 January. That
action was described in the Chamber last week as a
coup against the legitimate Government of Yemen. It
was also, of course, a coup d'etat against the transition
process that had been formally endorsed by the Council.

The situation in Yemen is still at very real risk
of further deterioration, and will certainly remain so
while the President and Prime Minister remain under
house arrest. We call for their early release.

We know from Special Adviser Jamal Benomar
that the Council's response to the crisis has been very
closely watched in Yemen, and that in the past the
parties have responded to our messaging. Against that
background, given the close attention in Yemen to our
response, the final agreement and achievement unity in
the Council are even more welcome.

New Zealand is convinced that all parties must
now fully engage in the United Nations-brokered
talks, and do so in the spirit of compromise directed
towards achieving a political settlement that allows
for a resumption of the political transition that was
previously agreed, which also tackles some of the other
serious issues faced by Yemen.

While today we have focused on the immediate
crisis, there are many important issues that the
resolution can only touch on, in particular the
humanitarian consequences of the crisis, the continued
threat of terrorist groups and the serious social and
economic issues that four years ago led the people of
Yemen to an agreed process of political transition,
one that appeared to be a model for the rest of the
region - a political transition that, until the Houthis'
ill-judged intervention, appeared to be on a fragile but
positive path.

Those issues are central to Yemen's longer-term
stability. They must also be addressed. Therefore,
we agree with Spain and others that they deserve our
continued attention and that we must remain seized of
the matter.
