Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have paid tribute to all United Nations
peacekeepers. We particulary mourn those who have
died in the course of their duty.

I also acknowledge Rwanda's very considerable
contribution to peacekeeping. It is a tribute that
Rwanda is now the sixth largest United Nations
troop contributor, which is yet another example of
the meaningful contribution made by small States to
the United Nations. We also acknowledge, with real
appreciation, the burden carried by Rwanda and many
other African countries in their support for United
Nations, hybrid and regional peacekeeping operations
in Africa, including in Somalia, South Sudan, Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and the
Central African Republic .

New Zealand is concerned that, despite the efforts
of all troop-contributing countries, the system of
peacekeeping is still dangerously exposed. United
Nations peacekeeping is overstretched. The deployment
of missions is too slow and uncertain. And, as we have
seen recently in South Sudan, even existing missions are
being taken by surprise by the re-emergence of conflict.
The adoption of resolution 2167 (2014) is therefore very
timely. We congratulate you, Mr. President - and
indeed, the whole Council - on raising the level of
decision-making on peacekeeping to that of a formal
resolution.

But New Zealand is still concerned that so much
of the initial work on halting conflict and restoring

peace is too dependent on peacekeeping by regional
organizations, which are often poorly equipped to
undertake those tasks. Ofeven greater concern is the fact
that regional peacekeeping still lacks predictable and
sustainable financing. We are therefore disappointed
by the failure of resolution 2167 (2014) to resolve the
funding and capacity issue. We recall that, 11 months ago
in S/PRST/2013/12 of6 August 2013, Council members
agreed that it was time to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a United Nations mandate.

It is a serious matter that, almost a year later,
the Council as a whole has still failed to resolve that
issue. The issue must not be put in the "too hard"
basket for another 11 months. New Zealand believes
that, if the recommendations in the Prodi report (see S/2008/813)) cannot be adopted in their entirety, then it
is incumbent on the Council to agree variations of those
recommendations that meet the needs of all parties and
ensure systematic and reliable United Nations support
for regional peacekeeping initiatives.

Today's debate is not just about financing.
Regional and subregional organizations have important
functions across the full spectrum of the Council's
mandate, from early warning, conflict prevention and
conflict management to conflict resolution to tackling
root causes, as well as oversight of developments
in peacekeeping operations. With the trend towards
deploying peacekeeping operations to deal with
asymmetric challenges where there is no real peace to
keep, interested and invested regional partners can play
even more important roles.

New Zealand's experience with its own regional
organizations dealing with such problems is very
much in line with that outlined to us a moment ago by
Mr. Paet. They usually have a better understanding of
the issues; they often know the players, maybe even
personally; they can generate a force rapidly; and they
can use all those attributes to set and implement robust
mandates that complement regional political efforts.

Too often, the Council and United Nations
peacekeeping have come too late in support of regional
efforts, as we have seen recently in Mali and again in the
Central African Republic. We must therefore improve
the partnership with those regional organizations
across the whole spectrum of the Council's agenda.
New Zealand is unequivocal in its support for such
partnerships. The annual consultations with the African
Union Peace and Security Council are useful, but
they do not offer the kind of opportunity for detailed
discussion that is necessary when a crisis situation is
emerging, and they do not allow for ongoing follow-
up. Genuine engagement requires commitment, both
from the Council collectively and from its individual
members.

There is much that has been left undone on those
issues, as the Rwanden presidency knew when it
insisted that the Council debate this topic. We therefore
thank you, Sir, and your delegation for the efforts you
have made here today. You have helped lay a solid
foundation for the next very necessary steps. You have,
in the words of your Ambassador, indeed saved the best
until last.

