Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Denmark.

Let me start by welcoming the adoption by
the Security Council and the General Assembly of
resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/268, respectively, on
peacebuilding in April. They were nothing less than
a landmark. Let me also applaud the recent reviews
undertaken by the United Nations of its peace operations
and extend our full support to the continued process of
implementing their recommendations.

The diversity and complexity of the various
peacebuilding efforts in Africa call for a differentiated
and comprehensive whole-of-government and whole-of-
United Nations approach. The experience of the Nordic
countries, for example, in supporting peacebuilding
efforts in the Sahel, is a case in point, emphasizing the
nexus between peace, security and development, and
targeting the root causes of conflict. The inclusion
of Goal 16 in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) is a
political testament to that.

Political solutions must be at the centre of any
peace process, and for any credible political solutions
to be found and adhered to, accountable, transparent
and inclusive political leadership is needed. The most
recent experiences from Somalia, Mali and South Sudan
have once again made that clear. Despite the progress
made, we must place still greater emphasis on conflict
prevention and solution. In that effort, we need strong
African leadership, and we have to place peacebuilding
at the core of all of our actions.

The African Union and the various regional groups,
institutions and dialogues, as well as the European
Union and United Nations, each have a unique role
to play in facilitating political processes. The Nordic
countries highly commend the African Union on its
efforts to advance peace and security in the African
continent, including the roles played by the AU's Panel
of the Wise, high-level panels, high representatives and
special envoys.

We also commend the willingness of many
African countries to contribute troops and other types
of personnel. The African Union and the regional
organizations are usually the first responders to crises
in Africa, dispatching troops on short notice, often into
dangerous environments and sadly, sometimes with
tragic losses. We fully acknowledge the need to look
for more predictable financial solutions for African
Union peace missions, and we welcome the historic
unanimous decision in Kigali, as mentioned by others,
to finance the African Union and the African-led peace
operations. We see that decision as an important step,
and we look forward to supporting its implementation.
We also note the appointment of President Kagame
of Rwanda to lead the ongoing institutional reform
of the African Union aimed at further improving its
effectiveness.

In order to counter the emergence of new
threats - internal or regional - strong governance
structures are required. As we work to adapt and
revitalize the United Nations structures to conform to the
realities of today, it is important to note that the African
Union has in fact developed and operationalized its
own peace and security architecture and its governance
architecture. Reinforcing the strong linkages between
those African structures and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture is, of course, essential.

In addition, further progress on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 2242 (2015) is
imperative. Women remain the single most underutilized
resource in effective peacebuilding. Experience shows
that empowering women and supporting their full and
active participation in peace-related, political and
economic decision-making leads to more inclusive
and lasting agreements. That has to be the central
component in any mediation and conflict prevention
effort.

Finally, we must remember that to achieve
sustainable peace and long-term development, real
inclusiveness is the key. The entire country has to be
heard, respected and involved, and including civil
society is the best way to do this. The people ofBurkina
Faso showed recently how a powerful and active civil
society can be the key to maintaining stability and
democracy.

Let me conclude by affirming that the Nordic
countries are pleased to bear witness to the ongoing
process in the United Nations and by reiterating the
unique mandate and the role of the Organization in
securing a sustainable and peaceful Africa.

