Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): Since I have already
elucidated Croatia's general views on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the General Assembly debate
on Monday, it is my intention to limit my comments
today to the role and the results of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as they
relate to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I wish to emphasize that Croatia assigns special
significance to the International Criminal Tribunal and its
work. Indeed, my country was instrumental in the
Tribunal's establishment. When it was ultimately
established in May 1993, one of its primary aims was to
contribute to peace by dispensing justice. This laudable
aim is not adequately reflected in the results to date.

Croatia does not condition its cooperation with the
Tribunal upon the reciprocal cooperation of any other
country or entity. Croatia has always considered
cooperation to be its legal, political and moral duty. We
believe that all other countries should have the same
attitude towards the Tribunal.

 

Due to its limited capabilities in comparison to the
magnitude of the crimes committed, it is apparent that the
Tribunal can only carry out its work in a selective manner.
Therefore, discretion in deciding which crimes and
perpetrators to pursue carries significant weight. Croatia
cannot be wholly satisfied with the exercise of this
discretion to date.

International sources have estimated that Bosnian
Croats and Muslims are responsible for about 10 per cent
of all the crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
during the conflict, while Bosnian Serbs are responsible for
about 90 per cent. Yet, at this moment, Bosnian Croats
represent 73 per cent of those in the custody of the
Tribunal. Furthermore, in spite of ample evidence, no
indictments are forthcoming for the crimes committed
against Bosnian Croats. The Croatian Government
maintains its insistence that the Tribunal must take action
in respect of these crimes.

The Tribunal's objective of dispensing justice, in
which my country and Bosnia and Herzegovina have placed
much hope, cannot be achieved if the present pattern is
maintained.

Concerning the recent arrest of two Bosnian Croats,
we wish to affirm that it is partly in order to avoid the risk
associated with the use of force that the Republic of Croatia
has encouraged the voluntary surrender of indictees,
Moreover, while the arrests are based on international law
and are within the scope of the mandate of the Stabilization
Force (SFOR), they have brought to an even higher level
the already existing disproportion of detainees, in terms of
the involvement of their ethnic group in war crimes.

While this debate proceeds, the architects of ethnic
cleansing walk freely in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Republika Srpska. General Mladic attends sporting
events in Belgrade, fraternizing with other former and
present senior Yugoslav army officers, some of whom are
responsible for the atrocities committed in Vukovar.
Radovan Karadzic gives interviews for foreign television
from Pale, where he pulls the strings in Republika Srpska.
Milan Martic, who ordered the shelling of Zagreb and is
indicted by the Tribunal for that crime, lives in a villa in
the immediate vicinity of SFOR headquarters in Banja
Luka. We should ask ourselves, what kind of message does
this send?
There is no doubt that the responsibility for war
crimes is always individual and that all perpetrators have to
be brought to justice. At the same time, due to its limited
resources, the Tribunal cannot prosecute all perpetrators.
Therefore, it is essential for the peace process that the
Tribunal in its future work better reflect the level of
involvement and degree of responsibility of the different
sides in the conflict. The fact that it has not so far done
so detracts from the achievement of justice and
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

