Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is the first time that Cuba takes the floor this
year, we wish to congratulate all the new members of the
Security Council. We also commend the presidency's
initiative to convene this debate.

Cuba supports the statement to be made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Middle East continues to draw the attention
of the international community owing to the various
events in the region in the course of the past year
and the long-standing hope for concluding a peace
process. The Security Council's consideration of this
matter has been extremely protracted, and the major
problems remain, especially the question of Palestine.
Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories constitutes the main obstacle to achieving
peace and ajust, lasting and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East.

It is imperative that the Security Council play its
due role in defence of international peace and security,
adopting concrete, practical measures to bring Israel
to put an end to its acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people.

Israel's actions deliberately contravene resolutions
of the United Nations, pose a threat to regional and
international peace and security and violate the human
rights of an entire people. There will never be peace in
the Middle East as long as such aggression continues and
the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people are not upheld and taken into account.

The General Assembly took a historic decision
when its members granted Palestine the status of
non-member observer State in the United Nations.
Cuba supported that decision, in keeping with its
historical position in support of the cause of the
Palestinian people and in favour of their rights. Cuba
reiterates its support for Palestine's entry as a full State
Member of the United Nations. The Security Council
must consider and approve, without further delay, the
request submitted by Palestine in 2011 to be recognized
as a United Nations State Member.

The news over the past year on the return to
negotiations between Israel and Palestine was
encouraging. But that optimism has been cautious, as
the Palestinian cause and peace in the region need to be
attained through fair agreements that do not undermine
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Support must continue to be given to the Palestinian

people in its legitimate claim for the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Cuba demands that Israel comply with international
law and put an end to its occupation of all Arab
territories. We reiterate once again our position in
favour of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of
the Middle East region.

The Palestinian people suffer as a result of the
growing number of illegal Israeli settlements, the harsh
and distressing reality of Palestinian prisoners and the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the besieged
Gaza Strip, where residents' living conditions have
further deteriorated as the unjust blockade has been
maintained. Only by ending that colonialist policy,
releasing Palestinian prisoners and lifting the blockade
against the Gaza Strip would allow for a meaningful
political process to take off and bring peace to the
region.

Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in its just struggle for self-determination and
welcomes the declaration of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We hope
that that decision will mark a historic watershed in the
full realization of the rights of the Palestinian people,
including its full-fledged membership in the United
Nations.

Cuba continues to closely follow the situation in
Syria and its international repercussions. We share the
concern at the loss of innocent lives in Syria, as in any
other part of the world. We likewise condemn all acts
of violence taking place in that country against the
innocent civilian population, perpetrated by any of the
parties to that conflict.

We reject all attempts to turn the alleged protection
of human lives into a pretext for foreign intervention,
whether directly or through support to ad hoc armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, which can
only lead to destruction and augment the death toll.

We also condemn any use of chemical weapons or
other weapons of mass destruction. We are strongly
committed to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, as well as
to strict compliance with its provisions. We welcome
Syria's joining of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the agreements reached on the destruction of its
chemical weapons stockpile.

Likewise, we welcome the progress made in
implementing the agreement for the destruction and
verification of the Syrian Arab Republic's chemical
weapons programme and the cooperation provided by
the Syrian Government to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations joint
mission.

The obligation of the Security Council is to
promote peace and bring an end to violence; to prevent
destabilization, prevent the financing, support and
training of destabilizing actors; and to protect innocent
people and prevent their manipulation for geopolitical
ends. That is also the responsibility of the Organization
as a whole.

Cuba opposes calls promoting regime change in
Syria and supporting the use of force and violence
instead of contributing to dialogue and negotiation
among all of the parties. We also reject the complicity
of the mass media, committing its customary distortion
of reality with no need to face the consequences of its
actions.

We reiterate the call to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and the
right to self-determination of its people, without any
kind of foreign interference or intervention. We call for
the conflict to be settled diplomatically without further
bloodshed.

We join international aspirations by investing our
hopes in the prospect of the second Geneva Conference
on Syria leading via dialogue to agreements ending the
conflict in Syria, through a peaceful process led by the
Syrian people in exercise of its legitimate right to self-
determination.

Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all acts of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by
whosoever committed, including States. In that regard,
Cuba condemns all acts of terrorism perpetrated in the
Middle East.

