Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on the work
of the Committees established uprsuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We welcome
the briefings of Ambassador Gerard Van Bohemen,
Raimonda Murmokaite and Mr. Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi as the respective Chairs of those subsidiary
bodies. We wish to thank them for their work and
leadership. We are also grateful to Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi for the joint briefing. We also
welcome the coordination of effort among the three
various teams.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
that the fight against terrorism must be conducted
within the framework of international cooperation and
in accordance with existing international and regional
instruments and the norms of international law, with
full respect for the sovereignty of States, human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Acts of extreme violence
perpetrated by terrorist groups in the countries of
Africa and the Middle East have intensified. Terrorism
continues to be a serious threat to international peace
and security. It is therefore necessary to implement
measures prohibiting the funding, transfer of weapons
and training of terrorist groups and non-State actors,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

Venezuela reiterates its emphatic rejection of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, which
constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights. My country wishes to reiterate its concern
about the nature and actions of non-State actors.
They are a constant threat and source of violence,
and in most cases they become terrorist groups. The
Security Council must take strong measures to prevent
the training, financing and supplying of weapons to
non-State actors. Also, we regret that resolution 2220
(2015) does not include an explicit prohibition of the
transfer of weapons to non-State actors. We urge the
Council to rectify that matter.

In the fight against terrorism, we must act with
a deep political sense. Beyond the combat operations
against these elements, the international community
must overcome the root causes of the crisis we are
experiencing today. The humanitarian tragedy in
Syria, Yemen and Libya, among other places, and the
actions of Boko Haram, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra
Front, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and its
associated groups call for the international community
to provide preventive, systematic and strong responses
to counteract the phenomenon.

We believe that the Security Council Committee

established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, is an important tool in the fight against
terrorism. We wish to reiterate the concern expressed
by the Committee with regard to the military power
and capacity of armed groups in their advance in Syria,
Libya, Iraq and Yemen. We also express our concern
about the unilateral action taken by some countries,
which, on the grounds of combating terrorism,
conduct illegal actions of targeted killings, arbitrary
arrests, torture and bombings, which often lead to
civilian casualties and are outside of international
law. Terrorism should be fought from the perspective
of multilateralism and in cooperation with the States
concerned.

We also believe that it is particularly important to
strengthen the role of the Ombudsperson in facilitating
due process. We believe that this mechanism should
be strengthened so as to have greater transparency.
We thank Ms. Kimberley Prost for the independence
and professionalism with which she has carried out
her work throughout her mandate. We hope that her
successor will soon be appointed.

In recent months, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, has focused, with
the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), on ensuring the
implementation of the provisions set out in resolution
2178 (2014), concerning foreign terrorist fighters, and
on identifying best practices and the gaps that Member
States face in combating this problem. Foreign terrorist
fighters now number 25,000 individuals, including
women and young people, and come from at least 100
countries. A demonstration of this is the important
reports issued by the Committee on the challenges of
prosecuting foreign terrorist fighters and on ensuring
effective border control in countries in conflict areas.
The special meeting that the Committee will hold in
Madrid on 27 and 28 July, on how to stop the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, is a positive initiative that
contributes to a comprehensive approach to this global
problem, and we fully support it.

Resolution 2178 (2014) marks a milestone in
addressing the phenomenon of terrorism, and we call
for its effective implementation. It encourages Member
States to adopt a series of legal and political actions,
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to stop the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters. We also deem it necessary
to fully implement other relevant resolutions on the
subject, such as resolution 1373 (2001), prohibiting the
financing of terrorism, and 1624 (2005), prohibiting
incitement to join terrorist groups. There should be
an assessment of the progress achieved this year,
which marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1624 (2005) and the establishment of CTED.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on measures to prevent the
acquisition of weapons by terrorist groups, Venezuela
would like to draw attention to the process of the
ongoing comprehensive review, which aims to assess
the work done by this subsidiary body since 2011 and
which should conclude in November 2016. We wish to
make the following comments and recommendations in
that regard.

The intergovernmental conference to be held in
June 2016 with the participation of Member States of
the General Assembly should be understood as a key
component and its results should be part of the review.
Looking forward towards the review process and as
a general practice, the Committee should expand its
outreach activities throughout the headquarters of
the bodies responsible for disarmament at the United
Nations, namely, New York, Geneva and Vienna.

As part of the review process, we should consider
in particular the Committee's work in the area of
international assistance and technology transfer.
Ways to optimize the matching of donor and recipient
countries should be considered. The priorities of the
countries requesting assistance should be the basis for
cooperation. In that regard, Venezuela recalls that in
previous years there was discussion of the possibility
of holding an international conference to promote
international assistance and technology transfer in the
scope of the 1540 Committee. We fully support that
initiative and would like to know if it is still being
considered.

Finally, in recognizing the importance of resolution
1540 (2004) in the efforts to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction by terrorist groups,
Venezuela believes that eliminating and controlling
these weapon systems, in particular nuclear weapons,
is the best guarantee to prevent non-State actors from
obtaining those weapons of destruction. We regret that
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held in
May was unable to adopt a final document, owing to
the negative attitude of some countries with regard to
realizing the commitment agreed upon in 1995 on the
convening of the conference on a Middle East zone free
of weapons of mass destruction.

