Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan welcomes
the unanimous resolve of Council members in urging
North Korea to stop its nuclear programme by adopting
resolution 2375 (2017), which entails a tougher and
broader sanctions regime.

We deplore the fact that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea continues to tirelessly violate
Security Council resolutions which inevitably leads to
greater consequences for the country and its leadership.
Despite the urgent appeals and rejection by the world
community of its provocative actions, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea consistently continues to
develop its nuclear missile potential, which poses a
threat to peace and destabilizes the situation in the East
Asian region and globally. In that regard, we are talking
not about a virtual threat, but rather a real threat to the
people of the neighbouring countries and beyond.

After a series of launches of improved ballistic
missiles, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
once again shocked the planet with its horrible nuclear
test. The irresponsible policy ofthe Democratic People's
Republic of Korea negatively affects the global process
of nuclear non-proliferation and undermines collective
efforts to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free future of the
planet. As a country seriously affected by nuclear
tests, Kazakhstan is strongly opposed to such heinous
violations. We are strongly convinced that, in the
twenty-first century, there is no place for nuclear tests.

Proceeding from its principled position, Kazakhstan
supports the new resolution in the hope that it will send
a clear and strong message to Pyongyang that the world
does not accept the nuclear policy of North Korea. We
hope Pyongyang will hear the call and act accordingly.
The resolution envisages tough sanctions as the means
to persuade Pyongyang to change its course in favour of
a nuclear-weapon-free future. At the same time, it also
leaves room for a resumption of dialogue - if North
Korea really wants it.

Once again, we call upon the Democratic People's

Republic of Korea to heed the message of humankind
and seek the path of prudence and dialogue.

