Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver this statement on behalf of Tunisia. The Niger associates itself with this statement. Tunisia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2510 (2020), concerning the political process in Libya. The resolution will support the conditions for a lasting ceasefire in Libya as soon as possible. My country welcomes the broad consensus in the Security Council on the need to make progress in the political process in Libya, put an end to hostilities, stop foreign interference and respect the arms embargo. That is the very essence of the conclusions of Berlin Conference. My country welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, to achieve a political settlement to the conflict in Libya. We reiterate our thanks to the Federal Republic of Germany for having hosted Berlin Conference. We would also like to thank the penholder, the United Kingdom, for its efforts during the negotiations on the resolution. Likewise, we thank all the members of the Security Council for their positive approach, as well as the support provided to my delegation's proposals. Tunisia made sure that the resolution mentions the Libyan political agreement as a reference and that it includes a commitment to Libya's sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity, as well as an emphasis on the fact that there is no military solution to the crisis in Libya and that there is a need to reach a permanent ceasefire as soon as possible, in addition to making reference to the important role played by the neighbouring countries and regional organizations, in particular the African Union and the League of Arab States, in supporting the political process in Libya. We welcome the initiative of the African Union to hold a reconciliation meeting among the Libyan parties in the spring, support the Berlin Conference conclusions and ensure that oil operations are not disrupted, for the benefit of all Libyans, while also addressing the threat of terrorism in the region. Tunisia calls upon all parties to implement this resolution and work to transform the truce into a permanent ceasefire without further delay. We support the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in proceeding with its work in order to achieve that goal. Tunisia also looks forward to convening the Libyan political forum in the near future. We also welcome the ongoing economic process that was recently launched to overcome the economic challenges facing Libya. In conclusion, in line with the Tunis communique for peace, we stress that all Libyans should come to the dialogue table and arrive at consensus to emerge from the current crisis in the context of a political agreement and respect for international legitimacy. We also reiterate that a solution to the Libyan conflict must be found among Libyans themselves, without exclusion or marginalization and within the framework of a comprehensive reconciliation process under a civilian system in a unified Libyan State.
