Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Ambassador Oh for his briefing. The United
States is grateful for the extraordinary success of his
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Under his leadership, the
Committee has made significant strides towards the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The fact that 173 countries have submitted
national reports since the resolution came into effect in
2004 is a strong testament to the global effort to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction.

Under the chairmanship of the Republic of Korea,
the Committee has accomplished most of its ambitious
programme to mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). As Ambassador Oh
has briefed the Council, it has significantly increased
country visits and regional outreach events, boosted the
collection of new and additional reports from States,
and supported the development of new tools to monitor
and promote the implementation of the resolution. In
addition, the Republic of Korea has demonstrated its
commitment to the importance of assistance efforts
by its generous contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund for resolution 1540 (2004) activities, and
last May held a successful open debate of the Security
Council on the resolution (see S/PV.7169), at which we
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/20l4/7, aimed
at fostering the full implementation of the resolution
by 2021.

We have appreciated the Committee's efforts on
implementation, especially its production of a draft
compendium of effective national practices on the
implementation of the resolution. For countries seeking
to create legislation in line with resolution 1540 (2004),
the compendium will be an invaluable resource for best
practices, all aimed at our shared goal of preventing
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. But this resource is a living and
evolving document, and we urge Member States and
others to continue to add to its development.

We also appreciate that the Committee included in
the compendium information from the 29 September
United States submission on effective United States
national practices for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which describes over 100 concrete
examples of how we implement the resolution. Related
to that, the United States considers monitoring the status
of implementation to be among the most important
tasks of the Committee, as it creates a solid foundation
on which the rest of the work of the Committee can
build.

Despite the good progress, we also note that
the Committee failed to meet its goal, set out in the
thirteenth programme of work, to complete updates
to all national implementation matrices by 31 August,
after having failed to meet a similar goal for 31 May
in the twelfth programme of work. We fully recognize
that the Committee and the Group of Experts pursue
ambitious agendas and that, at times, it has not been
at full force, but we ask that the Committee prioritize
this aspect of its work so that it can acquire and work
from a more comprehensive understanding of the status
of implementation. Doing so is important because the
results will help establish an important baseline for the
comprehensive review in 2016, which will be carried
out by the Committee and the experts. Following
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7 in May, we
believe that the Committee must develop a plan in
the coming months for the conduct of the review. The
Committee can start to develop its plan as we discuss
the next programme of work in January. We hope that
the Committee will find ways to incorporate ideas
from a full range of stakeholders, including Member
States as well as international, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and industry.

Again, allow me to congratulate Ambassador Oh
J oon and the Republic of Korea for their truly impressive
leadership. Their efforts helped move us forward
on goals we share with respect to strengthening our
non-proliferation work. We also thank the Committee
as a whole and the Group of Experts for their important
work. We look forward to working with the new Chair
starting on 1 January.

