Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ambassador Sangqu for his oral report on last
month's mission to Timor-Leste, which was led by
Ambassador Kumalo. We would like to thank the
Secretariat for the detailed written report on that
mission (S/2007/711). We also pay tribute here to
Ambassador Kumalo's leadership and to his
commitment to the work that the international
community is doing in Timor-Leste.

We strongly endorse the observation that the fact
that mission happened should be seen as reaffirmation
of United Nations support for Timor-Leste. We have
listened with interest to the input of the other United
Nations Member States who spoke this morning. Their
part in the international effort in Timor-Leste is, of
course, a vital part of us all working together for
success.

I would like to align myself with the statement
made by the representative of Portugal on behalf of
the European Union.

Three themes recur throughout these reports. I
believe the first theme is that United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the International
Stabilisation Force are doing an excellent job working
alongside the Timorese people and institutions. The
United Kingdom joins other speakers in commending
Special Representative Khare's efforts. While there
may be room for review and further improvement, I
think the overall impression that comes through
strongly is of a very confident, integrated mission
performing to high standards and in close partnership
with the International Force. That being said, we
endorse the mission's recognition of the need to send
an expert mission from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to review the role and
responsibility of UNMIT police and their relationship
with the National Police Force of Timor-Leste and the
Ministry of the Interior.

The second theme concerns the fact that, while
Timor-Leste post-conflict transition continues on track,
it is the case that the situation remains fragile, volatile
and prone to setback if specific challenges are left
untackled. First, there are the immediate challenges:
resolution of the issue of the petitioners, ensuring
accountability and justice - and that includes bringing
Major Reinado to justice - and alleviating and
resolving the situation faced by some 100,000
internally displaced persons.

Without wishing to diminish the importance of
those immediate challenges, they can each be
addressed, we believe, through treatment of some
fundamental challenges and concerns. The Timorese
political leadership, while maintaining healthy
differences of View over policy, should unite around a
shared vision of an independent, prosperous and united
country. Timorese institutions, in particular in the
security and judicial sectors, still lack capacity and
sufficient numbers of qualified personnel. A sustained
process of security sector reform, in our view, needs to
continue, and robust budget execution is needed in the
service of socio-economic development. In short, the
Timorese economy needs to grow and create jobs. And
the Timorese Government needs to use the Petroleum
Fund to help it do so.

The third theme that comes through the report is
that only the Timorese people can ensure that Timor-
Leste succeeds. I think this was one theme that was
stressed by the mission when it visited the country. The
United Nations and other international partners can
help achieve success, but they cannot resolve the
underlying challenges. The lessons of 2006 have been
learned: the international community will not reduce its
commitment precipitately, without assurance that
Timor-Leste can stand alone.

But nor will the international community want to
foster a relationship which encourages dependence and
discourages Timorese self-reliance. The United
Kingdom therefore supports the extension of UNMIT's
mandate in February, but we also support the mission's
request that the Secretary-General continue to report in
such a way that an assessment can be made as to how
much United Nations support will be needed in the
future.

