I would like to express our appreciation to Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Libya, and Mr. Guenter Sautter, Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany and Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for the quality of their presentations and for the perspective they have just given us on the current situation in Libya. As a neighbour of Libya, the Niger is sensitive to all, good and bad, that affects this country, and it is in that regard that we welcomed the announcement made by the Presidents of the Presidential Council, Mr. Faiez Serraj, and of the House of Representatives, Mr. Aguila Saleh, in favour of an immediate ceasefire. Very little good news has reached us from Libya lately. That is why the announcement of the ceasefire should lead us to say that, despite the current chaos, there are signs of hope. Indeed, when Libyans are able to talk to each other, they can create a space for peace and reconciliation in their country. In the same vein, the prospect of organizing elections by March 2021 should be welcomed and encouraged. It is obvious that true legitimacy is obtained through the ballot box and not through arms transferred in large quantities to Libya at the whim of interests contrary to the aspirations for peace of a population that has been exposed to acts of hatred and violence for too long. The suffering of the Libyan people is unfortunately exacerbated by the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the number of cases of which has recently soared. For almost a decade, the situation in Libya has continued to deteriorate. After more than a decade of war, Libyans have not experienced the democracy they were promised and to which they legitimately aspire. Worse still, they have lost peace and security and are now threatened with losing the unity of their country. Our repeated appeals and good intentions are, unfortunately, being thwarted by the refusal of several actors to respect the arms embargo, to which they freely subscribed in Berlin. Libya and its people have paid a heavy price, its women and children are being killed by the thousands, its resources are being plundered and its infrastructure destroyed, including its schools and hospitals, despite the coronavirus disease pandemic. Despite his efforts, the Secretary-General has been unable to appoint a Special Representative, which is necessary to relaunch the only valid way out of the crisis, that of political dialogue and reconciliation. It is urgent that a Special Representative of the Secretary-General be appointed, so that he can strengthen the momentum of the quest for a political solution to the Libyan crisis. Here my delegation would reiterate the importance of the role that the Security Council, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union and all the other actors concerned must continue to play in order to reverse the current trend and help Libya become once again a country of peace, stability and prosperity. In that regard, the Niger welcomes the efforts made by the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya and by the Contact Group on Libya of the African Union. We also welcome the positive role played by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, which, despite the difficult context, through its good offices and its multifaceted support, is working to bring the parties to the conflict closer together, in accordance with its mandate. To that effect, we would therefore be in favour of extending the mandate of the Mission for a further period of 12 months. The Niger also commends the role played by the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, in monitoring the arms embargo, in accordance with resolutions 2473 (2019) and 2292 (2016), while considering that special attention should be paid to the situation of African migrants in detention camps, who often are killed during bombings or otherwise used as combatants or human shields by the various armed groups in the country. In addition, the Niger agrees with the Secretary-General on the need to review the policy of returning migrants and refugees intercepted at sea to Libya. The volatility of the security situation and the situation of vulnerability in which they find themselves once they are disembarked back in Libya should be of concern to us. At the economic level, the serious consequences of the conflict have led to a deterioration in the living conditions of the Libyan population and reduced the capacity of the authorities to meet the basic social needs of their fellow citizens. That is why we encourage the lifting of the oil blockade throughout the country, because the resumption of production will generate the resources that Libya needs to meet the needs I mentioned earlier. To conclude, today more than ever Libya needs reconciliation; it needs the input of all its children, without exception, to build once again the strong and dignified nation it has always been. While we are committed to the triumph of justice, we are even more eager to see peace return to Libya, because without such peace there will be no justice. Indeed, to the crimes committed yesterday will be added those of today, which are even more serious and unacceptable. Libya needs our solidarity now more than ever, and it is time to act.
