Mr. Pohan (Indonesia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to extend its sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. Minister, on your delegation's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We have every confidence that under your wise
and able guidance the issues before the Council will be
brought to a successful conclusion.

Allow me also to extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Hasmy Agam, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, for his skilful stewardship of
the Council's activities last month.

My delegation welcomes the initiative to hold open
debates on several crucial issues in the Security Council
in the past few years, including today's open debate on
the agenda item entitled "Children and armed conflict".
We believe that such practices eventually lead to new,
realistic and pragmatic ideas and approaches for
overcoming and resolving the issues facing us. In this
regard, my delegation is looking forward to other
important and strategic issues being debated in the
Security Council, in order to transform it into a more
transparent, democratic and accountable Security Council,
especially as regards issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In this century, the situation of children in many
parts of the world remains critical as a result of armed
conflicts. As this problem continues to tear at the
conscience of mankind, we must be determined to meet
the challenge and overcome the problem. We share the
concern at its harmful, widespread and long-term
consequences for durable peace, security and
development.

 

In this regard, my delegation wishes to recall the
observation made by Mrs. Nafsiah Mboi, an Indonesian
expert, in her capacity as Chairperson of the Committee on
the Rights of the Child during the commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, held last July. She said that the use of children in
armed conflict was an extreme example of global
acceptance of the violation of the rights of children, and it
could no longer be tolerated.

Children are involved in armed conflicts basically in
two ways: one, as instruments of warfare; and the other, as
victims of armed conflict.

In the first instance, as was rightly pointed out by
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, in his report
contained in document A/53/482, children simply should
have no role in warfare. Children whose minds are just
beginning to take form are being used as tools for warfare,
and many if not all of these children are not fully aware of
the reasons and objectives of the armed conflict they are
participating in.

It is appalling to note that an alarming trend in recent
years is the increasing participation, both directly and
indirectly, of children in armed conflict. It is estimated that
currently more than 300,000 children are serving as soldiers
in conflicts in some part of the world.

The link of children to violence, especially in areas
affected by conflict, is largely due to the accessibility of
small arms. The international community has taken the right
track in endeavouring to institute controls on the transfer of
illicit arms, especially in zones prone to conflicts. But much
needs to be done.

Indonesia notes the efforts by many delegations, and
also by the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, to raise the legal age for
recruitment and participation in hostilities through the
adoption of an optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Efforts in other domains - such as
addressing the need to eradicate the political and socio-
economic conditions that often facilitate the recruitment and
participation of children in armed conflict, and an effective
response to the needs of child combatants in post-conflict
situations - also warrant our serious consideration.

As regards the second instance, millions of children
have already become victims of armed struggles in which
they have either taken part or merely become victims.
While we take note of these facts, we cannot ignore the
physical and psychological trauma. Millions of children
have lost parts of their bodies, mostly as a result of
mines, while many have lost their homes, parents and
possibly their dignity. All in all, many children have lost
years of education, youth and a normal life.

It is widely recognized that a sustained programme
of assistance in a post-conflict peace-building period is
critically important in order to consolidate peace and to
support rehabilitation capacities. A crucial element of
such an approach is focusing on the needs of children -
of those who are being used as instruments of an armed
conflict and of those who are victims of such conflict.

A narrow approach to this issue could not effectively
address the magnitude of the situation. A holistic
approach is therefore needed, while maintaining the
unique characteristics of each and every culture and
society. In this light, the sources of conflict should be
immediately focused on. It is worthy to note that the
nature and scope of conflict in recent times have changed
qualitatively. More and more armed conflicts are internal
in nature, taking place within existing State boundaries. In
these conflicts civilian victims - mainly women and
children - are now estimated to make up 90 per cent of
the casualties. A broadly accepted generic approach to
addressing and overcoming the situation has now become
imperative. Such an approach should be based on
principles that have enjoyed wide international support,
including those that govern relations between States.

In our View, any approach under consideration
should incorporate aspects relating to children in armed
conflict in various crucial fields such as peacekeeping,
peace-building and humanitarian aid and assistance.
Furthermore, we believe that the situation of children
would be better addressed through the establishment and
implementation of peace agreements and relief, protection
and socio-economic measures. Such approaches and
measures cannot be carried out by Governments
experiencing armed conflict acting alone; rather,
concerted, systematic and organized efforts are needed
from all actors in the regional and international
community, including the United Nations system, and
even from private citizens. In this regard, Indonesia
welcomes the work done by the Special Representative in
spearheading efforts to combine legal, political and
humanitarian strategies to promote the rehabilitation of
children, at the same time preventing their involvement in
future conflicts.

 

The future of human civilization and the future of
every individual society without doubt depend on children.
To use children in an armed conflict is to cast a shadow on
their future, for children who are exposed to violence tend
to carry in their hearts and minds fears and hatreds that
have long-term effects. Because of the sheer number of
children involved and victimized in armed conflicts around
the world, the future is at stake, especially where adequate
educational opportunities to prepare them for careers and
counselling to help them overcome the trauma of hostilities
are limited. It is self-evident that much needs to be done to
alleviate their suffering and to ensure them a rightful place
in their societies through adequate support programmes.
The international community could face a potentially
serious situation in the event that we fail to take timely and
adequate steps to deal with this problem.

Momentum to begin the process of rectifying the
situation, especially in its legal aspects, was evident this
year at the time of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It ought to have
been possible then to adopt the draft optional protocols, in
this case the one on the involvement of children in armed
conflicts. However, to the dismay and disappointment of
many Member States, they were not adopted.

We hope that today's debate will reach a satisfactory
conclusion with the adoption of a draft resolution
addressing the need to deal with the serious concerns on
children in armed conflict.

By way of conclusion, we would like to emphasize
that children are indeed our future. And for that reason,
children and their rights have been and will always be a top
priority in Indonesia's development policies. Those policies
are formulated on the premise that children's welfare is the
foundation of the well-being of a nation.

