Allow me to express once again our deepest condolences to the Indonesian delegation and to the families of the fallen peacekeeper in the attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) a few days ago. We hope for the swift recovery of the wounded soldier and expect that the perpetrators will be brought to justice. We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui for her briefing and Mr. Jamal Usseni for his valuable information and leadership in the fight against illicit mineral trafficking in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Dominican Republic is pleased that, despite tensions in the political dynamics in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the main actors have supported the efforts to contain the impact and spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However, we are concerned that, in addition to the resulting health emergency and economic imbalance, the pandemic also affects diplomatic activities aimed at strengthening regional unity, as well as the search for peaceful solutions to the border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia. The presence of troops from both countries in their respective border territories and the death of several soldiers as a result of clashes makes for a sensitive situation that could quickly devolve, with serious consequences. In that regard, we thank the Southern African Development Community for accepting to mediate, and, taking advantage of the restated willingness of both States to find a solution through diplomatic channels, we call for preventive and peaceful conflict-resolution measures. The constant level of violence and insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, triggered by confrontations, looting, kidnappings and ambushes by the Allied Democratic Forces and other armed groups against the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO, is very disturbing. It has resulted in ongoing deaths and violence against authorities and innocent civilians, including women and children, who are disproportionately affected. The Dominican Republic deplores and condemns those attacks and calls for the continued strengthening of MONUSCO's intelligence systems and the FARDC's resources, with a stronger and more coordinated joint strategy to more effectively and efficiently cope with and neutralize the armed groups while minimizing casualties. Those measures, in turn, would also help prevent other forms of violence exacerbated by the armed groups such as inter-ethnic and intercommunal clashes and human rights violations, including extrajudicial or summary executions and considerable conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, it is also essential to continue working with the Government to develop a comprehensive strategy to definitively eradicate the abominable abuses against children and conflict-related sexual violence. Due to the constant displacement of civilian populations, the aftermath of violence intensifies the humanitarian crisis. An estimated 25.6 million people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are in need of assistance, and 5.5 million are internally displaced and living in deplorable conditions. Those vulnerabilities are multiplied by the recurrence of deadly floods that destroy homes, farmland and basic infrastructure. They are further overwhelmed by several simultaneous health emergencies in the form of the Ebola virus, the measles outbreak and the current COVID-19 pandemic. In that context, we celebrate that the World Health Organization declared the end of the Ebola virus in the eastern part of the country. In conclusion, we thank MONUSCO for its efforts in helping the Congolese deal with these difficult health and safety circumstances. We also commend the arrest of Tresor Mputu Kankonde, implicated in the murder of two United Nations experts, Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp. In that respect, the Dominican Republic requests that the Under-Secretary- General, as an extraordinary measure, extend the contract of the United Nations experts assigned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo follow-up mechanism by six months. These experts already have the case knowledge and experience to conclude it and bring all perpetrators to justice. Despite all efforts, the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces security, health and economic challenges, as well as a lack of development. Those, compounded by the impact of COVID-19, could trigger a socioeconomic crisis with regional effects. In that context, the Dominican Republic reiterates the need for an urgent and coordinated regional and global strategy in response to the current and post- COVID-19 challenges. Only with comprehensive prevention, resolution and development strategies can we bring peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
