Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Sir, for organizing this debate on
a very important topic. We are also grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
comprehensive and informative briefing.

We would like once again to express our profound
concern about the lack of progress in the Middle East
peace process. In spite of occasional contacts between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides, the prospects for direct
talks have so far been deadlocked. It is clear that there
is no alternative to peaceful negotiations, and we call
on the parties to create the conditions conducive to
their resumption. Mutual confidence and continued
dedication on the part of all the parties and international
actors in the peace process are essential to achieving
tangible results.

We know that the Middle East Quartet has been
maintaining close contact with the parties in an attempt
to bring them back to the negotiation table. However,
we cannot remain oblivious to the fact that the current
situation is going nowhere. In that regard, it is pertinent
to remind the Council that responsibility for the
stalemate and possible failure of the process rests not
only with the parties concerned but, first and foremost,
with the entire international community. It is clear that
success depends on a number of critical factors, among
them the need to ensure that the process and efforts are
guided by the normative standards set by the Charter
and as well as by the goal of a comprehensive settlement
based on international law.

We express our serious concern over the continuing
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which place a tremendous burden on
civilians, cause serious obstruction to the peace
process and, more dangerously, threaten the two-State
solution and the emergence of a viable Palestinian
State. The international community must take the
necessary actions to make it clear that violence,
forcible displacements, the demolition of houses, the
construction of settlements and other illegal activities
must cease immediately and without preconditions.
Having said that, it is essential to underline once again
that, in assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must react adequately in order to
put an end to illegal practices and policies and ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected.

It is alarming that the economic, financial and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains troublesome. The issue should be
continuously addressed by the international community,
and urgent measures should be undertaken to alleviate
the suffering of people in need. It is also important
to fully utilize the advantage of cultural diversity by
promoting intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
while categorically rejecting and invalidating any
manifestation of ethnic and religious intolerance. We
reiterate our support for the application of Palestine for
admission to membership of the United Nations and
look forward to an early solution to that issue, based on
international law.

International assistance and participation in
tackling the challenges faced by the countries of the
region is vital to securing achievements and working on
shortcomings. The United Nations and its specialized
agencies and field presences, as well as regional
organizations, are best positioned to deliver such
assistance, and their efforts deserve to be adequately
recognized.

Lastly, we believe that, among other valuable
efforts and initiatives aimed at contributing to the
achievement and maintenance of regional peace and
security, the establishment of a Middle East zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction could be a unique opportunity for all States
of the region to take a collective stand on their security.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives aimed at
generating relevant discussion and facilitating the work
towards that objective.

