Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month.

Today, we meet once again to consider the subject
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a
matter of great concern, that in spite of the important
progress achieved by the international community
since the middle of the last century in developing
international law mechanisms to promote the principle
of the protection of civilians and to determine criminal
responsibility for massacres committed against
thousands of civilians in armed conflicts, we continue
to witness new and tragic forms of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Such forms
include wilful killing, rape, the confiscation and
destruction of properties, forcible displacement and
other acts of intimidation, which constitute flagrant
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. These acts, which include attacks on
humanitarian and media personnel with complete
impunity, are committed and used by warring parties as
a tool for exerting maximum political pressure to
achieve their goals in areas of conflict at the expense
of the security and safety of innocent civilians.

We believe that the reason such violations persist
is due not to the incapacity of the almost fully
integrated legal and humanitarian framework
established by the United Nations and represented in
international legal instruments on this issue -
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
its two Additional Protocols of 1977 and the
resolutions and presidential statements issued by the
Security Council on the protection of civilians - but
lies rather in the non-compliance of some states parties
with their respective obligations under these
instruments and the selective approach in their
implementation in some areas of conflict.

It is deeply regrettable that we for 19 days have
witnessed a vivid example of the contempt of some
States for the resolutions of this Council and the
exercise of double standards and selectivity in their
implementation. Israel is pursuing its barbaric military
assaults against the population of Gaza for the sixth
day after the Security Council adopted resolution 1860
(2009), which calls for an immediate and permanent
ceasefire and a full withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Gaza. In its paragraph 5, it also condemns in plain
language all violence and hostilities directed against
civilians.

Despite the adoption of this resolution, Israel has
continued to commit war crimes against the Palestinian
people in Gaza by bombarding civilian areas with
internationally banned weapons, using excessive force
and imposing severe collective punishments against
unarmed civilians, including through siege, the closure
of crossing points and the obstruction of humanitarian
assistance, in flagrant violation of the principles of
human rights and relevant international resolutions and
laws.

What is happening in Gaza Strip is testimony to
the serious impact of the international community's
failure to implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy and the selectivity of their implementation,
and to its inability to shoulder its responsibilities and
legal commitments in the protection of innocent
civilians during conflicts. The death toll among the
Palestinian people has so far surpassed 1,000 people,
40 per cent of whom are women and children, and does
not account for the missing persons and those suffering
from serious injuries and physical and mental
disabilities, whose numbers have exceeded 4,000, half
of whom are children and women. Their numbers are
increasing daily.

The United Arab Emirates supports international
efforts to find a solution to the Palestinian question
through peaceful means, including the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Annapolis Understanding, and urges
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to revisit the implementation standards
relating to the protection of civilians when it considers
the situation in existing armed conflicts, in accordance
with its resolution 1674 (2006), which recognizes the
primary responsibility of conflicting parties for
protecting civilians in armed conflicts, as well as the
shared responsibility of the international community as
a whole to assist States to shoulder their responsibility
in this regard.

In this context, we affirm the importance of the
following.

First, pressure must be exerted on Israel to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1860 (2009). It must
immediately cease its aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, fully withdraw from Gaza and open
all crossing points in order to allow for the delivery of
humanitarian aid and to alleviate the dire humanitarian
crisis being faced by Palestinian people.

Secondly, the international community must exert
pressure on Israel to resume peace negotiations, given
that the present crisis has shown the need to expedite a
serious and peaceful negotiating process. It must also
require Israel, the occupying Power, to shoulder its
responsibility and honour its previous agreements and
commitments, which would contribute to establishing
an independent Palestinian State as soon as possible.

Thirdly, an international commission of inquiry
must be established to investigate the war crimes
committed by Israel against civilians in Gaza and to
prosecute those responsible in accordance with the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the latest of
which is the resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council.

Here, we would like to reaffirm the importance of
strengthening the international role that the Security
Council must play in collaboration with specialized
departments and committees established by the
Secretariat, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council,
particularly in taking effective, swift and decisive
action to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflict
areas. That includes providing a safe and secure
environment for civilians in armed conflicts, which,
under the Charter of the United Nations, is one of the
Security Council's priority tasks in maintaining
international peace and security and in building peace.

In that connection, we emphasize the need to
develop methods for monitoring acts committed
against civilians during armed conflicts and the need
for measures to be taken to persuade all countries and
parties to conflicts throughout the world to fulfil their
commitment not to target civilians and to protect their
lives, property and legitimate interests without
applying double standards, bearing in mind the need to
fully respect the sovereignty of States and the principle
of non-interference in their internal affairs.

