Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my great honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Austria.
The Human Security Network is an informal group of
States that advocates for the greater usage of the human
security approach in policies and programmes at the
international, regional and national levels.

At the outset, let me thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their comprehensive
briefings.

Mr. Olguin Cigarroa took the Chair.

On behalf of the members of the Network, I would
like to express our strong appreciation to the presidency
of Chile for convening this very important open debate.
The Human Security Network has been traditionally
engaged in debates on critical issues in the Security
Council. We are very pleased by this timely initiative,
which appropriately highlights the connection between
inclusive development and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We welcome the adoption earlier today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, which calls on
the United Nations and its Member States to adopt
a more comprehensive and integrated approach to
peacebuilding, to promote the inclusive participation
of all stakeholders in post-conflict reconstruction,
and to adopt more preventive actions. These are core
elements of the human security approach that can
make a significant contribution to today's discussions
on the maintenance of peace and security. When
confronting multiple challenges and vulnerabilities that
affect different countries, societies and communities,
human security proposes responses that encompass
the elements of peace and security, development and
human rights - the three interdependent pillars of the
United Nations system.

Its prevention-oriented approach allows for timely
and effective policy planning that addresses the
underlying causes of threats that may endanger the
prospects for peace, stability and development. Those
underlying causes of both domestic and cross-border
conflicts include growing socioeconomic and gender
disparities, ethnic or religious tensions, the lack of
respect or denial of human rights, discrimination and
exclusion in general.

By disaggregating social and economic indicators
at the national and local levels, the human security
approach is able to uncover the various factors of
exclusion that impede women; minority, ethnic and
religious groups; and economically marginalized
populations. By engaging communities in the
development and implementation of solutions to their
daily challenges, the human security approach has led to
more effective and sustainable responses that promote
the inclusion of all relevant stakeholders, especially
women and marginalized groups; capitalizes on
existing local capacities; and promotes greater national
ownership. Such an approach must be a key element in
thwarting the emergence or spread of pervasive threats
that could constitute real obstacles or challenges to the
promotion of development, stability, peace and security.

In conflict situations, our group has constantly
emphasized the security and dignity ofcivilians affected
by armed conflicts, particularly those belonging
to more vulnerable groups. The multidimensional,
people-centred, context-specific approach that human
security proposes is also relevant in supporting the
efforts of societies in post-conflict situations and in
ensuring the better passage of critical transition periods
to greater normalization, stability and development. In
that sense, we are seeing encouraging examples for the
strengthening of institutions and the participation of
people.

In cases such as th of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the human security approach is being
applied in response to the reintegration of ex-
combatants, disenfranchised and marginalized youth,
the lack of sustainable livelihoods, struggling health
and educational services, persistent tensions among
community members, and acts of gender-based violence.
The integrated human security approach complements
various efforts led by the Security Council in post-
conflict situations.

Our challenge is to apply the human security
approach more systematically at the national level
through national ownership involving all local organs
and parties concerned, as well as across the entire
United Nations system. The Human Security Network
believes that this should allow for greater coherence and
efficiency in the use of resources and in the exchange of
good practices and lessons learned.

Ultimately, this approach would ensure that top-
down protection strategies, including strengthening
the rule of law, promoting good governance and
protecting human rights, are complemented by policies
and progammes that empower conflict-affected
communities and build social cohesion. Together, they
would foster greater participation and ensure that the
dividends of reconstruction and development, as well as
the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms, can reach all
corners of society. In conclusion, this should generally
benefit the goal of international peace and security for
all, and also provide an operational framework for the
post-2015 agenda.

