Ms. Pejanovie-Durisic' (Montenegro): First, let me
thank the Polish presidency for organizing this timely
and important open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts and for preparing an informative
concept note (S/2018/444, annex).

My country fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer European Union. I
would, however, like to make some additional remarks.

In the past few months we have been witnessing
increasing numbers of civilian casualties and worsening
trends when it comes to the protection of civilians.
Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate attacks, including
sexual and gender-based violence, against civilians and
the increasing use of siege and starvation as a method of
warfare are just a few examples. When attacks against
civilians take place and suffering happens, especially
when women and children are involved, people across
the world look to the United Nations for reassurance and
protection. This always results in further introspection
as to what more could be done in terms of prevention
and how parties to armed conflict with a military
advantage could be expected to respect international
humanitarian law.

Montenegro welcomes the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/462), which describes the state of
large-scale destruction and suffering affecting millions
of children, women and men. It is clear that it is our
joint duty to be more decisive to make our commitments
real so as to protect civilians in armed conflicts and the
refugees who have fled them. We are convinced that
there is more that the United Nations can do to prevent
conflicts and, when that fails, to end armed conflicts
through negotiated and inclusive settlements.

Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 2286 (2016). We call on other
Member States to take action on the Secretary-
General's recommendations, which will allow for its
full implementation. No country can be justified in
standing in the way of a resolution designed to allow
civilians access to food and medical assistance. All
Member States, not only those that are parties to armed
conflict, have a responsibility to take action.

Montenegro remains committed to the joint
initiative led by Switzerland and the International
Committee of the Red Cross on increasing compliance
with international humanitarian law. We underline
the importance of strengthening inter-State
cooperation and States' cooperation with international
jurisdictions to fight impunity. An important role of
the Security Council entails ensuring accountability
for such violations, including through referrals to the
International Criminal Court. Montenegro strongly
believes that human rights mechanisms could
contribute to preventing atrocities. In that regard,
increased engagement between the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council is instrumental. We are
convinced that the veto must not be used when there is
a clear responsibility to protect civilians. Montenegro
therefore endorsed the French-Mexican initiative and
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group. We call on all countries to
follow suit.

Montenegro continues to promote and build a
robust understanding of international humanitarian
law within its own institutions. Through a number
of projects and initiatives, along with support from
United Nations agencies and other international
organizations, we are ensuring that the Montenegro
army receives training on the fundamental provisions
of international law pertaining to the protection of
civilians and medical missions. Those who have been
on the ground in Afghanistan, Mali, Western Sahara or
in other peacekeeping missions already have significant
knowledge and experience, and they promote activities
aimed at raising awareness about the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as well as in peacekeeping,
on the basis of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians.

However, protecting civilians is not only the
responsibility of peacekeepers and men and women in
uniform, but also the primary responsibility of States.
Therefore, we should use the authority of the Council to
ensure that States deliver on their primary responsibility
to prevent conflict and minimize suffering. Civilians,
as well as non-governmental organizations and the
communities, play an important role. States should
regularly engage them in all their activities aimed at
protecting civilians.

Protecting civilians from the ravages of conflict is
vital to the mission of the Security Council. It remains
our main common goal and collective responsibility.
Although the challenges we face are huge, we have
to take concrete steps in strengthening the role of
the protection of civilians in the overall context of
maintaining international peace and security.

