Ms. Rodriguez Pineda (Guatemala): My delegation
appreciates the presence of Mr. Jose' Manuel Garcia
Margallo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, in
today's debate, and is grateful for the Deputy Secretary-
General's informative briefing.

Guatemala is extremely concerned about the
current situation of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory, Israel and, especially, Jerusalem. The
situation has been complicated by the increase in direct
clashes between Palestinians and Israel's security
forces, together with the expansion of settlements and
the forced displacement of Palestinians. Such violence
undermines the possibility for finding a political
horizon that meets the legitimate needs of both peoples
and can enable them to reach ajust and final settlement.
We believe that that can be achieved only through
the establishment of a Palestinian State coexisting in
peace with Israel, and not through the commission of
violent acts. It is essential that any measure designed
to maintain peace and security in the region take that
ultimate goal into account. The walls and checkpoints,
the violent responses from the security forces and the
demolition of homes, along with violent attacks by
individuals and groups and rocket fire, are not things
that will help to solve this conflict.

The most urgent challenge we are facing is to halt
the spiral of violence and preventing any further loss of
life. We are particularly concerned about the repeated
provocations that have occurred in the holy sites of
Jerusalem, as well as the disproportionate actions that
have been taken in that context. It is vital that political,
community and religious Palestinian and Israeli leaders
stand firm against terrorism, violence and incitement.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's
the rapid response and his visit to the region to ask the
parties to stop the violence.

Whatever happens, the current crisis cannot be
resolved by adopting security measures. The unending
occupation and Palestinians' reduced prospects for
their aspirations to establish a State also increase
frustration and despair, while the severe economic
situation, including the high unemployment in the area,
exacerbates such feelings. Similarly, the continued and
increasing expansion of settlements diminishes hope
and the potential for a viable Palestinian State. This loss
of any political prospects is the single most detrimental
factor contributing to the violence we are seeing.

The only thing that can break this cycle of violence
and fear is the establishment of a political horizon.
We hope that the Security Council can redouble its
efforts to create conditions conducive to a resumption
of meaningful negotiations. In that regard, we join
with the various calls that have been made to find
mechanisms that will enable us to relaunch the political
process. Similarly, we recognize the value of the
principle of shared responsibility, and in that regard, we
believe that the active diplomatic participation of the
Quartet in the Middle East peace process can generate
new momentum for the parties to take responsible steps
towards a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. We
also see the benefits that could result from an expanded
Quartet that includes other key actors in the region.

This is a good moment for us to rethink how we
can make progress and conclude the peace talks
that can enable us to work on measures aimed at
confidence-building and promoting Palestinian
reconciliation, issues that are critical to ensuring that
the parties commit to peace. We cannot stand idly by.
However, it must be the parties themselves, those with
a principal interest in reaching a mutually satisfactory
solution, who must commit to making a real and
renewed effort. It is they who must strengthen their
confidence and commitment to the option of peace and
coexistence of two States, Israel and Palestine, side by
side in peace and security.

In conclusion, Guatemala acknowledges the
enormous challenges that lie ahead, but it is our
political and historical responsibility as members of
the international community to support every possible
means and effort to overcome them.

