Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for his comprehensive briefing. I join other
Council members in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Xanana Gusmao, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, to our meeting.

Slovakia highly values President Gusmao's
personal contribution to the process of rebuilding and
reconciliation and of healing the wounds of Timor-
Leste after his nation suffered some of the worst
atrocities of modern times. I can assure him of our
continued commitment and our support for the
successful transition of Timor-Leste.

We share the evaluation of the situation and the
observations contained in the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) (S/2006/24). In that
connection, we are pleased to note that Timor-Leste is
making steady and tangible achievements in
reconstruction and State-building.

Despite remarkable progress in the establishment
of democratic institutions, there are still formidable
challenges and tasks that need to be addressed in order
to assist the country in its recovery from conflict and in
developing its capacities to achieve sustainable peace
and development. During the past three years, the
Government of Timor-Leste has proved that it is
capable of assuming ownership and responsibility for
resolving problems of transition. The lack of human
and financial resources, as well as insufficient
infrastructure and administrative capacities at this
stage, however, require the continued engagement and
assistance of the international community. In that
context, we commend UNOTIL for its activities in
supporting the development of critical State institutions
in Timor-Leste, including the police and the judiciary.

There is no doubt that the key milestone on the
road of transition will be the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2007. We
believe that the establishment of a solid legal
framework governing the elections will play a crucial
role in providing a level playing field for all and in
ensuring a transparent and credible outcome. We
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
an international political presence be retained in
Timor-Leste until the end of the electoral process in
order to better provide all the guidelines and support
necessary for the preparation and successful outcome
of the elections. In that connection, we think that the
proposal made by the President of Timor-Leste,
explained in detail in the letter from the Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/39), to create a smaller special United Nations
political office after the mandate of UNOTIL expires in
May 2006, deserves further serious consideration.

Recent incidents on the border with Indonesia
underline the necessity to address the issues of proper
training for border police and of finalizing the process
of border demarcation. We urge both Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to continue working out measures for
strengthening confidence in the border area. In that
connection, we welcome the development of contacts
between the Border Patrol Unit in Timor-Leste and its
Indonesian counterpart.

We welcome the efforts of the Governments of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia to develop good-
neighbourly relations between their countries and to
build stability and confidence through a process of
reconciliation. We commend the establishment of the
bilateral Commission for Truth and Friendship, which
is trying to achieve reconciliation and to define ways to
overcome the burden of the past.

At the same time, reconciliation must not in any
way mean that those who committed the most serious
crimes of rape and murder escape unpunished. In our
View, by overlooking the wrongs of the past in this
area, the international community would set a very
dangerous precedent. It would also send the wrong
signal to those who are committing or planning
atrocities in other parts of the world. We must break
the cycle of impunity and bring the perpetrators to
justice. The former United Nations Serious Crimes
Unit and the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation documented thousands of instances of
torture, rape and execution, which must be fully
investigated and appropriately prosecuted.

In conclusion, I would like to express
our appreciation for the excellent work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, and the UNOTIL personnel. We highly
commend them for their commitment and for the
progress made in implementing the key tasks mandated
by the Security Council. We are convinced that the
time is approaching when the issue of Timor-Leste will
graduate from the agenda of the Security Council and
will instead be transferred, as a successful case of a
resolved conflict, to the Peacebuilding Commission
and other United Nations institutions to further and
more appropriately assist the Government of Timor-
Leste in completing the process of peacebuilding and
transition.

