The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Namibia.

The 7 July signing of the Lome Peace Agreement
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) marked a watershed in
the civil conflict that engulfed the country for more than
eight years. We commend the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and
other forces for keeping a democratically elected
Government in power. Nigeria, Ghana and other countries
in the region made enormous sacrifices in this regard.

Looking back at the events that took place, it is
evident that a new culture has to be learned, a culture
without impunity and adaptive to new governance and the
rule of law. Sierra Leonean leaders need to continue to
make a conscious effort to inculcate democratic values
and belief in the worth and dignity of the human person
and to diligently dispel temptations to take recourse to
politics of revenge. Yes, the atrocities that took place
were gross, but peace is the only alternative, and that is
the option the Government of Sierra Leone has taken.

There is a pressing need to provide genuine solutions
to profound problems that are seen to have been the cause
of the conflict. We hope that all parties will have the
political will to address them. We have no doubt that the
Government will continue to work in good faith.

The social costs of resettling and rehabilitating
displaced people, refugees, amputees and demobilized ex-
combatants will be astronomical and the task daunting.
We call on the international community to contribute
generously to this effort. We reiterate our call for the
RUF to transform itself into a political party, to equitably
share the burden of nation-building with its other
compatriots as a dependable partner, with no crises of
credibility. Only then can the RUF contribute to
reconciliation and peace.

We commend ECOMOG for its efforts, and we
express our thanks and gratitude to the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands, the United States and all other donors
that have supported ECOMOG.

 

Namibia will vote in favour of this draft resolution,
and we concur with those who have proposed that the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) be further strengthened. Finally, we express
our appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sierra Leone, Mr. Francis Okelo, and
to the staff of UNOMSIL for their tireless efforts and
dedication to bringing peace to the embattled people of
Sierra Leone.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1999/874) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1260 (1999).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.

