Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): In all cultures, one of
the most important factors is the cohesion of families
and communities and the degree of nurture and
support that children receive. Indeed, one of the most
significant war traumas of all, in particular for younger
children, is simply separation from their parents. It is
universally true that such horrific experiences are so
deeply disturbing and overwhelming that a child will
try to suppress those bad memories rather than confront
them. The trauma of exposure to violence and death has
an emotional impact on generations of young people for
the rest of their lives.

Time does not heal trauma. A child must be helped
to express suffering and to confront such bad memories
with the support and guidance of an informed and
knowledgeable adult. The very act oftalking or writing
about or even acting out the traumatic events is a way
for a child to begin healing and start on the road to
recovery.

I therefore thank France, and you, Sir, for having
organized this very important open debate. I must say
that I was completely gripped by the experiences of
Junior Nzita, who shared his very real traumas with us.

Hungary fully supports the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and welcomes the
focus of today's debate on non-State armed groups.
For children, 2014 was the worst year in many
years, as the proliferation of conflicts around the world
affected tens of millions of them. Today, we have
already talked about the fact that impunity continues
to be deeply entrenched and that most perpetrators are
never held accountable for the war crimes they commit.
I believe that the recent decision of the Appeals
Chamber of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
in December of last year, was an important milestone,
since it confirmed the verdict against Thomas Lubanga,
who became the first person ever to be convicted for
the enlistment, conscription and use of children in
hostilities. We share the view of the Prosecutor of the
ICC that the decision stands as a symbol of hope and an
important step towards putting an end to the suffering
of children who are still being forced to fight, kill and
die in armed conflicts. Hungary fully supports the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, launched last year
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict.

Of course, children have always been caught
up in warfare. They usually have little choice but
to experience at a minimum the same horrors as
their parents. In such violent circumstances, girls in
particular suffer the added trauma of sexual abuse
and rape, which psychologists have identified as the
most invasive of traumatic events. Even girls who are
not physically forced to have sex may still be obliged
to trade sexual favours for food or shelter or physical
protection. Girls often face a greater risk of forced
abduction, sexual slavery and forced marriage. What
is also very frightening nowadays is the escalation
in the use of children as fighters. Extremist groups
successfully manipulate young boys and girls, and
we must find ways to counter the propaganda used
by terrorist groups to recruit susceptible children and
young people.

Hungary believes in the strength of education.
We are very concerned about the fact that attacks on
hospitals and schools have become a common feature
in most armed conflicts. The increasing use of schools
for military purposes is particularly worrying, since
that puts more children out of school and thus at an
increased risk of violence. But we truly believe that the
power of education in preventing young children from
joining extremist groups is extremely important, and
something that all of us must think about and work for.

