Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to express France's deep sympathy
for and solidarity with the United Kingdom and
Afghanistan in the wake of the terrible attacks that
struck London and Kabul.

I would like to thank President Morales for his
presence at today's meeting and express our gratitude
to the Bolivian presidency for this relevant initiative on
the topic of preventive diplomacy and transboundary
waters and congratulate it on the high quality of the
concept note, which clearly describes the problem
we are discussing today. I would like to also thank
Senegal, who, in November 2016, had the excellent idea
of organizing a debate in the Security Council on the
topic of water, peace and security (see S/PV.7818). The
discussion that we are having today owes much to this
felicitous initiative undertaken by Senegal.

I shall limit myself to three brief observations,
which I think are important.

My first comment is that water is a vital resource
at the heart of development and human rights, but
which also touches on security and peacekeeping. The
debate on transboundary waters is essential because
it is urgent and legitimate for the Security Council to
address these issues.

Access to water and sanitation was recognized
as a human right by the United Nations in 2010 in a
compromise resolution, which owes a great deal to the
efforts undertaken by the Bolivian presidency. Many
human activities depend on water resources and, at
the same time, global demand for water has grown
considerably, which is leading to an increase in pressure
being placed on water resources. These tensions will
continue to rise in the upcoming decades. The World
Bank estimates that, as a result of population growth,
the water needed for agriculture is expected to increase
by 50 per cent between now and 2050 and water needed
for energy production will increase by 85 per cent.

The pressure on water resources has major
consequences in terms of security. While
environmental factors are rarely the sole cause of
conflict, it is undeniable that access to and the use
of natural resources can contribute to the outbreak of
violence. According to the United Nations Environment
Programme, at least 40 per cent of the conflicts that
have broken out over the past 60 years are somehow
related to natural resources, such as gold, minerals and
oil, but also fertile land and water.

Conflicts related to sharing water can arise
locally among consumers, as well as among States
at a transboundary level. With regard to both
surface or underground water, conflicts related to
transboundary waters are frequent. They lead to the
unequal management of water resources and punish in
particular the poorest populations. Upstream countries
put significant pressure on downstream countries and
too often impose their rules. This then becomes a
serious issue ofjustice.

Water is a real factor of stability and fairness. It
therefore deserves our full attention and should not be
neglected in the anticipation and settlement of disputes.
Too often a source of division, water resources can
and must become a factor for cooperation and peace
between States.

My second point is that there are effective
international tools that must promote in order to
prevent water conflicts. I am of course thinking of the
two major multilateral conventions that should guide
all our action in this area: the New York Convention on
the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International
Watercourses and the Helsinki Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes. These two conventions are, to my
mind, complementary and not rivals.

The Helsinki Convention is, in some respects,
more ambitious than the New York Convention. It is
mandatory, it covers groundwater and goes further in
terms of protecting the environment. It also provides a
mechanism for dialogue and arbitration - a veritable
tool for facilitating and pacifying water management in
the context of tensions between riparian States on the
same river, lake or aquifer. I recall that the Convention
has been open to all States Members of the United
Nations since March 2016.

The principles underlying these two texts
are fundamentally similar. They are essentially
the principle of reasonable and equitable use of
transboundary waters, and an undertaking not to cause
significant harm to ones neighbours. Both texts also
provide a very comprehensive toolkit, detailed and
adapted recommendations, and good practices based on
long experience. Let us learn to make use ofthese tools,
recommendations and good practices.

I should like to add an important point about the
New York and Helsinki texts. These conventions set
down key principles but leave much leeway for the
parties concerned and do not impinge on the sovereignty
of States. Ibelieve that this is a great strength; conflicts
are resolved much better on a local or regional basis.
We need to promote governance bodies based on river
basins, as local parties are best able to assess their
needs and discuss the equitable sharing of their waters
in order to ensure sustainable and peaceful access to
their resources. To that end, we must facilitate dialogue,
propose appropriate tools and support cooperative
approaches proposed by the parties on the ground but
in no case make decisions on their behalf.

My third and last remark is of a more general
nature. Climate change exacerbates most environmental
issues and makes development issues more complex.
Water is no exception. Water resources are becoming
increasingly scarce and under increasing pressure due
to the combined effect of global warming, population
explosion and increasing water demands. The cost
of access to the resource will rise and tensions will
intensify. Some 90 per cent of natural disasters are
related to water. Floods, droughts, storms - these
disasters tend to multiply as a result of climate change.
These constraints affect the living conditions of human
beings; cause or contribute to serious humanitarian
crises, such as famine; and give rise to conflicts among
neighboring States. Water issues are thus closely linked
to the challenge of climate change. It therefore seems
to me that in order to prevent water-related conflicts,
the challenge of climate change must also be met and,
to that end, Paris Agreement on Climate Change must
be implemented.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to the Secretary-
General, who, with great foresight, has stressed the need
to decompartmentalize the approaches to sustainable
development, human rights and peace and security.
The issue of water illustrates with particular force
the concrete imperative of a comprehensive approach.
We must anticipate water-related crises, strengthen
dialogue and promote the creation of sustainable
partnerships by focusing on a long-term vision. There
is an urgent need to preserve our water resources so
as to preserve our future and that of our children in a
peaceful and sustainable environment. This is one of
the critical issues of our time, and its importance will
only grow in the coming years. France will remaining
resolutely committed in that regard.

