Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Spain will make on behalf
of the European Union.

Bulgaria is profoundly grateful to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock for his very important work as Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We would also like
to thank his colleagues at the British Mission and in
London. We warmly thank the Vice-Chairmen and all
the other members of the Committee.

We fully endorse what has just been said by my
colleagues who have spoken before me, in particular
Ambassador Levitte. Ambassador Greenstock not only
has indeed managed to show the serious-mindedness
with which we are all familiar, but he has also taken
the right approach to the daunting task before him by
giving due weight to the political and technical aspects
of the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which are intimately interrelated and often very
difficult to distinguish from one another.

I think that the great success of Sir Jeremy's work
has been due to his openness, in particular with the
media, and to his constant efforts to explain to the
international community and the general public an
activity that, ultimately, is not always very easy to
explain. My thanks go to Sir Jeremy for his excellent
work.

Bulgaria is very satisfied with the results of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. However,
we note that 46 countries have still not submitted their
national reports. We would like to voice our hope that
those countries will be able to submit their reports as
soon as possible. It is clear that there are many reasons
for those delays. In particular, as Sir Jeremy has
pointed out, for some countries the fight against
terrorism is something new, and the administrative
machinery in those countries lacks the appropriate
means to carry it out. Our delegation believes that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee should focus particular
attention on that aspect of its work and possibly come
to the Security Council with a proposal to accelerate
the preparation of these reports well in advance of the
review of the work of the Committee, which will occur
at the beginning of October.

We entirely share the view of the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee that Virtually no country
today can pride itself on having entirely achieved the
objectives set forth in resolution 1373 (2001). The
implementation of that historic resolution is a long and
evolving process.

Jean-David Levitte spoke of a world audit. That
is exactly what is happening. I think that after
identifying the scope of the problems we shall then
make our way towards identifying the means of solving
them. It is here that, in the near future, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will have to be put through its
paces.

Like delegations that have spoken before us,
Bulgaria entirely agrees that the regional approach has
great potential. We are delighted to see that this is the
approach the Committee has adopted. In that spirit, let
me note that in the very near future, quite probably at
the end of June, Bulgaria intends to organize a regional
forum of the countries of South-East Europe at which
the countries of the region will be able to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

In conclusion, I would again like to thank the
Secretariat and the independent experts for the
remarkable work they have done and express the hope
that Sir Jeremy will continue his work in the same
vein.

