Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, for having
introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(8/2016/833).

I should like also to thank Mr. Sidikou's entire
team, as well as the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for the work
that they have been doing in the country. I should like
also to thank the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
Mr. Amr Aboulatta, for his introduction in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I should like to reiterate Uruguay's commitment
to the stability and the establishment of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, not only as an
elected member of the Security Council, but also as a
country contributing troops to MONUSCO, which we
have been doing without interruption for the past 16
years.

Uruguay is deeply concerned about the stalled
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is increasing political tensions and
generating numerous incidents. There is a pressing
need to unblock that situation, and the only way to
do so is through inclusive, good-faith and transparent
dialogue among all national political actors. Political
actors, which should act in the interests of the country
and its inhabitants, have an enormous responsibility
of garnering the necessary consensus to hold credible
elections without undue delays, if they are to avoid
an escalation of tension and violence. Similarly, we
once again call upon the political groups that have not
yet joined to dialogue process to do so and to play a
constructive role that will contribute to the timely
holding of credible elections.

We are also concerned about reports on increases in
civil and political rights abuses, including violations of
the freedom speech and assembly, committed even by
Government linked forces or personnel. In that regard,
it must be clear that sooner or later those responsible
should be brought to justice and held accountable for
their actions.

Finally, Uruguay regrets every civilian death over
the past few months, including those that occurred
during the Kinshasa protests on 19 September and
those in Beni in the month of August, allegedly carried
out by armed groups.

