Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President - Foreign Minister Alfano - for
presiding over this important discussion. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this afternoon.

Several members have already spoken about
many of the specific challenges countries around the
Mediterranean face. Terrorism, illicit smuggling,
migration and development are all urgent issues that
deserve our full attention. But let us step back for a
moment. When we look at the Mediterranean, we can
see that many of those challenges originate in conflicts
in two places, that is, Syria and Libya. Both of those
conflicts began when ordinary people demanded
respect for their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Attempts by the Al-Assad and Al-Qadhafi
regimes to suppress those demands by force created
much of the instability we are now grappling with
today. The lesson is simple: the question of security
in the Mediterranean is really a question of human
dignity. When we support respect for human dignity
and the rule of law, we can achieve lasting stability.
However, ignoring such demands for human rights can
sow the seeds of future conflict.

In Syria, Al-Assad's brutality gave the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Qaida a window
of opportunity. As the Al-Assad regime rounded up,
tortured and executed thousands of people, ISIS and
Al-Qaida's violent ideology gained new traction. As
Al-Assad's regime literally starved its people and
bombed hospitals and schools, the migration exodus
began. As long as the Al-Assad regime remains in
power, the potential for instability and extremism
will remain.
In Libya, decades of misrule by Al-Qadhafi left
the country with extremely weak institutions. When
the revolution came, those institutions crumbled.
Libya became a place where ISIS was able to set up an
outpost and where illegal activity, such as trafficking
in people and arms, could thrive as well. As with
Syria, the Libyan people continue to pay a steep price.
It is now time for all Libyans to support and engage
constructively in the political process facilitated by the
United Nations to achieve national reconciliation, end
the conflict and build unified national governance and
security institutions.

Today we are facing the consequences of those
decades of tyranny. Oppression at home in Syria and
Libya created threats to international peace and security.
The answer to security challenges in the Mediterranean
must therefore not be a misguided attempt to recreate
failed political structures of the past; instead, we have
to do better. All of us in the Council must work, in word
and in deed, to support something different. We need
political solutions to conflicts in Libya and Syria that
empower people and that create strong representative
institutions over the long run. That goal has to be what
guides us in responding to the immediate challenges
of the present. Of course, there is no shortage of
immediate threats to confront. None is more pressing
than defeating ISIS and Al-Qaida.

The United States continues to lead, with important
successes against ISIS in Syria. But we have to stay
vigilant. Fighters on the run in Syria threaten to slip
across borders as they try to return home or go to third
countries. All Member States will need to increase
their defences against foreign terrorist fighters, in line
with the terms of resolution 2178 (2014). In Libya, we
partnered with the Government of National Accord
and its aligned forces as they expelled ISIS from Sirte,
which was once the principal stronghold of ISIS outside
Iraq and Syria. Yesterday, we heard from Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary
General, on his mediation efforts (see S/PV.8104).
The international community must help Special
Representative Salame and the Libyan parties advance
the country's political process, which is the only viable
way to stabilize Libya and unify national security
forces against the real threat, that is, ISIS. Armed
civil conflict among Libyans will only destabilize the
country and play into ISIS's hands.

Of course, civilians face dire risks every day from
the fighting in Syria and Libya, too. Just this week,
air strikes reportedly killed more than 50 civilians
in a market in northern Syria. These were the latest
incidents in the regime's long track record of flagrant
disregard for the lives and welfare of the Syrian people.
The Al-Assad regime's barbaric acts continue to play
right into the hands of terrorist groups and undermine
stability across the region.

We are also seeing new risks for civilians in
Libya. Just a few weeks ago, more than a dozen people
were killed and many more injured in an air strike
in the city of Derna, and its people desperately need
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access. Last
month 36 bodies were found in a mass grave not far
from Benghazi. The United States strongly condemns
those incidents. As Mr. Salame, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, stated yesterday
(see S/PV.8104), there are also concerns that a number
of the fighters who died last week in the Warshefana
area, in western Libya, were killed in a manner that
violates international law. Those responsible must now
be held accountable in order to prevent such atrocities
from happening in the future, and all sides must avoid
further escalation.

Finally, the United States agrees with many
others in the Council about the importance of
combating trafficking in persons and illicit smuggling.
Transnational criminal organizations are responsible for
so much of that illegal activity, and they are preying on
the defenceless. We continue to hear sickening reports
from victims inside Libya, including migrants who
have been raped, sold into prostitution or subjected to
forced labour. It is no surprise that those same criminal
gangs have no concern for the lives of migrants at sea,
where more than 2,900 people have died this year in the
Mediterranean alone.

We recognize the important work of the European
Union's Operation Sophia, led by Italy, in combating
smuggling and rescuing thousands of lives at sea, but
the criminals are branching out, including through the
illegal smuggling of Libyan oil and petroleum products.
That is why it was important that the Council designated
for sanctions two ships involved in the illegal petroleum
trade earlier this year, and we should use all the tools
we have to disrupt those criminal networks. But we
all have to remember where so many of the challenges
began. They began with regimes that did not respect
the dignity and rights of their peoples. Stability in the
Mediterranean is not just about addressing all of the
short-term challenges around us; it is about learning from
the recent past. It is about investing in real institutions
that protect people's rights. It is about speaking up as a
Security Council when we see Governments moving in
the wrong direction. It is about remembering that when
people are oppressed, the consequences go far beyond
the borders of any one country, and that is what we
must act on.

