The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns as gross
violations of international humanitarian law the recent
atrocities carried out against the civilian population,
particularly women and children, of Sierra Leone by
members of the Revolutionary United Front and the
deposed military junta, including widespread rape,
mutilation and slaughter. It calls for an immediate end
to all violence against civilians. The Council, in this
regard, expresses grave concern about reports of
military support being provided to the rebels. It calls
on all States to observe strictly the provisions of
resolution 1132 (1997) and to avoid any action that
might further destabilize the situation in Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council deplores the continued
resistance to the authority of the legitimate
Government of Sierra Leone and calls on all rebels to
cease their resistance, lay down their arms, and
surrender to forces of the Military Observer Group
(ECOMOG) of the Economic Community of West

African States (ECOWAS) immediately. It again
commends ECOWAS and ECOMOG for the
important role they are playing to restore peace and
security in Sierra Leone. The Council reiterates its
call for States to provide technical and logistical
support to assist ECOMOG to continue to enhance
its ability to carry out its peacekeeping role and
contribute to bringing an end to the atrocities being
committed against the people of Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
for the plight of all those affected by the continuing
insecurity, including the tens of thousands of
refugees and displaced persons. It urges all those
concerned to continue humanitarian assistance and
underscores the importance of a comprehensive
response by United Nations agencies in coordination
with the Government of Sierra Leone and with the
support of ECOMOG. The Council also recognizes
the important role played by the international
community, including the Organization of African
Unity and relevant non-governmental organizations,
to provide humanitarian assistance to civilians in
dire need in Sierra Leone. The Council commends
the Governments of neighbouring countries for their
reception of refugees and calls upon all States and
relevant international organizations to help them in
responding to the refugee crisis.

"The Security Council expresses concern for
the safety of all humanitarian personnel working in
Sierra Leone. It calls on all parties concerned to
facilitate the work of humanitarian agencies. The
Council urges the parties to protect displaced
persons seeking refuge, as well as United Nations
and humanitarian aid workers.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
made by the democratically elected Government
since its return on 10 March 1998 to restore peace
and stability and to re-establish effective
administration and the democratic process in Sierra
Leone. It encourages ECOWAS to renew its political
efforts to foster peace and stability and urges all
parties in the country to embark on the tasks of
national reconstruction, rehabilitation and
reconciliation. The Council urges all parties
concerned to respect fully international law,
including human rights and humanitarian law.

"The Security Council urges States and other
parties concerned to contribute to the trust fund to
support peacekeeping and related activities in Sierra
Leone. and to humanitarian assistance efforts.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep it advised on the situation in Sierra
Leone.

"The Security Council will remain seized of this
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

