Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations for their valuable briefings.

To start with, we are pleased with the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/432) on the latest developments
around the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017). We welcome the technical agreement signed in
February by the G-5 Sahel States, the United Nations
and the European Union, in line with the provisions
of the resolution, and we commend their efforts. We
followed with great interest the international high-
level conference on the Sahel held in Brussels on
23 February, which raised funding to cover the Joint
Force's operations for its first year. We welcome the
preliminary steps taken to operationalize the Joint
Force, and we wish it every success in its efforts to
confront the common dangers facing the States of the
region. We fully support it in its aim to prevent the
proliferation of the terrorist and extremist activity that
has significantly damaged the region. In that regard, we
would like to recall the engagement of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in supporting the Joint
Force in its efforts, which resulted in OIC resolution
45/51-POL on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, adopted
during the annual conference of its Council of Foreign
Ministers in Dhaka at the beginning of this month.

The recent developments mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report have further contributed
to strengthening the Joint Force's capacity to achieve
its goals. We appreciate the efforts of the various
United Nations bodies in providing technical support
and training and helping to set up the Joint Force in
various areas, including logistics and human rights.
The international community and the United Nations
must continue their efforts to bolster the capacities of
the Force. We call on the G-5 Sahel States to accelerate
the deployment of Joint Force contingents, ensure the
continuity of military operations and further back
up the progress that has been made in combating the
terrorist groups operating in the region.

The Joint Force is operating in a deteriorating
security situation in the Sahel. It has to deal with a range
of threats, including cross-border and international
crime and the trafficking of weapons and drugs in
the region, especially around border areas, where the
States have very little control, which enables such
items to be smuggled from one country to another. We
should step up our efforts to control such activities
through cooperation between the Joint Force and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
We support UNODC's training seminars, which play
an important role in strengthening local authorities'
capacities to prevent the flow of weapons and drugs and
trafficking in human beings.

In addition to the very difficult security situation,
the Joint Force is also operating within the framework
of a peace operation that is making limited progress,
which in turn has a negative impact on the Force's
ability to combat terrorism in Mali. We must promote
that peace process and remain committed to the recently
signed road map, which will have positive impact on the
work of the Joint Force. Nor should we underestimate
the importance of development in promoting stability
in the region. We are pleased with the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
and we welcome the continued cooperation among the
States ofthe region and the United Nations to strengthen
their capacity in the areas of the rule of law, governance
and law enforcement, which will have a direct effect on
stability and will help create an environment conducive
to supporting the work of the Joint Force. On that point,
we would like to highlight the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation's request to the Islamic Development
Bank for funding to be provided to social and economic
projects in the G-5 Sahel countries, particularly those
aimed at promoting the role of young people and the
empowerment of women.

We would like to reiterate our support for the efforts
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force to prevent the spread of
threats in the region. It would not be able to achieve its
goals without the support of the United Nations, and
Kuwait is ready to work with all the members of the
Security Council to chart the Joint Force's future plans.

