Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this, the first month of the new year, and to assure you
that you can rely on our full and effective cooperation.
I would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
our new Secretary-General. We would like to assure
him that we have every confidence in him and to wish
him every success as he carries out his important new
responsibilities.

As we all know, over the past decade the concept
of security has been expanded from one with a narrow
political and military definition to one with new
dimensions, each of which corresponds to new threats
and challenges - terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, grave human rights
violations, organized crime, the situation of fragile
States and environmental degradation. If we are to
counter these threats, we need an effective multilateral
system founded on solid international institutions and
respect for international law. For Belgium, the United
Nations, with the Security Council at its heart, plays a
crucial role in this respect.

In the context of this new concept of security it is
essential that, above and beyond pre-established and
often reductionist approaches, we recognize that, at the
end of the day, it is the security of men, women and
children that is at stake. That is why Belgium
welcomes the increased attention that the Security
Council is giving to the protection of civilians -
particularly that of women, children and other
vulnerable groups - in armed conflict. The relevant
resolutions aimed at the protection of civilians must be
effectively implemented.

In this regard, Belgium would also like to
emphasize the importance of ensuring the close
monitoring and rigorous implementation of arms
embargoes in conflict areas. Indeed, we all know that it
is first and foremost civilians who are the victims of
lack of compliance with such embargoes and, in
particular, of the abuse of small arms and light
weapons.

In this context, I would like to refer to the
principle of the responsibility to protect, which was
enshrined during the 2005 Summit and which has since
been taken up in numerous resolutions. Belgium is
fully aware that the operationalization of that principle
will require in-depth and prudent reflection. We
nonetheless believe that that principle will henceforth
be part of the conceptual acquis of the work of the
Security Council.

As we all know, terrorism represents one of the
greatest threats to international peace and security. The
Security Council plays a leading role in international
action to combat terrorism. In this regard, Belgium
welcomed the adoption by the Council of resolution
1624 (2005). By reaffirming the importance of respect
for international law, including human rights law, as
well as the importance of dialogue and understanding
among civilizations, it aims to prevent incitement to
terrorism. That is a good example of the preventive
dimension of Security Council action. In this regard,
the Council could also consider how best to counteract
hate speech and discourse inciting violence during
periods of armed conflict, as well as before conflict
breaks out or with a view to preventing the re-
emergence of conflict. As we know, words can be as
deadly as weapons.

Conflict prevention remains the main - albeit,
by definition, the less visible - task of the Security
Council as the guardian of international peace and
security. Conflict management, by contrast, is its most
visible task. Peacekeeping operations are the Council's
instrument of choice in shouldering its responsibility in
the area of international peace and security. Such
operations cover a broad range of activities, from
classic peacekeeping to multidimensional operations,
culminating in transitional administrative missions.

The range of diverse actions undertaken by the
Security Council in recent years testifies to the
growing support for a more operational and more
pragmatic approach to carrying out its functions.
Belgium welcomes that development. At the same
time, however, my country urges caution regarding the
risk of the indiscriminate proliferation of such
operations. Indeed, it is quite clear that not all crisis
situations can be resolved in that manner. The Security
Council must therefore study each case on the basis of
specific criteria in order to decide whether or not such
an approach can be used. In this context, we should
remember that before any peacekeeping force can be
deployed, there must be a peace to be managed - or,
at least, a credible political process under way.

The establishment of the Peacekeeping
Commission by the Council completes that conceptual
evolution of the work of the Security Council from
preventive diplomacy to crisis management to
peacebuilding - the only guarantee for the durability
and irreversibility of any solution. Belgium believes
that, now that the early work of the Commission has
proved to be productive, the Security Council must
henceforth consider useful interaction between those
two organs - an interaction that Belgium hopes will
be flexible, effective, pragmatic and free from
procedural hindrances.

The presence among us today of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, also provides Belgium -
which is well aware of the distinct functions and
responsibilities of the office of the Secretary-General
and of the Council - with an opportunity to state how
much it appreciates the daily dialogue and cooperation
between those two Charter organs, whose conceptual
interplay has in recent decades stimulated and enriched
the debates in the Council.

