Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We support the
Secretary-General's proposal, as contained in his 9
August report, asking authorization for a military force
of up to 4,200 personnel for the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) to assist in
the implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement. The structure and concept of the operations
are based on good political and military assessments.
This will allow us to move forward, as envisaged in
Security Council resolution 1312 (2000).

We welcome the inclusion of an elaborate public
information component. Council members and the
broader membership have been putting emphasis on
this aspect as an element of lessons learned,
particularly in Sierra Leone. The Governments of
Ethiopia and Eritrea deserve our appreciation for
agreeing to provide airtime on national radio and
television to UNMEE for public information
broadcasts.

We also note with appreciation the importance the
Secretary-General has attached to coordination with the
humanitarian community, as well as on civil-military
coordination. A mission that is planned in keeping with
the elements contained in relevant Council resolutions
and presidential statements - including those relating
to the protection of civilians and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process - will
certainly mark a significant improvement in United
Nations peacekeeping.

Of particular importance is the coordination with
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which is a
guarantor of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities.
We endorse the coordination mechanism proposed by
the Secretary-General and hope that the OAU will
ensure effective coordination and consultations with
the United Nations representatives.

At the Lome summit meeting of the OAU, the
heads of State and Government called for a speedy
deployment of the United Nations Mission. We believe
that the Council should give its authorization as soon
as possible. At the same time, it is important that the
Secretariat should complete the mission planning
process for an early deployment. Bangladesh stands
ready to participate in UNMEE.

I would like to pay tribute to President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika of Algeria and express my deep
appreciation to the OAU high-level delegation for their
contribution to the conclusion of the Agreement
between the two countries. We call upon the
Governments of the two countries to exercise the
utmost restraint and ensure full respect for the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities. Their
cooperation with the United Nations will be critically
important in the authorization, deployment and
operation of UNMEE.

The international community needs to respond
more attentively to the immediate humanitarian needs
of the war-affected peoples of Eritrea and Ethiopia.
Special attention and assistance should be given to the
drought-stricken population in Ethiopia. We call upon
the donor community to come forward with greater
generosity in response to the July 2000 revised appeal,
which calls for $87.3 million in relief aid, required by
the eight United Nations agencies.

UNMEE should be able to complete its mission
early; however, this will depend on the conclusion of a
peaceful, definitive settlement of the conflict. The two
parties should use the proximity talks responsibly so as
to fulfil their commitment to reach such a settlement.
Meanwhile, the international community should ensure
full respect for the arms embargo imposed by Council
resolution 1298 (2000).

The international community should be able to
devote its attention and resources to the reconstruction
and rehabilitation efforts in the two countries. The
priority, once the territorial disputes are resolved,
should quickly be shifted to people and their
development.

We call upon Ethiopia and Eritrea - fellow
members of the Non-Aligned Movement - to make
serious efforts to achieve an early implementation of
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities. We
encourage them to go beyond the bonds of friendship
and cooperation. They are two neighbours with a long-
shared history. We wish to see them as two friendly,
prosperous people in the comity of nations.

