Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, allow me to thank the senior
officials of both Tribunals for their briefings and for
the reports submitted to the Security Council about the
status of implementation of the Completion Strategy.

We are also grateful for the interesting proposals
contained in the revised document on the future legacy
of the Tribunals being considered by the Security
Council Working Group. We will search for the best
possible options regarding the proposed mechanisms
for the residual competence of the Tribunals.

We note that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) has been working productively
over the last six months. The arrest of four indictees
during this period and the speeding up of criminal
proceedings regarding those persons in the custody of
the Tribunal attest to some clear progress in carrying
out the tasks of the ICTR.

We welcome the efforts of the ICTR to clear their
caseload and to refer cases, when possible without any
detriment to the principles of justice to national
jurisdictions. In this context, efforts to develop the
justice system of Rwanda, including capacity-building,
to judge cases referred by the Tribunal to it become
increasingly urgent.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) report also shows that the
Tribunal is making efforts to implement its Completion
Strategy. However, one cannot fail to be worried by the
assessments contained by the President and by the
Prosecutor regarding projected dates for the
completion of trial hearings and appellate proceedings.
I would like once again to note the position of principle
of the Russian Federation, which is that both Tribunals
must be guided by the deadlines established by the
Security Council and do everything within their power
to make sure that the work is completed by the end of
2010.

The fact that certain indictees are not in the
custody of the ICTR and the ICTY cannot be
considered as justification for an unlimited extension
of the activities of these bodies. In the context of the
ICTY, we think it is important to take bolder action to
refer the cases of indictees to the consideration of the
courts of the States of the region.

I would like to dwell in particular on the question
of cooperation with the Tribunal in the area of witness
protection. I would like the Council members to look at
paragraph 35 of annex II of the report of the President
of the ICTY (S/2007/663). The Prosecutor quite
specifically refers to the presence of difficulties facing
the Tribunal in getting evidence from witnesses in the
Ramush Haradinaj et al case. Many witnesses are
refusing to provide evidence out of fear for themselves
and for their family members.

Once again, I would stress, the Prosecutor is
reporting to the Security Council that her Office would
like to draw on assistance to be provided by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in the question of witness protection.
However, the chances of this kind of assistance remain
illusory, since, according to the report, indictee
Haradinaj enjoys the support of senior representatives
of UNMIK. I would request the Prosecutor explain in
greater detail the information provided in her report in
this matter?

Once again, we call upon Security Council
members to pay very close attention to our proposal
that was put forward some time ago about working out
the Council's reaction to this scandalous situation.

