Let me begin by thanking Russia for having organized this important debate as we commemorate 20 years of the women and peace and security agenda. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-Women for their statements as well as all briefers for their compelling presentations. Twenty years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which amplifies our voice on women's full, equal and meaningful participation in peace processes. The women and peace and security agenda is an important platform for elevating women's voices and leadership. By investing in women, we invest in peace. Today the role of women in conflict situation remains crucial amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and complex tensions around the world. Against that backdrop, I would like to focus my statement on three fundamental points. First, women's participation needs to be further enhanced with regard to peace and security. We should not be complacent about what we have achieved over the past 20 years. As mentioned by Secretary-General, the percentage of women involved in major peace processes worldwide remains low - only 13 per cent of negotiators and 6 per cent of mediators. We need more women in decision-making positions and more women as negotiators and mediators. Indonesia therefore continues to support the involvement of more women mediators and negotiators. The goal is not only to bring greater legitimacy to peace processes but also to ensure the sustainability of peace itself. Last March, our Minister for Foreign Affairs initiated the Afghanistan- Indonesia Women Solidarity Network during her visit to Afghanistan. The network aims to increase the role of the women of Afghanistan in peace processes. Indonesia is also developing the Southeast Asia Network of Women Peace Negotiators and Mediators. That network will encourage more women in the region to actively participate in the process of the mediation of conflict. Secondly, the role of women peacekeepers should be continually strengthened, not by merely increasing the numbers but also by ensuring an enabling environment for them in the field and enhancing their capacity through training. Their broad skill sets are valuable assets for ensuring peace, including to protect victims of sexual violence in conflict. Hence, Indonesia initiated resolution 2538 (2020), adopted last August, as the first resolution that specifically emphasizes the valuable role of women in peacekeeping efforts. Women peacekeepers have proved themselves in the maintenance of peace as well as in community engagement, as has also been alluded by the briefer Ms. Natalia Emelianova and others. We hope that as a result of that resolution there will be more women peacekeepers in the field. Today, 157 Indonesian military and police women are serving in various missions. During the COVID-19 pandemic, our women peacekeepers have been actively promoting health education in local communities and assisting the local population in creating a healthy environment. Thirdly, a multi-stakeholder approach is central to women's participation in sustaining peace. The partnership of national authorities with local communities and civil society is essential to ensure the implementation of women's participation in peace and security processes. Since 2014, Indonesia has integrated that approach into our national action plan on strengthening women's empowerment and gender equality in social conflict. This approach has also been greatly beneficial to preventing radicalization and counter-terrorism by engaging local communities. Now, Indonesia has approximately 30 Peace Villages, which promote the role and participation of women in order to reduce the potential for violent extremism and terrorism in society. Looking to the future, Indonesia envisions the women and peace and security agenda as a transformative force leading to greater effectiveness in peacebuilding and the sustaining of peace itself. We strongly support the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Indonesia will not stop at this time. Rather, we will continue to be actively involved in the initiatives of Member States and multi-stakeholder initiatives to complement the advancement of women and peace and security agenda. I would like to echo the Secretary-General in that we cannot wait another 20 years. We have to start now. I reiterate the message of our Foreign Minister, Madame Retno Marsudi, that by investing in women, we invest in peace.
