Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the delegation of Algeria I would
like to thank you, Sir, for having organized this open
debate on the Middle East and the very dangerous
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories. I
also thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on the issue.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) and the Non-Aligned Movement.

Algeria condemns the violations and dangerous
attacks that continue to be carried out by the Israeli
occupying forces against Palestinian worshippers
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque and elsewhere in the West
Bank. We also condemn the unfair blockade of the West
Bank, which continutes despite the many international
calls to end the occupation, including resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
violations and violence are very dangerous. They
includes murder, the arrest of Palestinian worshippers
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque and others. Those measures
deprive Palestinians of the freedom of religion. We also
see attempts to displace citizens and the destruction
of houses. We condemn such horrible crimes in the
strongest terms. Furthermore, the practices of the
occupying forces constitute a flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law, without accountability and in total impunity. That
is why the international community must act to end
those heinous crimes.

My delegation expresses its full solidarity with the
people and authorities of the Palestinian State, a brother
country. We have always supported the Palestinian
people and their just cause to recover their full rights,
including full and entire recognition of the Palestinian
people under international law, on the territories that
have been occupied since 1967, and we call for the
creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

In the face of this dangerous spike in violence and
systematic efforts to Judaize the Islamic holy sites,
we call on the international community to accelerate
its joint efforts to ensure that the Palestinian people
are not left without defence and can protect the holy
sites. The criminal acts are increasing by the day, and
we therefore call on the Council to fully assume its
responsibilities and to ensure that all of its resolutions
on the subject are fully applied.

In conclusion, we restate that the capacity of the
international community to establish international
peace and security is at stake here. We need to show
solidarity, and Algeria participates generously in that
solidarity, by seeking to establish a sustainable solution
that reflects its commitment to the three pillars of
the United Nations, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights.

