At the outset, allow me to welcome the new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the United Nations, Ambassador Barbara Woodward. We look forward to fruitful cooperation with her in the Security Council, including on the issue of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). We thank the Under-Secretaries-General - Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Khare - for their informative briefings. We agree that the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, signed on 3 October, provides a unique opportunity to ensure long-term stabilization in the country and the transition to progressive development. We are heartened to see that the Sudanese authorities stand ready to directly address the issues that constitute the root causes of conflicts, including in Darfur. The significant progress made in the implementation of the Agreement over the past two months attests to that fact. We would like to recall that the success of the negotiation process is largely attributable to South Sudanese mediation efforts, including the personal efforts of President Salva Kiir Mayardit. Moreover, the progress made towards establishing friendly, neighbourly relations between the two countries is expected to have a positive impact on the entire East Africa region, once again proving the effectiveness of the formula "African solutions to African problems". The Sudan is dealing with complex challenges that have only been exacerbated during the coronavirus pandemic. Decisive measures must be taken in order to restore the economy and implement peacebuilding initiatives. In that connection, it is vital that UNITAMS reach its full capacity as swiftly as possible. Khartoum is expecting the global community to provide all the support and assistance required in a timely manner. We have carefully studied the analysis of the situation in Darfur contained in the recent joint report of the African Union and the United Nations (S/2020/1155). We agree with the recommendation to terminate the mandate of the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) on 31 December. We believe that the views of the Sudanese authorities must be prioritized when addressing the parameters of peacekeepers' withdrawal and in making arrangements for the operation of UNITAMS. The situation in Darfur has not undergone any significant negative shifts. Intercommunal clashes in certain states have not altered the overall landscape. The well-coordinated and prompt response of authorities to all such incidents, as well as the national strategy for the protection of civilians that is currently being implemented, once again point to Khartoum's earnest intent to take a comprehensive approach to stabilization. UNAMID has successfully met all its mandated tasks. It is high time that we focused on the economic revival of the region, which is the principal objective of the support that UNITAMS will provide. We also hope that the modalities for the transfer of assets and support capacities from UNAMID to UNITAMS will soon be finalized. We consider it most pertinent to recall that Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who is responsible for antagonizing the Sudan Liberation Army in the Jebel Marra area, remains the major spoiler of the peace process. He has refused to join the Agreement and to engage in dialogue with Khartoum. We reiterate our call to those with any influence over that supposedly irreconcilable spoiler to exert due pressure upon him.
