Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Modibo Toure, for his briefing. I commend
him and his team for the valuable work being undertaken
in support of the people of Guinea-Bissau. Let me also
extend my thanks to the Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

As Ambassador Vieira mentioned his country's
long-standing relations with Guinea-Bissau, I thought
that I would take this opportunity to point out that
Sweden recognized Guinea-Bissau in 1974, and we
began supporting General Assembly resolution 2911
(XXVII), concerning its self-rule, in 1968. In the
1970s and 19805, Guinea-Bissau was one of our largest
development partner countries. There is therefore a
deep and historic friendship between Sweden and
the people of Guinea-Bissau, and it is in that spirit of
friendship that we are engaging in support for Guinea-
Bissau in meeting its current complex challenges.
Moreover, we welcome the opportunity to draw
upon the strategic advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its longer-term perspective, which are
essential for sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau. The
activities financed by the Peacebuilding Fund to that
end are also important. An integrated approach from the
United Nations family in Guinea-Bissau can contribute
positively to overcoming peacebuilding challenges.
Accordingly, we welcome the efforts outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/110).

We are concerned by the ongoing and increasingly
protracted political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. A lack
of progress in resolving the stalemate undermines
peacebuilding efforts and is holding the country's social
and economic development hostage. Resolving the
crisis is therefore a prerequisite for the consolidation of
peace in the country. The six-point Bissau road map and
the Conakry Agreement remain the only legitimate way
forward, and must be implemented. The appointment
of a consensus Prime Minister, as stipulated in the
Agreement, is essential. National leaders must live up
to their commitments and meet their responsibilities.

We strongly commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
mediate among the parties to find a solution to the
political crisis. ECOWAS is playing an essential role
on behalf of the region, and we welcome its continued
efforts to reach a consensual implementation of the
road map and Conakry Agreement. We welcome
the ECOWAS decision to impose sanctions on those
impeding the Agreement's implementation. It is
important that the international community fully
support regional efforts in a concerted and coherent
manner. In that regard, we welcome the statement
issued yesterday by the African Union in support of
ECOWAS, including regarding sanctions.

Long-term peace and security in Guinea-Bissau will
be achieved only when the root causes of the conflict
are addressed. Constitutional reform, reconciliation
and political dialogue, strengthening the rule of law
through strong and inclusive institutions, and ensuring
equal access to economic opportunities are all critical
in that regard. It is also essential that all parts of society
have their voices heard. In particular, ensuring the full
and effective participation of women is crucial. We
agree with the Secretary-General that the promotion
of, and respect for, human rights is fundamental to
sustaining peace and ensuring long-term stability and
development in Guinea-Bissau. We echo the Secretary-
General's call on national authorities to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms and to refrain from
any further acts that undermine the rule of law. Let
me also take a moment to welcome the military's
neutrality and its posture of non-interference in the
political process.

Concerning the role ofthe United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
it has a crucial role to play in coordinating international
efforts to support Guinea-Bissau, not least of which is
supporting preparations for the holding of elections.
There is a need to immediately refocus the Office's
resources where they can be used most effectively,
particularly with regard to resolving the political
deadlock and supporting the electoral process so that
it moves forward. We strongly support the Office's
work to strengthen women's participation as active
peacemakers in resolving the political crisis, including
by encouraging women's mediation efforts. We
welcome in particular that the integration of gender-
sensitive perspectives into the work of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team has been accorded
the highest priority by the United Nations in Guinea-
Bissau. We look forward to hearing more about how
that process is being taken forward.

During the Peacebuilding Commission's meeting
on Guinea-Bissau on Monday this week, all key
actors, including Guinea-Bissau, expressed the view
that the Secretary-General's recommendation for a
one-year extension of the UNIOGBIS mandate should
be authorized. A one-year extension would allow for
longer-term planning and more effective support for
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
holding of elections.

The political crisis in Guinea-Bissau has gone on
for far too long. It is now time to move forward with
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
preparations for the holding of inclusive elections. The
international community, together with the region, must
stand ready to support the country on its path towards
long-term peace and development.

