Mr. Sen (India): We congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the Council presidency for the
month of October. We also congratulate Ambassador
Juan Antonio Yafiez-Barnuevo and other members of
the Spanish delegation for their able stewardship of the
Council in September.

My delegation welcomes this opportunity to
participate in the open Council to discuss the item
"Justice and the rule of law: the United Nations role".
As your compatriot and fellow diplomat turned
political leader, Paddy Ashdown, famously observed
on 28 October 2002 in his New York Times article
"What I learned in Bosnia", "In hindsight, we should
have put the establishment of the rule of law first, for
everything else depends on it."

To adhere to the time limit that the President set
earlier, I shall outline only the essential points of my
statement, since the full text has been circulated.

We have read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/616) on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. We commend the Secretary-General for
emphasizing the need to eschew a one-size-fits-all
formula and the importation of foreign models, and for
stressing the importance of basing our work on
national assessments, national participation and
national needs and aspirations.

The temptation to impose external models
without the required sensitivity to cultural and other
factors is sometimes strong on the part of many. The
emphasis on international norms and standards often
leads some Member States, international organizations
and civil society organizations down that path.

Even as we underscore the importance of
respecting international standards, the assistance
rendered to a particular society recovering from
conflict must necessarily take into account its
sociocultural specificities and particularities so that the
support rendered by the international community
becomes durable and sustainable. If the gulf between
the legal structure and social norms in that society is
too wide, giving effect to legal prescriptions could
carry far too high a socio-political cost.

To our mind, the specific function of the legal
system is crucial. Many conflicts arise from clan,
ethnic, economic and other group grievances. It is
important to address these through the process of the
administration of law itself. Segmental entities can be
transformed into healthy political competition that
sustains constitutional order. The constitutional expert
Granville Austin therefore has rightly said: "This is
messy, but it is democracy and social revolution in
action." Some traditional liberal Western models,
therefore, may not be adequate. A multicultural,
socially activist legal arrangement would, in such
cases, be far more appropriate.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
careful sequencing of activities relating to rule of law
reforms and transitional justice with post-conflict
elections is vital not only to ensure their success and
legitimacy, but also to preserve the fragile peace
processes in societies emerging from conflict. United
Nations peacekeeping operations are envisaged as
short-term interventions. While the idea of
incorporating components of rule of law reforms and
transitional justice activities in a United Nations
peacekeeping operation may be unexceptionable, we
ought to remember that building the rule of law and
fostering democracy are long-term processes. These
are beyond the capability of personnel traditionally
involved in peacekeeping operations. However, we
strongly believe that they can lay a vital foundation if
they embody, in their outlook and behaviour, a long-
standing democratic and multicultural tradition.

In the past decade, the United Nations has
resorted increasingly to establishing a wide range of
special criminal tribunals, including ad hoc criminal
tribunals, as subsidiary organs of the Security Council.
Their track record has been mixed. In some cases, they
have succeeded in establishing accountability for
perpetrators and in instilling greater public confidence
in post-conflict societies that have enabled those
societies to move forward. The exact balance between
retributive justice and the need for reconciliation
through an amnesty should be determined not a priori
or ideologically, but strictly by pragmatic
considerations of establishing an enduring peace.

The Secretary-General is also correct in being
chary of a dependence on voluntary contributions for
the financing of United Nations tribunals, not only
because of its ephemeral nature, but also because of the
undue influence that this could give to donors in
dealing with vulnerable local institutions normally
characteristic of post-conflict societies.

Any meaningful capacity-building is possible
only when the society concerned establishes its
governing institutions and supreme law and moves into
the institution-building phase. National stakeholders
have to set their reform vision and agenda for that
purpose so that they can claim local ownership. That
work can be done both multilaterally and very
effectively on a bilateral basis as well.

I should also like to refer in that context to the
capacity and expertise within the United Nations
system in the area of the rule of law and transitional
justice. We find that such expertise exists not only in
different parts of the Secretariat, but also in the
secretariats of the funds and programmes. The need for
different parts of the Secretariat, including those of the
funds and programmes, to work synergetically and in
cooperation with each other rather than in competition,
cannot be overemphasized. There has been some talk
of creating an independent structure dedicated
exclusively to that question. We are not yet convinced
of the efficacy of such an approach. At this stage,
better coordination among existing units and optimal
utilization of the existing resources are called for.

The role of the United Nations in supporting the
rule of law and transitional justice in post-conflict
societies must involve assistance through a system-
wide, coherent, needs-based approach which can result
in the consolidation of security and peace, social
justice and democracy. In all those areas, the United
Nations should play a supportive and facilitating role.

