The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Shehu
for his very informative briefing, which clearly
emphasizes that the response to terrorism cannot simply
be a military one. Various factors must come together
in order to end this genuine scourge.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Togo.

I would first like to welcome everyone, in particular
the ministers who are participating in today's debate.
Their presence reflects the attention that their countries
attach to the issue of combating terrorism around the
world and, more particularly, in Africa, as well as a
demonstration of their determination to eradicate it.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, not
only for his statement on the subject under discussion
but also for the activities he leads on behalf of our
Organization to promote peace, security and stability
wherever they are threatened, in Africa in particular.

Terrorism is a global phenomenon that requires

a global response. It strikes hundreds of innocent

people every day and casts a tragic shadow over entire

populations. Today its spectre is haunting Africa. The

Sahelo-Saharan Strip, which crosses Africa from east to

west, is dealing with a mass of security challenges that

include growing religious extremism, radical Islamism,

terrorism, trafficking of all kinds - including in human

beings, drugs and arms - organized crime, and so forth.

This is indeed one of the most disturbing threats of our

time. Established in Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and other
countries, terrorist groups, entrenched in the desert, are
becoming more and more active. They sow their seeds
in African countries whose low development levels
constitute fertile soil for their activities, conducted
against a background of tribal conflicts, porous borders
and social problems.

Terrorism is the result of a confluence of political,
security, economic, social and environmental factors
interacting with one another. It is tied to poverty,
weak governance and corruption, and thus to
underdevelopment. It is particularly active in fragile
States, countries in post-conflict situations where
the absence of the rule of law and an administrative
vacuum enable such groups to grow with complete
impunity and to extend their influence over a powerless
population with no hope for the future. In the areas
where it establishes itself it eliminates any possibility
of programmes for economic and social development.
That situation enables such organizations to take over
as de facto authorities that regulate the areas under
their control and discourage foreign investment, which
leads to the isolation, indeed the economic collapse of
the States concerned. Economic activity, both legal
commerce and illegal trafficking, and the movement of
people, whether migrating native populations, tourist
travel or non-governmental personnel, is entirely at
their mercy. Thus Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
now rules in the Sahel and has made it a fabulous gold
mine for international hostage-taking, trafficking in
cigarettes, drugs and arms, and money-laundering.

If African Governments are not given the means to
conduct an effective and lasting anti-terrorist policy by
depriving these groups of their armies, it is alarmingly
possible that we could see them consolidating not just
a terrorist arc stretching from Mauritania to Nigeria
and extending as far as the Horn of Africa, but also
developing a lawless area available to traffickers from
around the world. For ties are being created between
the drug traffickers in the Sahel and European mafias
such as Italy's Camorra and Latin-American groups,
which exchange experience and expertise with them.

It is clear that terrorism in Africa extends well
beyond the African continent. The organized criminal
activity there is constantly growing. The ports of
West Africa and the Sahel have become hubs for drug
trafficking networks, connecting suppliers of cocaine
from Latin America and hashish from various African
countries with markets in Europe and the Near East.
Trafficking in immigrants ranges between 65,000 and
120,000 people a year; trafficking in light weapons is
estimated at 8 million items a year, including 100,000
Kalashnikovs. Drugs from the Middle East and Latin
America transit through the soft underbelly that is
Africa via porous border before reaching Europe.
The number of cocaine addicts in West Africa is now
estimated at 1.5 million consumers.

It is therefore more than urgent that we find ways to
curb this new wave of narco-terrorist criminals operating
globally. How can we end this rampant scourge? Three
avenues should be explored. First, only a multi-pronged
response, no longer a strictly military one, as the
speakers before me have emphasized, will enable us
to contain narco-terrorist criminal groups. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted
in 2006 and revisited in 2012, goes in that direction.
It is essential to work on security issues together with
development problems and issues around the promotion
of human rights. It is also necessary to work upstream
from terrorism on development, education and health
programmes. It is only by ensuring the well-being of
citizens and peoples, and of the poorest and weakest in
particular, that they will be less receptive to extremist
or violent ideologies. Only the promise of development
and personal growth can compete with this sordid,
murderous alternative.

The threat in the Sahel is not only military, Islamist
and terrorist. It is also about food. Between the end
of 2011 and the middle of 2012 the number of people
dealing with food insecurity grew from 13 million to
more than 18 million, of whom 8 million are facing a
serious food crisis. Population movements inevitably
worsen an already precarious situation. Increasing
population losses, a lack of water and the loss of
revenue are the key ingredients that can transform this
humanitarian crisis into a truly political one, leading to
renewed violence.

In Mali, for example, on the eve of the lean
season, the food situation continues to worsen.
According to United Nations agencies and specialized
non-governmental organizations, one in five households
is facing severe malnutrition. A vicious cycle threatens
those populations, as they are easy to persuade and
thus provide a continuous flow of recruits for terrorist
groups seeking new blood.

Secondly, given the close links between terrorism
and drug traffickers and other trafficking groups, it
is essential that we adopt a holistic approach to fight
that phenomenon, as these elements are two facets
of the same reality. While terrorism seeks to use
violence against individuals or property to coerce or
to intimidate States and societies in order to achieve
political objectives - as is the case in certain countries,
for instance Uganda, with the Lord's Resistance
Army - it cannot be treated separately from organized
crime, which is ultimately aimed at financial gain.
Criminal groups are gradually transformed into hybrid
groups, as is the case currently with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. That group,
which was based on a political ideology, has over time
mutated into a criminal narco-terrorist group.

Similarly, the political and social demands made
by Ansar Dine are facilitated by the availability of
illicit sources of funding and cooperation with other
movements, such as Boko Haram and the Mouvement
pour l'unicite' et lejihad en Afrique de l'Ouest (MUJAO).

According to the United States Drug Enforcement
Agency, 60 per cent of terrorist groups are linked to
narcotics trafficking, and 80 per cent of the Taliban
are pursuing financial interests and not the desire to
impose a religious doctrine. In the Sahel, a third of the
jihadists are fighting to defend their ideology, while
the remaining two-thirds pursue social or financial
interests.

The response to these new forms of crime must be
international. The international community needs to
develop, in consultation with the countries concerned,
a global strategy embodied in a number of long-
term policy, diplomatic, socioeconomic and security
initiatives. Such a strategy should seek to assist in
improved governance, which should involve effective
justice and the willingness to issue arrest warrants
against those responsible for abuses. It should enhance
the fight against youth unemployment, as highlighted
by the Secretary-General and the Director General
of the Intergovernmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa. It should seek
better control over conventional arms transfers to the
continent's interior. Since the Arab spring, there has
been a proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
The transparency of any arms deal should be confirmed
by a designated African authority.

The strategy should also seek to achieve better
border control. Following the conflict in Mali, new
transit routes for cocaine have already opened up in
some countries of Central Africa, according to the
French criminologist Xavier Raufer. The strategy must
focus on the regional approach to mitigate the risk of
terrorist migration, in particular in Mali because of
Operation Serval. We must be aware that the war in
Mali is not without consequences, and several West
African capitals have been cited by the MUJAO as
potential targets for attacks.

The strategy must further seek the greater
involvement of the African continent in the international
debate on terrorism and the global management of
that scourge, as well as closer coordination between
the African countries and between Africa and its
international partners. The strategy must support
the ownership of African countries and regional
organizations in the fight against terrorism within their
territory. In that respect, I commend the outstanding
work by the African Union, which took a number of
steps in the right direction at its ministerial meeting on
17 March, such as the strengthening of border security,
exchanges of information and national capacity-
building through experience sharing, training and
equipment.

Thirdly, to implement those measures, it is urgent
that the partner countries honour their commitments
with respect to official development assistance.
According to the most recent report of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development for 2012,
official development assistance fell by 4 per cent in real
terms between 2011 and 2012, after having fallen by
2 per cent in 2011. Total global official development
assistance amounted to $125 billion in 2012,
representing 0.29 per cent of the combined national
wealth of the various donors, as compared to 0.31 per
cent in 2011. That does not seem fair to me, since we
know that poor countries are facing new challenges
for which they are not necessarily responsible and
which are clearly the result of the furious pace of
industrialization by wealthy countries. I am thinking in
particular of the devastating effects of climate change
on our countries. Nevertheless, I would like to thank
Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway, the Netherlands and
Sweden for having met and sometimes even exceeded
their official development assistance commitments.

The figures are sufficiently clear and speak for
themselves. The challenges are immense and the
financial needs considerable. As President Bouteflika
said way back in 2002, the fight against poverty is
perhaps the first essential element in the fight against
terrorism, since while poverty is humanly and morally
unacceptable, it also destroys human virtues and the
bases of social solidarity.

While I urgently appeal to all of our partner
countries to make an effort in terms of official
development assistance. However, we must also find
other sources of funding. I am thinking in particular of
the tax on international financial transactions. Its basic
purpose was not to bridge the gaps created by banks
in the partner countries but to uncover new resources
for official development assistance. Eleven members
of the European Union agreed to launch a tax on the
Community's international financial transactions
through strengthened cooperation, starting in February
2013. I welcome that measure, which will free up large
amounts of funding, some of which, I hope, will be
devoted to international aid. I would like to thank the
President of the French Republic, who has committed
here at the United Nations to devote 10 per cent of such
assistance to development and the fight against health
issues and pandemics.

Only subregional and international cooperation
will allow us to fight criminal drug trafficking
groups. Without the support of the international
community, the African continent will not know how
to defeat that scourge, which infects States, corrupts
Governments and literally transforms people into
the slaves of the twenty-first century. Only global
governance - a world Government, as Jacques Attali
of France says - developing effective policies would
counterbalance the growing crime that all governments
face.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2013/5.

It is so decided.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

