Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join others in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Jawed
Ludin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, and to thank him very much for his
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2011/772*). We are very appreciative of the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. I would also like to join others
in appreciating all the work that Mr. De Mistura has
done in Afghanistan and to congratulate him on his
new appointment as undersecretary at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs in his country.

We are pleased that the Bonn Conference was
well attended. We would like to congratulate
Afghanistan for its outstanding chairmanship and to
thank Germany for hosting that important Conference.
Coming close on the heels of the Istanbul Conference,
which provided new and better regional cooperation,
the Bonn Conference provided an opportunity to
comprehensively review developments in Afghanistan
during the past decade and to chart the collective
vision of the international community for the future.

The outcome, as embodied in the Bonn
Conference conclusions, is an expression of the
international community's determination and political
commitment to sustained long-term engagement with
Afghanistan. To realize that vision, we need to back up
our commitments with more resources and actions. If
the Afghan Government assumes full ownership, it also
needs support for economic development. We hope that
the upcoming conferences in 2012 - the Chicago
conference on security in May, the Kabul conference
on regional cooperation in June and the Tokyo
conference on development in July - will ensure the
continued engagement of the international community
in Afghanistan's growth.

Afghanistan today faces at least four deficits,
primarily with respect to security, governance,
development and investment. Afghanistan will require
enormous assistance for a long time if it is to
adequately address those four deficits. There is real
danger that, as international forces withdraw from a
combat role and in numbers, there will be a transition
recession, namely, that attention and aid will decline
just when Afghan Government security demands
increase. It is important that we draw the right lessons
from our past mistakes. We should not let Afghanistan
slip back. We need to avert the possibility that
Afghanistan could be let down or made to feel
abandoned by a withdrawal of assistance, both in terms
of quantity and in quality post-2014. Afghanistan's
security can only be ensured through non-interference
in its internal affairs.

Concerted international and regional efforts are
imperative for laying the foundations of lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan. It is important that the
ongoing transition remain Afghan-owned and that it be
carried out in a systematic manner, taking into account
the realities on the ground. The transition must be
multifaceted and should ensure the protection and
promotion of the human rights of all Afghans and lead
to strengthening of the Afghan State and its
institutions.

First and foremost, Afghanistan needs assistance
and support to build its capacity to tackle the critical
challenges of terrorism, including suicide terrorism, the
religious extremism that fuels it and the drug
trafficking that sustains it. We are seriously concerned
that the insurgency remains resilient. There has been
no let-up in terrorist violence, and the security gains
are still tenuous. Besides the targeting of high-profile
political and public figures, innocent civilians have
been repeatedly targeted by the Taliban, even on
solemn and auspicious occasions.

As we have repeatedly highlighted, terrorism
finds sustenance and support from a dangerous osmosis
of ideologies, ambitions, training and operations
among the syndicates of terrorism in the region, with
suicide terrorism as its main technique and targets not
limited to Afghanistan. We need concerted action to
isolate and root out the syndicate of terrorism, which
includes elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar-
e-Taiba and other terrorist and extremist groups,
operating mainly from outside Afghanistan's borders.
The groups are ideologically and operationally fused,
and their bonds have strengthened over the years. We
need resolute determination and political will to deal
firmly with safe havens for terrorist groups outside
Afghanistan's borders in the region.

Our vision for the period of transition must also
take into account the conditions on the ground and the
capacity of Afghanistan's security forces to preserve
the sovereignty, independence and integrity of the
nation. We support further strengthening of the Afghan
National Security Forces, which must go hand in hand
with strengthening their training and equipping and
with financing and developing their capabilities
beyond the transition period.

In addition to security, we also need concomitant
progress on the development front. That requires
market access, foreign investment and a coherent
international economic strategy for Afghanistan. It also
implies greater coordination and further streamlining
of the international community's development-related
efforts, including aligning assistance with Afghanistan
national priorities.

India has age-old historical, cultural,
civilizational and economic ties with neighbouring
Afghanistan. During the past decade our relationship
has been renewed and consolidated by India's
contribution to the rebuilding and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. India fully supports a genuinely Afghan-
led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-driven peace and
reconciliation process - as opposed to an
internationally led process - accompanied by an
inclusive political process and intra-Afghan dialogue
with those who renounce violence, cut off ties to
terrorist groups, abide by the Afghan Constitution and
are committed to the protection of human rights,
including the rights of women.

India believes in a strong, independent,
sovereign, stable, united, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan, at peace with itself and its neighbours.
Recent history has shown that an end to Afghanistan's
suffering requires an end to external interference in its
internal affairs. India has pledged up to $2 billion in
development and humanitarian assistance and signed a
comprehensive strategic partnership agreement with
Afghanistan in October, looking at 2014 and beyond.
The agreement creates an institutional framework for
our future cooperation in the fields of political and
security issues, trade and economy, capacity-building
and education and social, cultural, civil society and
people-to-people relations.

We offer our growing market to Afghanistan's
products. Last month, India announced the virtual
elimination of sensitive lists affecting exports from all
least developed countries in the South Asian region to
India. India is assisting Afghanistan in building an
agricultural university to tap the potential of
agriculture in Afghanistan. We have extended our
assistance to Afghanistan for capacity-building and
increased the number of civil scholarships offered to
Afghanistan, so as to enable more students from
Afghanistan to get the requisite training in art, culture,
technology and other areas in order to further the
process of nation-building in Afghanistan.

We are also prepared to make long-term
investments in Afghanistan. Indian companies are
willing to invest up to $10 billion in the mining sector
and in setting up a steel plant and related infrastructure
in Afghanistan. Recently, an Indian consortium was
awarded mining rights for three blocks of the Hajigak
iron ore deposits by the Government of Afghanistan.

Those are concrete manifestations of our long-
term political commitment to Afghanistan. If others do
the same, we could set off a virtuous cycle of healthy
economic development in Afghanistan that benefits
Afghanistan and the region and start, as President
Karzai has called it, a cooperative, rather than a
competitive, great game in the region.

Afghanistan's growth strategy is built on the
country's comparative advantage consisting of
abundant natural resources and its strategic
geographical location. We see Afghanistan as a hub
linking the Middle East, West Asia, Central Asia and
South Asia through trade and transit routes, railways
and highways, energy pipelines and electricity
networks, economic projects and cross-investments. It
is our expectation that such cooperation would not only
be at the intergovernmental level but would also
involve civil society and business as stakeholders.

The greatest need today is for the Afghan people
to have peace and stability. They deserve to live in
peace and to decide their future themselves, without
outside interference, coercion and intimidation. All
countries of the region must work to facilitate that. The
international community as a whole needs to work with
renewed vigour and unity of purpose towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government in
seeking solutions that are inclusive and led by the
Afghan people themselves.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that India
appreciates and supports the good work being done by
UNAMA. I would also like to welcome the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jan
Kubis, and to assure him of our full support.

