Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Ambassadors of
the United States and the United Kingdom for their
briefings on the activities carried out by their countries
in Iraq in their capacity as the coalition established as
the authority in Iraq and in accordance with the
obligations imposed upon them by international
humanitarian law as occupying Powers as well as by
virtue of Security Council resolution 1483 (2003). We
are grateful for those briefings because they provide us
with information that is essential for the Security
Council to be able to assess conditions in Iraq and
properly channel the efforts of the United Nations in
that country.

Mexico perceived the news of the attack on
United Nations headquarters in Iraq last Tuesday as an
act of aggression against our own country and an attack
on all members of the United Nations. Mexico's
President and its Minister for Foreign Affairs have
already conveyed our condolences on behalf of all
Mexicans to the Secretary-General, the entire staff of
the United Nations and the leaders of the countries
whose nationals were victims of that devious and
abominable act of terrorism. As both a cause and a
method, terrorism is nothing but an irrational
expression of hatred and a dehumanizing act. We must
not become fearful because of terrorism or yield in our
efforts to combat it. Mexico believes that the Security
Council and its members must take very seriously the
issue of protecting the humanitarian staff of the United
Nations, the international community and non-
governmental organizations, especially in conflict
situations. A deliberate attack against humanitarian
staff such as the one that took place in Iraq constitutes
a war crime and a crime against humanity that must be
prosecuted as such. The international community must
unite its efforts to ensure that those responsible answer
for their actions accordingly. The Security Council
must also send a very clear message and take concrete
and effective steps to increase protection and
strengthen the instruments protecting humanitarian
staff. My country will remain vigilant in that regard
and will redouble its efforts to have the Council take
effective steps towards that end.

Mexico mourns the death of Sergio Vieira de
Mello. Just two months after having arrived in Iraq, his
energy, conviction, talent, sensitivity and skill as an
international civil servant made an indelible mark on
Iraq. His example and perseverance will continue to be
part of the spirit of the Organization and of every
United Nations staff member remaining in Iraq. In
fulfilling the Council's mandate, Mr. Vieira de Mello
began to work immediately in support of the efforts of
the people of Iraq to regain their sovereignty and end
the military occupation. He did so by setting up
genuinely representative bodies that could lead to the
emergence of a Government capable of effectively
exercising Iraq's sovereignty. Mr. Vieira de Mello
assumed the role of interlocutor with spirited
determination. Instead of locking himself up in his
office, Mr. Vieira de Mello travelled throughout the
country to speak to every sector of society, thereby
getting a very clear idea of what the Iraqi people
wanted. Shortly before his death, he told a Brazilian
newspaper that the coalition forces needed to give the
Iraqi people greater confidence and send the signal that
the occupation is temporary by announcing a timetable
for their withdrawal. Mr. Vieira de Mello added that
this would reduce tension among the population and
probably also put an end to attacks on foreign soldiers.
Having heard the briefings provided to the
Security Council this morning by the United States and
the United Kingdom, we express our hope that the
appeals made by Mr. Vieira de Mello and the
Secretary-General will be heeded, and that very soon a
timetable will be set for the withdrawal of military
occupation, as well as a timetable for the establishment
of a legitimate, representative political authority that
will reclaim the right of the Iraqi people to decide on
their own future. Without a clear horizon in this regard,
the reconstruction of Iraq will be increasingly difficult.

The United Nations has been attacked by
terrorism in Iraq; we all have been attacked. But those
who will feel the effects of this act of aggression the
most - its most direct victims - are the Iraqis
themselves, the people of that country. The United
Nations is not a party to the conflict. The United
Nations is in Iraq side by side with the Iraqi people,
and this is certainly the framework in which a solution
must be found. Only the United Nations has, in its
Charter, the legal mandate, the moral and political
authority and the international legitimacy to confront
the most serious challenges to international peace and
security. That is why the United Nations must not only
continue to fulfil its tasks in Iraq; its efforts must have
greater depth, and its support for the Iraqi people must
be yet more vigorous.

The United Nations must also support, organize
and channel international efforts in support of Iraq. In
current circumstances, and in accordance with
resolution 1483 (2003) and with international law, the
authority emanating from the occupying Powers is
responsible for security in the territory of Iraq.
Independently, the United Nations, through the Mission
established by the Council, is conducting humanitarian
action in support of the economic, social and political
reconstruction of the country.

The harsh blow dealt the United Nations by that
terrorist attack obliges us to reaffirm the presence of
the United Nations in Iraq and to broaden it, and
perhaps also to reformulate the terms of our presence
there. Towards that end, the United Nations must
continue actively to deal with the situation in Iraq.

My country will be examining the reports
submitted to us by Ambassadors Jones Parry and
Negroponte, in accordance with resolution 1483
(2003). In that context, we will participate in the
Council's deliberations on the future of the United
Nations in Iraq. My country considers that the situation
in Iraq is critical, with the potential for extremely grave
consequences for its neighbours and for international
peace and security.

We share the View expressed around this table
that Iraq needs the support, the presence and the
renewed efforts of the international community in order
to restore peace and security as well as the rule of law
and to recover its sovereignty. It is the responsibility of
the Council to decide on the best way of organizing
these efforts and to guide and direct them. The
humanitarian presence in Iraq depends on this, as does
the channeling of effective resources for
reconstruction.

Mexico believes that the Organization must
provide guidance for all of the efforts and endeavours
of the international community in Iraq. That is our
conviction.

