The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 24 March 2000 on
developments in Guinea-Bissau (S/2000/250).

"The Security Council pays tribute to the people
of Guinea-Bissau for the success of the transitional
process which has led to the organization of free, fair
and transparent elections. It congratulates the
Representative of the Secretary-General, the staff of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and the Members of the
United Nations for all they have done to assist the
people of Guinea-Bissau in this task. The Council also
thanks the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), Member
States which contributed to the trust fund established
to support the activities of UN OGBIS and the Friends
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for their
contributions to consolidating peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council welcomes the swearing in
of President Kumba Yala on 17 February 2000 and
the return to constitutional and democratic order in
Guinea-Bissau following the holding of free and fair
presidential and legislative elections. The Council
affirms that all concerned, particularly the former
military junta, elections, as part of the Abuja
Accord (S/ 1998/ 1028, annex).

"The Security Council encourages all concerned
in Guinea-Bissau to work together closely in a spirit
of tolerance to strengthen democratic values, to
protect the rule of law, to depoliticize the army and
to safeguard human rights. The Council supports the
efforts made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
redefine the role of the military in Guinea-Bissau in
accordance with the rule of law and democracy.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the newly elected Government of Guinea-Bissau and
encourages the new authorities to develop and to
implement programmes devised to consolidate peace
and national reconciliation. The Council calls on the
international community to support the
Government's three-month transitional programme,
pending the organization of a new round-table
conference. The Council agrees with the comment
made by the Secretary-General, in paragraph 24 of
his report, to the effect that sustained support of the
international community is crucial for the
consolidation of the progress achieved so far, and
for helping Guinea-Bissau lay a durable foundation
for a better life for its people."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/ll.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.
