Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia deeply regrets
that a vote was called today. It was unnecessary and,
as has been said, we have all lost. We have valued the
dialogue with Kenya and the African Union (AU) on
this very difficult question and believe that further
dialogue was needed. The concerns of Kenya and
the AU were clearly conveyed to the Council by the
African Union ministerial Contact Group. We listened
carefully. There was a genuine willingness on the part
of all Council members to consider those concerns.

Australia certainly understands the security
challenges that Kenya faces. We recognize that
the security situation in East Africa is volatile and
precarious, with serious threats that are flowing across
borders with deadly results. We acknowledge that
President Kenytta and Deputy President Ruto face a
serious challenge in trying to meet their trial obligations
at the same time as devoting their attention to tackling
security threats in their country and the region. But that
challenge must be balanced against the need to preserve
the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
support of international peace and security.

Australia is a staunch supporter of the ICC,
the principles it embodies and the integrity and
independence of the Court, which are central to its
mandate to end impunity for serious international
crimes. We consider that Security Council action under
article 16 of the Rome Statute to defer an investigation
or prosecution should be taken only in exceptional
circumstances when the proceedings themselves
threaten international peace and security and alternative
options have been exhausted. That threshold was not
met on this occasion, and therefore we were not able to
support the draft resolution.
In any case, there were real alternatives to pressing
ahead with a divisive vote in the Council on the question
of deferral. The ICC Trial Chamber has already
postponed the start of President Kenyatta's trial until
5 February 2014, at the request of his defence team.
The Assembly of States Parties will meet next week,
and constructive work is already under way by parties
on proposed amendments to the rules of procedure and
evidence to help address Kenya's concerns. Australia
will continue to listen closely to African States parties'
views at the Assembly and will adopt a responsive and
flexible approach to any proposal that States parties
bring to the Assembly for its consideration.

Australia is determined to do what it can to ensure
that President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto
are able to fulfil their constitutional responsibilities.
In turn, we trust that Kenya and other African States,
particularly those with relevant obligations under
the Rome Statute or resolutions of the Council, will
cooperate in full with the ICC to ensure that the
Court can continue to play its role in contributing to
our common objective of deterring the commission
of serious international crimes, which is intrinsic to
achieving peace and security. We are also determined
to continue to work to strengthen the relationship
between the Council and the African Union, as was
cited so well by the observer of the AU in the Council
just a few months ago: "The United Nations needs a
strong African Union, and the African Union needs a
strong United Nations" (S/PV. 7015, p. 7).

