Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September.

I also wish to welcome the adoption of resolution
2376 (2017), on extending for another year the mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). I should like to make several comments in

that regard.
First, we must base our work on the principle of
national ownership - a crucial principle referred
to in a number of the Council's previous resolutions.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya is a special political mission with a
mandate to facilitate the political process in Libya and
to bring together the various parties in the country. We
are aware of the fact that the political and institutional
divisions are the key reason for the various challenges
faced today by the Libyan State. We need a separation
of powers into the legislative, executive and judicial
branches. And we need a single, unified army that
operates under civilian authority.

Secondly, the issue of illegal migration is also a
major challenge for my country. This issue is of course
linked to the political and institutional divisions that
prevail in the country and the volatile security situation.
We know that migrants are living in incredibly difficult
conditions. That, too, is linked to the lack of stability in
my country. We understand the concerns expressed by
host States. However, the political crisis is the crisis that
needs to be resolved. That is the key to allowing us to
overcome all of the other challenges facing my country.
We also emphasize the fact that illegal migration is
an international issue, and therefore we need to find
an international solution to that multidimensional
problem. In addition, we Will need to tackle the root
causes of the crisis - not simply its symptoms. Transit
countries such as Libya cannot manage the problem
alone. Moreover, we need to work in coordination with
States of origin. And we need to tackle the criminal
organizations that help migrants transit through Libya.

The overarching aim of UNSMIL is political
stability. We must therefore put in place a
comprehensive development plan and work towards
rebuilding my country. We also need to create job
opportunities, including providing opportunities
for workers from neighbouring countries. All of that
needs to be undertaken Within a legal framework that
makes it possible for migrant workers in my country
to operate in an environment that allows them fully to
enjoy their rights.

We held various discussions with a number of
members of the Council in order to incorporate into
today's resolution language pertaining to national
ownership and coordination with the Government national ownership was not referred to as we asked that
of National Accord. Unfortunately, our suggestions it be. That was an entirely legitimate demand.

were not included in the resolution, and the concept of The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
