Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for leading the work of the Council on
this memorable day for the international community,
which is witnessing the birth of a new State.

It is a great honour and a pleasure for me to
convey the congratulations of the President of the
Republic of Bulgaria, Mr. Georgi Parvanov, to the
President and the people of East Timor on the
proclamation of the independence of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. This historic event is the
happy outcome of the East Timorese people's long
struggle for national independence. In conformity with
the norms of international law and established practice,
my country considers the telegram of congratulations
sent by the Bulgarian President to His Excellency
Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, President of East
Timor, as the instrument of Bulgaria's recognition of
the Democratic Republic of East Timor.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria endorses the statement made earlier by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. On the occasion of this memorable event, I
should like to add a few words in my national capacity.

My country highly appreciates the active role and
the personal commitment of the Secretary-General in
the effective coordination of the activities of the United
Nations system in East Timor. My delegation thanks
the Special Representative for East Timor and
Transitional Administrator, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
and the team of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) for their
outstanding work and dedication. I should also
acknowledge the assistance provided by non-
governmental organizations to the East Timorese
people. The people and the leaders of East Timor
undoubtedly have the principal credit for the
independence of their country.

I pay tribute to the constructive participation of
Portugal, to the assistance and the essential support of
Australia and of New Zealand, and to the role of
Indonesia and its President, Megawati Soekarnoputri,
as well as to that of Japan, which have all contributed
decisively to the birth of a new State. After the General
Assembly's adoption of its resolution 56/282, removing
East Timor from the list of non-self-governing
territories, the new and sovereign State is a full-fledged
member of the international community. We are
convinced that, under the leadership of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) will succeed in the
mandate conferred upon it by resolution 1410 (2002).

In conclusion, Bulgaria fully supports the
presidential statement on East Timor to be made at the
conclusion of this meeting.

