Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The members of the Security Council will
recall that, when we received the report of the
Secretary-General in May, the Russian delegation
expressed its willingness to work constructively with
partners on agreeing to a substantive draft resolution of
the Council on the future mandate of a United Nations
presence in the region of the Abkhaz/Georgian border.
We therefore stated that the corrected parameters for a
temporary security regime and mission mandate
proposed by the Secretary-General could be taken as
the basis of a mandate for the new United Nations
stabilization mission proposed in the report.

The mandate of the current United Nations
presence in the region will expire in a few hours. Over
the past two weeks, the Group of Friends has held
intensive consultations for the purpose of agreeing to a
draft resolution on this issue. The positions of Russia
and the Republic of Abkhazia in support of maintaining
the useful role of the United Nations observers in the
Caucasus is well known.

In fact, the earlier mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) ceased to
exist, owing to the Georgian aggression against South
Ossetia in August last year and Georgia's subsequent
secession from the Moscow Agreement on a Ceasefire
and Separation of Forces of l4 May 1994. There is no
point in extending it since it is built on old realities.
Guaranteeing Georgia's neighbours that there would be
no attack from Georgia, and boosting support for the
stability and security in that region, can only be done
with a new security regime on the Georgian-Abkhaz
border.

In that context, it is very obvious that, bearing in
mind the new political and legal conditions, the
majority of old terms and terminology used in the
international documents cannot be applied. The
international community must clearly understand all
consequences of the wanton attack on peaceful
Tskhinvali on 8 August 2008. The Saakashvili regime
ended the territorial integrity of its country itself, and
09-37028
two new States emerged on the world map - the
Republic of Abkhazia and the Republic of South
Ossetia.

However, we suggested that in the current
realities such a draft Council resolution would have
established a new security regime with politically
incorrect provisions and old, contradictory terms. In
fact, it was aimed at affirming the territorial integrity
of Georgia and at denying the existence of Abkhazia as
a State. Obviously, the Russian side could not agree to
that.

During the work in the Group of Friends of
Georgia, we gave our partners a compromise draft
resolution with a number of concrete measures to
ensure security and support for stability on the border
of Georgia and Abkhazia, including impartial
monitoring by UNOMIG. Our proposals were part of
the latest recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the matter. Thus, the Russian draft resolution could
have become a realistic basis for continuing
constructive international interaction on the basis of a
United Nations presence in the region.

Based on the European Union Monitoring
Mission in Georgia, which was agreed within the
Geneva discussions of the joint mechanisms to prevent
and react to incidents, developing a new mission
mandate would have allowed us to arrange the practical
cooperation of all interested parties to strengthen
security and to restore trust in this turbulent region in
the Transcaucasia.

However, our Western partners were
unfortunately not able to accept that approach. They
tried to pursue a political chimera. How could anyone
seriously expect that the new mission would be called
an observer mission in Georgia, since it would operate
in both Georgia and in Abkhazia? There was stubborn
insistence on including a reference to resolution 1808
(2008), which was adopted in April 2008 even before
the Georgian aggression that changed the political
landscape in Transcaucasia.

On 14 June, a number of Council members, who
refused to adopt Russia's pragmatic solution, said that
they wanted a new technical extension of the old
Mission mandate and once again wanted to insert a
reference to the old resolution 1808 (2008). In that
regard, it should be recalled that the Mission's mandate
has been rolled over for periods of four months on two
occasions - in October 2008 and February 2009. We
09-37028

are convinced that the time has come for appropriate
reflection in international documents of the new
military and political position of States in the region.

Nevertheless, once again demonstrating our
constructive approach, the Russian delegation
expressed its willingness for a new technical extension
of the Mission for a month, in the first instance, to
continue in-depth dialogue. That decision, however,
was to be taken without advance political implications.
However, our partners preferred poison to medicine.
We can only regret that.

With regard to the draft resolution on the
Council's table, the Russian delegation cannot support
it and allow its adoption, for the reasons that we have
indicated. It is difficult to say what the sponsors were
thinking of in putting to the vote a draft resolution that
is clearly unacceptable. They were not thinking of the
interests of strengthening stability in Transcaucasia.

The main sponsors of Georgian aggression
against South Ossetia have gone from the political
scene, but their shadows still loom large among us. We
really must get rid of that apparition. Political wisdom
is not to be found in blind adherence to the vestiges of
past thinking, but in showing restrained approaches,
bearing in mind current realities. Thus, full
responsibility for bringing to an end the United Nations
presence in Transcaucasia lies with our partners.

For our part, the Russian Federation will continue
to undertake efforts aimed at ensuring the steadfast
security of the new young States in Transcaucasia and
the socio-economic development of their peoples.

