Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and wish you success in leading the work of the
Council to its desired outcome. I would also like to
express similar appreciation and thanks to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of France, for his efforts
in conducting the business of the Council during the
past month.

Less than a month ago, the Security Council met
to discuss the heinous crime committed by the
Government of Israel when it assassinated Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin and his comrades as they left the
mosque in Gaza City. Because the Council did not
condemn that terrorist act, Israel continued to kill,
destroy and violate international law. It killed
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi in an aerial attack against
the car he was in. He fell victim to this unjustified,
pointless act, which also claimed the lives of three
Palestinians who were with him.

How long will the Council remain powerless to
condemn Israeli terrorism and to adopt a position
reflecting the interests of justice and equality among
peoples? Where is the justice in viewing extrajudicial
killing as a right under the law of the jungle, while
considering it terrorism and aggression when the victim
rises up to defend himself and his right to liberate his
own territory? How can we explain the passivity of the
Security Council in the face of Israel's arrogance and
defiance of all international laws, rules and
conventions? We hear only meek voices here and there,
whispering appeals and calling for the exercise of self-
restraint. How long will Israel remain above the law? If
the Council's negative and passive attitude can be
relied on, it will do so until it has taken out the entire
Palestinian leadership.

We condemn the policy of assassination, which
will lead only to further escalation and violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories and presage disastrous
consequences. We call on the international community
to provide international protection for the Palestinians
in facing Israeli terrorism. We must move seriously and
immediately in the Council to deter and pressure Israel
to respect international law and to resume negotiations
to implement the agreement between the two parties, in
accordance with the road map.

