The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/434, which contains the report of the
2

Security Council mission on the electoral process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that took place
from 10 to 12 June 2006.

I shall now take the floor in my capacity as head
of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

First, I should like once again to express my
thanks and the thanks of our colleagues who
participated in the mission to the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for their welcome
to the Security Council mission that visited Kinshasa
from 10 to 12 June.

I have already reported in detail on our mission,
so today I will address the essential points that I have
communicated to the members of the Council, drawing
also from the mission's report, which has since been
published.

We came away from our meetings with the
understanding that conditions have now been met to
allow the holding of the elections that will mark the
culmination of the transition period in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In organizational, technical and
security terms, the legislative elections and the first
round of presidential elections should be carried out in
a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the
announced timetable on 30 July.

Nevertheless, during our mission we informed
our interlocutors of the concerns of the members of the
Council about the deterioration of the political
atmosphere, particularly as regards certain messages of
division and exclusion being broadcast by the media.
We stressed that such messages are dangerous and we
recalled other situations in Africa in which such
messages have had tragic consequences. The mission
therefore made recommendations in that respect in its
report, particularly in paragraph 51 regarding respect
for the code of conduct, paragraph 52 regarding access
to media, and paragraph 53 regarding the security of
the electorate and candidates.

During our mission to Kinshasa, we emphasized
the importance we attach to the campaign's being
carried out as peacefully as possible. All should be able
to speak freely and the press must be allowed to do its
work. In that respect, it is regrettable that a
correspondent of one international media company,
Radio France Internationale, which is widely listened
06-41819
to in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was not
accredited and was expelled.

The elections will not be an end in themselves, as
we stressed during our mission. We underlined the
importance of the period to follow. We especially
stressed the need for all political actors to adopt a non-
exclusive approach. Much work will remain to be done
following the elections. We note that the situation is far
from stable and that militias continue to be active in
the East.

In that respect, our report contains
recommendations relating to two issues of special
importance. Ongoing reform in the security sector is
essential if we are to deal with the problem of armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I refer to paragraphs 54 to 56 of our report in
that regard. Moreover, improved governance is
essential if the Congolese nation and State are finally
to benefit from the country's wealth after many years
of war and transition. That issue is addressed in
paragraphs 57 and 58 of our report.

Those are the main elements that I wish to stress
in opening this debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

