Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, the Permanent Observer ofthe State
of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Mr. Ron Proser, for their
statements.

The Middle East is being rocked by two crises
that urgently require a resolute response from the
international community. First, on the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process, my delegation has stated
on numerous occasions that the two-State solution
represents the only fair and lasting solution to the
conflict. In 2013, the only way to ensure sustainability is
to achieve it. In that context, we welcome the agreement
in principle - thanks to the efforts of the American
Secretary of State - to resume Israeli-Palestinian
talks. We also welcome the sense of responsibility
demonstrated by the authorities of both sides.

The process calls for the parties' commitment
to resume direct, credible negotiations without
preconditions. The alternative is easy: either 2013 will
see the launch of meaningful negotiations leading to a
final agreement on all of the issues, or 2013 may well
see slip away this final opportunity to establish peace
through a viable, sovereign, independent, contiguous
Palestinian State, living in peace and security within
recognized borders, side by side with the State ofIsrael,
with Jerusalem as the capital of two States.

The process calls also for a political environment
conducive to the negotiations. In particular, that
requires establishing trust in order to dispel the mindset
of mistrust between the parties.

In that context, we are concerned about the
construction of new settlements, carried out in violation
of international law, which will only complicate the
launch of negotiations. That is why the European Union
decided to align its laws with international law and to
recall that might does not make right.

A change with respect to the Gaza Strip and lifting
the blockade are also imperative to strengthen support
for peace among a population that today lives under
the exclusive yoke of Hamas. That must be done in
respect for Israel's security. In that regard, France has
firmly condemned the rocket attacks and recalls its
commitment to strict observance of the truce.

As for the Palestinian Authority, we hope that it will
use its new status in the United Nations constructively.

To conclude with respect to the peace process, I
would like to again emphasize my country's readiness
to contribute to a final settlement, in particular with
its European partners, to facilitate negotiations and to
participate, when the time comes, in implementing a
peace agreement.

The year 2013 must also see the liberation of the
Syrian people. The situation is tragic. Last week,
Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres and Mr. Simonovie again
described the suffering of the Syrian people to the
Council (see S/PV.7000). The statistics are horrific.
The human toll since the start of the crisis is nearly
100,000 victims, a majority of whom are civilians, as
well as tens of thousands of disappeared individuals.
There are 1.8 million refugees, and 6.8 million people
require humanitarian assistance. Attacks carried out
in Al-Qusayr, Aleppo and Homs show that the regime
has continued to ramp up its military attacks against its
own people and pursues massive shelling in residential
areas.

The regime knows no limits in its choice of
weapons. It is using cluster munitions and incendiary
bombs. A growing number of information sources have
indicated that the regime continues to use chemical
weapons, including sarin gas, which constitutes a war
crime.

We call on Syria to authorize unimpeded access
to the United Nations Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
to investigate the allegations and incidents of the use
of chemical weapons. We are awaiting the results of the
commission's visit to Damascus this week.

It is high time for the Council to take the measures
necessary to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people, the primary and overwhelming responsibility
for which lies with the Al-Assad regime. Those
measures are familiar to all: first, a referral to the
International Criminal Court to prosecute war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed by all parties
in Syria; secondly, increased humanitarian action to
enable unimpeded access to all populations who need
it. Ms. Amos identified in the Council a list of measures
necessary to meet the needs of Syria. Based on that, the
Council should send a clear, unanimous message on the
application of international humanitarian law and the
need for the regime to authorize humanitarian access
throughout the country and to the Syrian population.
Thirdly, a political transition is necessary. We support
international efforts, particularly those led by Russia
and the United States, for a political solution in Syria
that embodies the principles of a political transition,
based on the first part of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex), namely, the transfer of the
executive powers to a transitional Government.

For our part, we will continue to work on structuring
the opposition. The broadening of the Syrian National
Coalition and the election of a new president represent
important decisions. The Coalition is also strengthening
its status as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people and is pursuing its steps to restructure and to
unite.

We call upon the international community to
support the only approach capable of leading to a
political transition. We have called for a credible
interlocutor, and we have one - who is recognized
by the League of Arab States and by the vast majority
of the international community - working to form a
Government and to effectively unite the various sectors
of Syrian society.

I will make a final comment on Lebanon, which
is caught in the middle of the storm. France welcomes
the unanimous support expressed by the Council
for Lebanon on 10 July. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/9), adopted on France's initiative,
made clear the international community's unanimous
commitment to the sovereignty, integrity, independence
and stability of Lebanon.

As the effects of the Syrian crisis are increasingly
felt in Lebanon, it is important to reiterate our collective
support for Lebanese State institutions, which are the
guarantors of stability in the country, and first and
foremost to President Sleiman and to the Lebanese
Armed Forces, which today courageously uphold the
dissociation policy. We must ensure that Lebanon is not
drawn into the Syrian conflict.

Today we are witnessing a region on the brink
of toppling because of the Syrian crisis, the burden
of refugees and the radical terrorism proliferating
throughout the Syrian charnel house. Doing nothing
to resolve the crisis in Syria would be to abandon that
strategic region for world peace and security to decades
of chaos that will not remain confined to the Middle
East.

