Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Security Council of the Prime Minister
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
and we listened carefully to his assessment. The
complex military and political situation and the
humanitarian situation in Somalia give greater urgency
to the task of crafting a coordinated international
strategy for a settlement. The lead role in this process
is to be played by the Somali transitional federal
institutions.

The priority task now is to ensure security in
Somalia. A radical military and political breakthrough
must be achieved. In particular, there is a need for the
further consolidation and enhancement of the country's
defence and security structures. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) continues to be a key
stabilizing factor in Somalia. We express our gratitude
to the Governments of Burundi and of Uganda, as their
units form the backbone of the Mission.

Predictable and timely support for African Union
peacekeepers must be provided by both donors and the
United Nations. We advocate quickly increasing the
size of the Mission to the level planned for in
resolution 1964 (2010).
Strengthening the military contingent of
AMISOM. and the security sector of the Transitional
Federal Government is aimed above all at protecting
civilians and dismantling the military capacity of
Al-Shabaab as the primary factor of destruction in
Somalia. We must therefore close the external channels
providing support for the armed Somali faction. The
Security Council must continue to focus on the task of
ensuring effective sanctions regimes that include
targeted sanctions and that should be imposed on the
basis of objective, vetted information.

The achievement of a peace settlement in
Somalia will depend largely on the Somali people
themselves. The Transitional Federal Government and
the Parliament must strengthen their social bases,
including by ensuring that the population has social
and economic services, and also by restoring contacts
with the constructive opposition and broad public
participation in discussing the nation's future
constitution and the parameters for the country's
development after the transition period.

We support the process of phased expansion of
the United Nations presence in Somalia and measures
to improve coordination of its activities. We commend
the efforts of Special Representative Mahiga, and in
this context it is important to continue to take into
account the security conditions under which United
Nations staff members work.

The ongoing difficult humanitarian situation in
Somalia and the meagre financing of assistance
programmes are also matters of concern. We welcome
the efforts of humanitarian organizations working
under very difficult military and political conditions.

The problem of piracy continues to worsen.
People perish at the hands of pirates, and the current
counter-piracy measures do not keep up with
developments. The Security Council needs to take
urgent and decisive steps to stem further deterioration
of the situation. The Russian delegation intends shortly
to submit the draft of a new resolution on piracy, aimed
at a comprehensive solution to this problem, including
the very important issue of fighting impunity. We
anticipate the support of the Council members for our
initiative.

With the leadership of Somalia and international
and regional partners, Russia will continue to work
towards achieving a stable peace in the country based

11-2583]
on the Djibouti Agreement and in the interest of
strengthening stability and security in the region.

