Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council this morning. I will
cover a number of urgent issues, but the main focus
today must be the conduct of hostilities and the need
for strict compliance with international humanitarian
law.

The current situation in southern Israel and Gaza
is pressing and desperate. Civilians in southern Israel
have long had to live under constant threat of rocket
and mortar attacks by Palestinian militants.
Considering the number of rockets and mortars fired,
civilian casualties have been limited, but the frequent
and indiscriminate nature of these attacks inflicts
severe psychological suffering. Four Israeli civilians
have been killed and dozens injured since the current
hostilities began.

These attacks are contrary to international
humanitarian law and must cease. Yet any Israeli
response must itself comply with international
humanitarian law. Here too, there is considerable and
grave cause for concern. The population of Gaza was
already suffering severely after more than 18 months of
closures. Since the current hostilities started, the
Palestinian Ministry of Health reports, as of yesterday,
13 January, that the number of Palestinian casualties
stands at 971 killed, of whom 311 are children and 76
women, and 4,418 wounded, of whom 1,549 are
children and 652 are women. Many of the male
casualties are no doubt also civilians. The number of
child casualties has reportedly tripled since the
beginning of ground operations on 3 January. The
Israel Defense Forces are no doubt trying, as they say
they are, to take steps to minimize civilian casualties,
but they are clearly not succeeding.

Israeli operations are also causing extensive
damage to homes and public infrastructure and
09-20780
seriously jeopardizing water, sanitation and medical
services. United Nations schools sheltering displaced
persons have been hit; humanitarian workers have been
killed and ambulances hit; the sick and wounded have
been left trapped and unassisted; and up to 100,000
people have been displaced from their homes.

The situation for the civilian population of Gaza
is terrifying, and its psychological impact is felt
particularly by children and their parents, who feel
helpless and unable to protect them. It is a situation
from which civilians have only minimal respite: three
hours a day, with no escape, as borders and crossings
remain closed. Only a full and fully respected ceasefire
will spare the civilian population from these horrors,
and even then, their need for assistance will remain
both urgent and overwhelming.

In the conduct of military operations, constant
care must be taken to spare the civilian population
from the effects of hostilities. This requires strict
compliance with the principles of distinction and
proportionality and the requirement to take all feasible
precautions in attack and against the effects of attack.

For those launching attacks, this includes doing
everything feasible to verify that the objectives to be
attacked are neither civilians nor civilian objects and
refraining from any indiscriminate attacks, including
those that may be expected to cause incidental civilian
casualties that would be excessive in relation to the
concrete and direct military advantage anticipated from
that specific attack.

For those in defence, it means removing civilians
and civilian objects from the vicinity of military
objectives and avoiding locating military objectives
within or near densely populated areas. It also means
not ordering or using the presence or movement of
civilians to render certain points or areas immune from
military operations or to shield military objectives
from attack.

Can we look at what has been happening in Gaza
in the past three weeks and say that either Israel or
Hamas has come close to respecting fully these rules? I
think not. I repeat that violations of international
humanitarian law by one party to a conflict offer no
justification for non-compliance by other parties.
Allegations of violations must be fully investigated and
those responsible held to account.
09-20780
As much as the world's attention is focused on
Gaza, that is, sadly, by no means the only situation to
raise profound concerns over the degree of respect for
these rules and for international humanitarian law.

From the end of August, the eyes of the
international community were focused on the
catastrophic situation that began to unfold around
Goma, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Congolese civilians found themselves in the
worst of all worlds, subject to attacks, displacement,
sexual violence and forced recruitment perpetrated by
advancing rebel forces, and to acts of violence, rape
and looting carried out by members of the official
Congolese armed forces and Mai-Mai and other
militias.

In one particularly horrific incident in early
November, an estimated 150 people were killed during
two days of violence in the town of Kiwanja. Reports
indicate that most of those killed were summarily
executed by the forces of Laurent Nkunda. Others died
when caught in combat between Nkunda's forces and
Mai-Mai militia.

Though the situation in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is now somewhat
more stable, sporadic violence continues and
humanitarian needs are great, while access remains
extremely limited.

Meanwhile, we have had to face up to fresh
atrocities committed by the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) in the north-east of the country and in parts of
southern Sudan. According to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, LRA attacks on villages
in Orientale province in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have left more than 500 people dead. Over
400 have been abducted and some 100,000 displaced.
For any who hoped the threat of LRA brutality had
gone, it has been a rude awakening indeed.

In Somalia, 2008 was, for an increasingly high
proportion of the population, another year trapped in a
vicious cycle of attack and counter-attack between
armed groups and Ethiopian and Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) forces. Throughout 2008, armed
groups in Mogadishu used residential areas to launch
indiscriminate mortar attacks against Ethiopian and
TFG forces, provoking equally indiscriminate and
disproportionate counter-attacks, often involving the
use of heavy weapons. Reports suggest that all sides
launched their attacks with such lack of precision that
3
there was little, if any, expectation of striking a
military objective or avoiding civilian casualties.
Armed groups also used homes and crowds of civilians
as cover from which to ambush TFG and Ethiopian
forces, resulting in wild firefights and further civilian
casualties.

In Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) reports that more
than 2000 civilians were killed during hostilities in
2008, an increase of over 40 per cent compared to
2007. Over half died as a result of attacks by anti-
Government elements, in particular through suicide
bombings and the use ofimprovised explosive devices.

The calculated and callous nature of suicide
attacks remains particularly horrifying in Afghanistan
and elsewhere. They promote a climate of extreme
insecurity for civilians, disrupt any degree of normality
in public life, and destroy the lives of ordinary people
with neither warning nor compunction.

Some 250 civilians were also executed by anti-
Government elements in Afghanistan. These were
mostly individuals considered to be linked in some way
to the Government or the international community.
Alarmingly, killings of this sort appear to be spreading
to areas of the country that were previously immune.

Civilian deaths were also attributed to air strikes,
search and raid operations and force protection
incidents involving international and national armed
forces. More than 550 civilians died as a result of air
strikes in 2008. In one incident alone, in August,
UNAMA reported that 92 civilians, including 62
children, were killed in the Shindand district of Herat.
This prompted the International Security Assistance
Force to amend its standard operating procedures with
a view to preventing such incidents in the future.
However, the killing of 37 civilians in an air strike in
Kandahar in November 2008 indicates that still more
needs to be done.

Prompt investigations by international forces in
the aftermath of such incidents and the provision of
adequate public information and payments to those
affected are also essential.

In Sri Lanka, strict compliance with international
humanitarian law is all the more critical with the
intensification of fighting in the Vanni region and with
reports of intermittent artillery fire into populated
civilian areas in recent weeks. The scale of
humanitarian needs is difficult to gauge, given the
restricted humanitarian access due to the intensified
fighting and the relocation of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations from rebel-held
territory in mid-September.

I am, however, particularly concerned that some
350,000 civilians are trapped in an increasingly
confined space and effectively prevented from leaving
by Tamil Tiger rebels. This raises deep concerns over
the possible use of civilians to render areas immune
from military operations. Regarding those who are able
to leave Vanni, while the Government has the right to
screen for fighters among them, it must not unduly
continue to restrict their freedom of movement.

In environments such as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, it is
particularly worrying that humanitarian organizations
and their staff continue to be subject to threats,
intimidation and deadly attacks.

In Afghanistan, 112 humanitarian workers were
kidnapped in 2008, five of whom were killed by their
captors. A total of 33 humanitarian workers were killed
in 2008, the majority of whom were national staff.

In North Kivu province in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 104 security incidents
involving humanitarian workers were reported during
September of last year alone.

In Somalia, 32 humanitarian workers were killed
in 2008 and 19 were abducted, of whom 10 are still
captive. In a particularly chilling turn of events, many
Somali United Nations staff and their families had to
be relocated from their duty stations following the
circulation of an apparent death list of individuals
targeted for assassination by armed groups.

Such actions inevitably result in increased
security measures, further restrictions on access and a
scaling down of humanitarian operations. The main
losers from that are, of course, the most vulnerable.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) is continuing to monitor and analyse
trends of violence against humanitarian workers, and
access constraints more generally, and will provide a
comprehensive overview of those issues in the
Secretary-General's next report on the protection of
civilians.
Meanwhile, we must urgently find better ways to
prevent and reduce that pattern of behaviour. It is
relatively straightforward, if not always easy or
productive, for the United Nations to engage with the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan,
or with national armed forces, and to raise our
concerns. But whether in Afghanistan, the occupied
Palestinian territories, Somalia or elsewhere, we cannot
talk only to one side. If we are serious about sparing
civilians from the effects of hostilities and about
obtaining access to those in need and seeking to ensure
that humanitarian workers can operate safely,
humanitarian actors must have consistent and sustained
dialogue with all parties to conflict, be it the Taliban,
Hamas or Al-Shabaab.

It is simply not sufficient to oppose such
engagement for fear that it will confer a degree of
recognition on those groups. We need those groups to
understand what international humanitarian law says
and why. We need to be able to speak out for their
victims and for the communities they endanger through
their mere presence and by storing weapons in homes,
schools and places of worship. We need to speak to
them to gain safe and sustained access to populations
in need and to point out consistently the extent of their
misperceptions of humanitarian motives, the lack of a
political agenda on the part of United Nations or other
humanitarian actors and our firm attachment to the
humanitarian principles of impartiality, neutrality and
independence. And we need to be able to call them to
account when they violate international humanitarian
law.

I recognize that for some militia, guerrilla and
rebel groups, civilian casualties and constraints on
access are in many cases intended consequences of
their actions. But the simple truth remains that unless
we can consistently raise protection and access
concerns with those groups, and unless we can bring
home to them the deep irresponsibility of some of their
actions, we will continue to see such groups kill, maim
and threaten the lives of more civilians.

Amid all that darkness there are some bright
spots too, not least among them the opening for
signature and ratification last month of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions. The Convention has the
protection of civilians at its core. For those States that
sign and ratify the Convention, it bans the use,
production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster
munitions. For those that do not, it deepens the stigma
associated with cluster munitions, making it politically
and morally more difficult to continue to use those

weapons. Ultimately, the Convention will lead to the
destruction of billions of lethal submunitions and, in so
doing, will save a huge number of civilians, their
families and communities from the terrible
humanitarian consequences of that weapon.

I applaud the Oslo core group and the civil
society organizations that contributed to making the
Convention a reality, as well as the 95 States that have
signed it. I urge all States that have not yet done so to
sign and ratify the Convention to ensure its entry into
force without delay.

However familiar the challenges to the protection
of civilians are - and I have not, on this occasion,
focused on the massive and increasing problem of
internal displacement due to conflict - the ability to
ensure that we respond to them in a comprehensive and
consistent way continues to elude us. For example, the
potential vested in peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates is still not being realized. One
reason is that those missions are not being provided on
a consistent basis with the capacity required to fulfil
those mandates.

In Darfur, for instance, despite the grave and
well-documented situation confronting the people
there, 12 months since it became operational, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) has only some 15,200 of the 26,000
uniformed personnel authorized by the Council. That is
one peacekeeper for every 170 of the staggering
2.7 million internally displaced persons who live in
perpetual fear of violence, hunger, disease and death.
Consider also the vastness of Darfur, combined with
UNAMID's lack of sufficient aviation capacity, and it
is all too apparent that the Operation's efforts to protect
civilians will inevitably fall short until it has the troops
and tools needed to do the job properly.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
upsurge of violence in the east of the country at the end
of August severely tested the ability of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to protect civilians.
It raised important questions again about MONUC's
capacity and whether it had the mandate necessary for
the task. It also raised the need to look again at
concepts of operations, standard operating procedures
and rules of engagement as they relate to the protection
of civilians.
5

The joint study by OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping missions will
examine those and related issues. The study is under
way and due for completion later this year. Its findings
will be shared with Member States and will provide
recommendations for us all on how to tackle some of
those weaknesses.

The lack of a comprehensive and consistent
approach is apparent also in our efforts to combat
sexual violence. As I said during the last open debate,
in May 2008, those require the same degree of
concerted action wherever they occur. Eight months
on, I am pleased that United Nations actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and their national
and international partners have made significant
progress in developing a draft comprehensive strategy
to combat the horrific sexual violence there, in support
of the efforts of the Government. It focuses on four
critical areas: addressing impunity, supporting
activities to prevent and provide protection from sexual
violence, incorporating prevention efforts into security
sector reform, and improving access to medical, mental
health and legal support for survivors.

The strategy is a crucial and welcome initiative
and warrants full support from all concerned. We will
certainly pursue it vigorously. But it also still begs the
question of consistency I raised in May. Where are the
strategies for C6te d'Ivoire, the Sudan and other
contexts where rape and other forms of sexual violence
are widespread? They need to follow soon, and I hope
the Council will also insist on that.

Helping to facilitate a comprehensive and
consistent approach to the protection of civilians in all
circumstances was the intention behind the Secretary-
General's call for the establishment of a Security
Council expert group in his sixth report on the
protection of civilians (S/2007/643). I am therefore
greatly encouraged by the convening later this week of
the first meeting of the expert group. That is an
informal forum that brings together Council Member
States for transparent and timely consultation with
OCHA on protection concerns, particularly in the
context of the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. A particularly useful tool for
the expert group - but also, I believe, for the Council
itself - is the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2003/27, annex). The aide-memoire
was first developed in March 2002, at the Council's

request, to facilitate its consideration of protection
issues. In close consultation with the Council, OCHA
has produced a revised and updated version, which I
trust will be adopted by the Council at the end of this
debate.

The aide-memoire identifies the key concerns
regarding the protection of civilians in contemporary
conflicts and, based on the Council's past practice,
specific actions that the Council could take to respond
to those concerns. It maintains a focus on the role of
peacekeeping missions, but it also includes a range of
additional measures that could be taken by the Council,
such as imposing targeted sanctions against the
perpetrators of serious violations against civilians and
the referral of situations to the International Criminal
Court.

From the perspective of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, 2009 has had a dreadful
beginning. We need urgently to redouble our efforts to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights law in time of armed conflict. The
convening of the expert group and the revision of the
aide-memoire are important steps in this direction.
Additional proposals will be outlined in the seventh
report of the Secretary-General, due in May of this
year

Meanwhile, let this, the tenth anniversary of the
first Security Council resolution on the protection of
civilians, be the year in which a sustained effort to
approach the issues in a comprehensive and consistent
manner begins to produce results.

