Let me first of all express my gratitude to the Republic of Indonesia for the invitation to today's open debate of the Security Council. We commend you, Sir, for having chosen to put this very timely and critical issue on this month's agenda for consideration during your presidency. I would like to thank Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University, for their very informative statements. Let me thank the organizers of today's event for the opportunity to speak on this important topic, entitled "Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace"'. We note with deep concern the threat to human health, safety and well-being caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which continues to spread throughout the world, and we would draw attention to the unprecedented consequences of the pandemic, including serious disruptions to public life and economic development as well as challenges in the area of travel and global trade, climate change, humanitarian and migration crises, rising poverty and increasing inequality, and its detrimental effects on both human well-being and international security, which will reverse the hard-won development gains and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals, within their given time frames. The advent and rapid spread of COVID-19 on a global scale has had a severe impact on conflict-affected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, which poses a major threat to human health and safety. It is obvious that peoples in conflict-affected States are paying the highest price in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, and this is happening against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts. The current situation requires the immediate unification of our efforts and the adoption of decisive actions by the whole international community. In this matter, the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council cannot be underestimated. Considering this, the Kyrgyz Republic supports the call of the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for a global ceasefire and enhanced international cooperation to successfully counter the COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome resolution 2532 (2020), which demands a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council's agenda and supports the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his Special Representatives and Special Envoys in that respect. There is a need to strengthen development cooperation and to increase access to concessional finance, especially in the context of the global pandemic, and we call upon donors that have not done so to intensify their efforts to fulfil their respective official development assistance commitments, particularly to least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. We reaffirm General Assembly resolutions 74/270, on global solidarity to fight COVID-19, and 74/274, on international cooperation to ensure global access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19. We are deeply concerned about the impact of high debt levels on the ability of developing countries, particularly countries in special situations, to withstand the impact of the COVID-19 shock and to invest in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We welcome the steps taken by the Group of 20 to provide a time-bound suspension of debt-service payments and by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to provide liquidity and other support measures to ease the debt burden of developing countries, and we call upon all relevant actors, including the international financial institutions, to address debt vulnerabilities, with special consideration given to countries in special situations, and to assist with the response to and recovery from the pandemic. We call in particular on all donors to consider allocating funds for the purchase of the necessary medicines and equipment and the implementation of additional assistance measures to the most vulnerable States. Also, owing to the acute shortage of the medical personnel during the COVID-19 pandemic, all United Nations Members need to take serious response measures for the protection of medical personnel and medical infrastructure and consider sending medical volunteers and groups to the countries most affected. During this challenging time for the international community, the Kyrgyz Republic fully supports the vital role of the United Nations and its Security Council in solving problems related to the maintenance of international peace and security, developing friendly relations among nations, cooperating in resolving development problems, reducing poverty, promoting respect for human rights, protecting the environment and fighting disease and the COVID-19 outbreak response in relation to peace and security in the world today. We believe that, given the existing and emerging issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic around the world, the role of the Security Council should be strengthened as much as possible. In that regard, we fully support the peaceful resolution of ongoing conflicts and crises around the world by promoting dialogue between all political and military forces under the auspices of the United Nations. In particular, the Kyrgyz Republic pays close attention to preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and peacemaking, and civilian protection. We call upon the international community as a whole to actively participate in the settlement of international and local conflicts, in United Nations peacekeeping operations and within the framework of the Peacebuilding Fund. The spread of COVID-19 has added an additional burden to achieving the goals of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Nevertheless, today it is very important to continue to ensure peace in the respective territories, as United Nations peacekeeping missions do. In that regard, the timely rotation of peacekeepers plays an important role so that they can perform the assigned tasks efficiently. It is also necessary to provide them with appropriate means in order to protect them from infection by the coronavirus. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us in the most powerful way that we are closely interconnected and only as strong as our weakest link. Only by working together and in solidarity can we end the pandemic and effectively tackle its consequences. Only together can we build resilience against future pandemics and other global challenges. The United Nations must be at the centre of our efforts. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and actively to work in cooperation with all Member States, the United Nations system and all international partners to achieve our goals.
