Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam highly appreciates
the Dominican Republic's initiative to hold this open
debate on this very important subject. We also thank
the briefers for their informative interventions.

The climate is changing faster than we expected,
faster than we can move and faster than we can adapt.
The frequency and intensity of climate-related and
extreme weather disasters, as well as the severity of
their consequences, increase every year. Devastating
tropical storms, heavy precipitation, flooding and
droughts have caused untold suffering to hundreds of
millions of people.

As a result, the displacement and migration of
people and food and water insecurity are potential
security risks and have been the cause of actual
conflict in some cases. The most threatening impact of
climate change is sea level rise. Studies show that, in
the most optimistic scenario, by 2050, without concrete
climate and development action from the international
community, hundreds of countries and territories
will be affected. The very survival of small island
States is at risk. The direct impact of climate change
on international peace and security has become more
evident. The threat is already here. The way in which
we respond to it will define our future.

During the past 20 years, Viet Nam has been
among the 10 countries most affected by climate risks,
and for the past four years, we have been among the top
six. Let me mention just one aspect - sea level rise. A
study shows that if the sea level rises by approximately
1 metre by the year 2100, nearly 40 per cent of the
Mekong Delta will be flooded. There is already
increasing soil salinization by sea water in a large area
of the Delta. That will not only affect the livelihoods
of nearly 20 million people in that region of Viet Nam
but also have an impact on food security beyond its
borders, as we are one of the top three rice exporters
and the Mekong Delta accounts for 90 per cent of our
rice exports.

Viet Nam supports a comprehensive approach
to address climate change, including its security
implications. We are encouraged to see that in recent
years the Security Council has increasingly recognized
the importance of this issue and remains focused on it.
We emphasize the important roles of the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, and many
regional organizations. Those roles are very important
to ensuring that the security dimension is addressed
in their work and cooperation in support of national
and regional efforts. In Southeast Asia, in the spirit of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Declaration on One ASEAN, One Response: ASEAN
Responding to Disasters as One in the Region and
Outside the Region, the ASEAN Coordinating Centre
for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
is responsible for facilitating cooperation on and
coordination of disaster preparedness and response
among the 10 ASEAN member States. We call on the
United Nations and international partners to closely
cooperate with us and to assist us.

We would also encourage further informative
exchanges with representatives and experts, including
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, on the
security implications of climate change, as well as more
integrated sharing of data and expertise.

We support a comprehensive climate change
response plan that addresses all aspects of the issue,
including the security implications, and involves the
active participation of all United Nations organizations
at the Headquarters, regional and country levels,
working closely with national Governments and
regional organizations to effectively address this issue.
We count on the continued leadership of the Security
Council in that direction.

