Mr. De Villepin (France) (spoke in French): We
are meeting here today, just a few hours before
hostilities begin, to exchange our opinions once again
in observance of our respective commitments, but also
to outline together the path that must allow us to
recover the spirit of unity.

I wish to reiterate here that for France, war can
only be a last resort, while collective responsibility
remains the rule. However much we may dislike
Saddam Hussain's cruel regime, that holds true for Iraq
and for every crisis that we will have to confront
together.

To Mr. Blix, who introduced his work
programme, and to Mr. ElBaradei, who was
represented today, I wish to say thank you for the
sustained efforts and the results achieved. Their
programme reminds us that there is still a clear and
credible prospect for disarming Iraq peacefully. It
proposes and prioritizes the tasks involved in
disarmament and presents a realistic timetable for their
implementation.

In so doing, the report confirms what we knew all
along. Yes, the inspections are producing tangible
results. Yes, they offer the prospect of effective
disarmament through peaceful means and in shorter
time frames.

The path that we mapped out together in the
context of resolution 1441 (2002) still exists. Although
it is being interrupted today, we know that it will have
to be resumed as soon as possible.

Two days ago, the Council took note of the
Secretary-General's decision to withdraw the
inspectors and all United Nations personnel from Iraq.
The discharge of their mandates has therefore been
suspended. It will be necessary, when the time comes,
to complete our knowledge about Iraq's programmes
and achieve the disarmament of Iraq. The inspectors'
contribution at that time will be decisive.

Make no mistake about it - the choice before us
is between two visions of the world.

To those who choose to use force and think that
they can resolve the world's complexity through swift
preventive action, we, in contrast, choose resolute
action and a long-term approach, for in today's world,
to ensure our security, we must take into account the
manifold crises and their many dimensions, including
the cultural and religious ones. Nothing enduring in
international relations can be built without dialogue
and respect for the other, without strictly abiding by
principles, especially for the democracies that must set
the example. To ignore that is to run the risk of
misunderstanding, radicalization and spiraling
violence. That is especially true in the Middle East, an
area of fractures and ancient conflicts, where stability
must be a major objective for us.

To those who hope to eliminate the dangers of
proliferation through armed intervention in Iraq, I
would like to say that we regret the fact that they are
depriving themselves of a key tool for resolving other
similar crises. The Iraqi crisis has allowed us to craft
an instrument, through the inspection regime, that is
unprecedented and can serve as an example. Why not
envision, on that basis, establishing an innovative,
permanent structure - a disarmament body under the
aegis of the United Nations?

To those who think that the scourge of terrorism
will be eradicated through what is done in Iraq, we say
that they run the risk of failing in their objectives. An
outbreak of force in such an unstable area can only
exacerbate the tensions and fractures on which
terrorists feed.

Over and above our differences, we share a
collective responsibility, in the face of these threats, to
restore the unity of the international community. The
United Nations must remain mobilized in Iraq to aid in
that objective. In that regard, there are duties that we
must assume together.

First, we must dress the wounds of war. As
always, war brings its share of victims, suffering and
displaced people. So it is a matter of urgency to
prepare now to provide the required humanitarian
assistance. This imperative must prevail over our
differences. The Secretary-General has already begun
to mobilize the various United Nations agencies.
France will take part fully in the collective effort to
assist the Iraqi people. The oil for food programme
must be continued under the authority of the Security
Council, with the necessary adjustments. We are
awaiting the Secretary-General's proposals.

Next, it will be necessary to build peace. No
single country has the means to build Iraq's future.
Above all, no State can claim the necessary legitimacy.
The legal and moral authority for such an undertaking
can stem only from the United Nations. Two principles
must guide our action: respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq, and the preservation of its
sovereignty.

Similarly, it will be up to the United Nations to
establish a framework for the country's economic
reconstruction - a framework that will have to affirm
two complementary principles: transparency and the
development of the country's resources for the benefit
of the Iraqi people themselves.

Our mobilization must also extend to the other
threats that we must address together.

Given the very nature of those threats, it is no
longer possible today to address them in a casual order.
To give an example, terrorism is fueled by organized
crime networks; it cleaves to the contours of lawless
areas; it thrives on regional crises; it garners support
from the divisions in the world; and it uses all available
resources, from the most rudimentary to the most
sophisticated, from a knife to whatever weapons of
mass destruction it can manage to acquire.

To deal with that reality, we must act in a united
way and on all fronts at the same time. Therefore, we
must remain constantly mobilized.

In that spirit, France renews its call for heads of
State and Government to meet here in the Security
Council to respond to the major challenges that we are
confronting today.

Let us intensify our fight against terrorism. Let us
fight mercilessly against its networks, with all the
economic, legal and political weapons available to us.

Let us give new impetus to the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. France
has already proposed that our heads of State and
Government meet on the sidelines during the next
General Assembly to define together the new priorities
for action.

Let us recover the initiative in the regional
conflicts that are destabilizing entire regions; I am
thinking in particular of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
How much suffering must the peoples of the region
continue to endure before we force open the doors of
peace? Let us not resign ourselves to an irreparable
situation.

In a world where the threats are asymmetrical,
where the weak defy the strong, the power of
conviction, the capacity to persuade and the ability to
change hearts count as much as the number of military
divisions. They cannot replace them, but they are the
indispensable elements of a State's influence.

Given this new world, it is imperative that the
international community's action be guided by
principles.

The first is respect for law. The keystone of
international order, it must apply under all
circumstances, but even more so when it is a question
of taking the gravest decision: to use force. Only on
that condition can force be legitimate, and only on that
condition can it restore order and peace.

Next is the defence of freedom and justice. We
must not compromise on what is at the core of our
values. We shall be listened to and heeded only if we
are inspired by the very ideals of the United Nations.

Last is the spirit of dialogue and tolerance. Never
before have the peoples of the world aspired so
fervently to its respect. We must hear their appeal.
We see this clearly. Never has the United Nations
been so necessary. It is up to this body to muster the
resolve to meet these challenges, because the United
Nations is the place where international law and
legitimacy are founded and because it speaks on behalf
of peoples.

To the clash of arms, a single upwelling of the
spirit of responsibility - the voices and action of the
international community gathered here in New York in
the Security Council - must respond. That is in the
interests of all: the countries engaged in the conflict,
the States and the peoples of the region, the
international community as a whole. Confronted by a
world in crisis, we have the moral and political
obligation to restore the lifelines of hope and unity.

The judgement of future generations will depend
on our capacity to meet this great challenge, at the
service of our values, at the service of our common
destiny, at the service of peace.

