As this is our first time participating under your leadership, Sir, allow me to congratulate Germany on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and wish you a successful month of work in the name of international peace and security. I would also like to thank Germany for convening this open video-teleconference meeting of the Security Council on the theme of pandemics and security and welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on this matter of utmost urgency as we continue to tackle the threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We further congratulate the sponsors of the resolution and the Security Council members on this important achievement. Finally, I would also like to thank His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, for their insightful remarks. Undoubtedly, pandemics undermine and disrupt international peace and security. For the last four months, we have all been witnessing the socioeconomic and lethal consequences of COVID-19 across the world. Particularly, conflict- affected countries and countries emerging from conflict have seen their pre-existing challenges impacted by the additional burden of the pandemic. This has led to a deterioration of the humanitarian situation, which has especially affected vulnerable groups, such as women, children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and returnees. The pandemic has also shifted resources from national programmes for achieving sustainable peace and development to emergency plans for preventive and curative measures. In addressing pandemics, collective efforts and measures are required at the national, regional and global levels. Particularly, the United Nations and the Security Council have the duty and responsibility entrusted to them by the Charter to act cohesively and deliver their mandates. I would like to thank the Secretary- General for his leadership and efforts in the response to the pandemic, and especially for the launch of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19. Furthermore, it is an honour for Afghanistan to be part of these efforts as one of the co-coordinators, along with Croatia, of the General Assembly's efforts on COVID-19-related initiatives. As a country affected by conflict and that is experiencing the severe socioeconomic effects of COVID-19, Afghanistan understands how difficult it is to simultaneously respond to a pandemic with restricted resources while addressing the violence and instability emanating from conflict. In addition, those in need of humanitarian assistance grew from 9.4 million at the start of the year to 14 million as of June as a result of the virus. In response, the Afghan Government has acted by taking preventive measures and adopting a response plan centred on health care, food security, public works and regional economic cooperation, and we will continue to address the pandemic with the support of and in coordination with the United Nations, the World Health Organization and regional and international partners. I would like to highlight our regional and international partners for their support in response to COVID-19. The escalation of violence by the Taliban and its refusal to reduce levels of violence have increased the misery of the people in need of assistance and prevented the delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance to vulnerable groups. Afghanistan is one of the 170 signatories to the joint statement in support of the Secretary-Genera's call for a global ceasefire, and the Government has been consistently calling on the Taliban to observe a humanitarian ceasefire. Moreover, recognizing the imperative priority of peace, the Afghan Government is acting in good faith to see the immediate start of intra-Afghan negotiations. As part of this effort, we have prioritized the meticulous process of releasing close to 4,000 of the total 5,000 requested Taliban prisoners to build a stronger degree of confidence among all parties. Nonetheless, despite a three-day ceasefire during Eid al-Fitr, which raised the hopes of the citizens of our country, the Taliban has responded to our calls with increased levels of violence, going so far as to perpetrate attacks on humanitarian personnel and targeting civilians We believe that by adopting resolution 2532 (2020), the Council joins the people of Afghanistan in demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities all around the world. It is time for all of us to join in the imperative task of delivering humanitarian assistance to all those who need it. It is time to come together and work with the United Nations and other organizations to ensure that nobody is left behind and that all vulnerable groups receive the resources and care they need. We reiterate to the Taliban that by continuing its attacks and refusing to heed the Secretary-General's call for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, it is making a decision to go against an explicit call from the Security Council and, more importantly, the interests of its Afghan brothers and sisters, who are desperate for an end to the conflict and to receive the assistance that they so desperately need. The Government is doing our part; it is now up to the Taliban to respect the will of the Afghan people, lay down its weapons and work with us to find a peaceful solution to this 20-year conflict In closing, Afghanistan welcomes the Security Council's resolution and applauds the Council's resolve to uphold its responsibility in maintaining international peace and security. COVID-19 is a multidimensional challenge and the global community will be able to effectively respond only through cohesive action that involves all different segments of the United Nations system and our global community. Afghanistan will continue to work and play its role, together with our neighbours and international partners, to address COVID-19 and to build back better at the national, regional and international levels.
