Mr. Brattskar (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and would like to express our support for the
Secretary-General's proposal regarding the extension
of UNTAET's mandate. Norway would like to pay
tribute to the men and women of UNTAET, and
especially to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for
undertaking a difficult task in a manner that gives hope
for a smooth transition to an independent East Timor.

There seems to be growing support among the
East Timorese people for seeking independence by the
end of this year. It is therefore of great importance that
we, the Member nations, support the work done by
UNTAET so that it can fulfil its mandate as soon as
possible.

Norway follows the political developments in
East Timor with great interest and anticipates that
elections can be held late this summer under the
supervision of UNTAET. We would like to underline
the importance of fair elections. East Timorese citizens
living in Indonesia, especially those living in refugee
camps in West Timor, must be given the opportunity to
vote.

One of the most important challenges at this
stage, and in the process leading to independence, is
the participation ofthe East Timorese themselves in the
building of their future nation. In this respect, Norway
welcomes the establishment of the East Timor
Transitional Administration and the transformation of
the National Consultative Council into a National
Council, a broader and more representative body.

Norway believes that a United Nations presence
after independence is needed. Such a presence must be
based on full respect for the sovereignty of East Timor
and developed in full cooperation with the new
government. Once independent, East Timor will need
substantial international assistance, both in terms of
financial assistance and in terms of a continued United
Nations presence. Norway welcomes the suggestion
made by the Secretary-General in his report in
foreseeing an integrated mission under a special
representative of the Secretary-General and mandated
by the Security Council.

We feel that it is of particular importance that
both the United Nations military component and the
civilian police force can undertake their responsibilities
in an efficient way and in line with international
standards.

Norway recognizes that all sovereign States have
legitimate defence and security needs. We therefore
endorse the decision to establish the East Timor
Defence Force. To ensure the security of the people of
East Timor, there should be a United Nations military
presence also after independence until the East Timor
Defence Force is fully established.

It is important that a national civilian police force
be established as well. The role of this police force
should be separate from the mandate and role of the
defence force. International civilian police should be
present after independence until the national police
force is fully recruited and trained and should assist the
national civilian police force under the auspices of the
East Timorese authorities.

Norway would like to take this opportunity to
underline the importance of a long-term development
perspective in our common East Timor policy. We must
ensure that the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank, among
others, are given sufficient resources and opportunities
to participate in the reconstruction process in a
coordinated manner.

Norway would like to stress the importance of an
integrated approach with regard to political and
development planning in East Timor. The development
agencies should work closely with UNTAET in the
months to come and be given a central role in the
United Nations presence after independence. Capacity-
building must be an important focus in the planning for
independence. The presence and participation at
today's meeting of UNDP, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund were therefore most
welcome. It was also very useful for the Council to
have an opportunity to hear the views of Mr. Harri
Holkeri, President ofthe General Assembly.

I would like to take this opportunity to assure the
East Timorese people and the Security Council that
Norway has a long-term perspective regarding our
engagement in East Timor, in terms of both political
and financial support. I am particularly glad to be able
to stress this point in the presence of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, who is with us today as a member of the
Transitional Cabinet of East Timor. Norway has
already provided substantial support to East Timor and
will continue its support, taking due account of the fact
that East Timor should not be overly dependent on
development assistance. Our Minister of International
Development, Ms. Anne Sydnes, will travel to East
Timor next month to assess the need for future
Norwegian development assistance to East Timor.

Norway continues to be seriously concerned
about the security situation on the border with
Indonesia, especially in the refugee camps in West
Timor. We urge the Indonesian Government to take the
necessary steps to fulfil Security Council resolution
1319 (2000).

Norway emphasizes that the instigation of
criminal proceedings against individuals responsible
for serious crimes is an important prerequisite for the
establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation. In
this respect, we are pleased to learn that the
investigations conducted by the prosecution authority
are materializing in indictments.

