Mr. Elmessallati: (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
giving us an opportunity to participate. I would also
like to convey our gratitude to Ambassador Inocencio
Arias, Chairman of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), for the commendable effort
he has made as the Committee's Chairman and for the
excellent briefing he gave us this morning, which
detailed the efforts being made by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) to exercise its mandate
and presented us with a detailed view of the
Committee's work in the upcoming 90 days. As in the
past, my delegation will continue to afford the
Committee's work our full cooperation and attention,
in the hope that the Committee will make further
progress and achieve greater success.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has always pursued
a basic policy of renouncing and condemning all forms
of terrorism at every national, regional and
international forum. That position is based on our total
conviction that terrorism is a threat to the peace,
security and stability of the world's peoples and whose
disastrous effects are not limited to any State or region.
Terrorism's effects are felt by everyone, irrespective of
religious, national or cultural affiliation. Its negative
implications also have an impact upon every area of
socio-economic development and saps national and
international resources that could otherwise be directed
towards that development.

We believe that terrorism has neither religion nor
identity. We therefore categorically reject any attempt
to link the phenomenon of terrorism to a specific
religion or culture or to label indiscriminately as
terrorists persons who belong to a given culture or who
follow a particular religion. The evils of terrorism have
affected people of different religions and cultures.
There are numerous examples of that fact, and it is not
my intention to go into detail about them here.

Libya's position of principle has therefore been to
condemn and renounce terrorism and to seek ways to
combat it and eradicate it. Libya had been combating
terrorism for years, even before the world woke up to
this scourge. We believe that, in that respect, Libya was
the first to draw the world's attention to the dangers of
terrorism. While we urged that terrorists be tried, some
supported terrorists and considered them to be
freedom-fighters. Many States hosted and sheltered
terrorists and encouraged them to pursue their terrorist
activities. Since the mid-19905 we had called on
Interpol to arrest certain terrorist elements - persons
who were subsequently proven to have been involved
in international terrorism.

Along with other Member States, we have called
for an international conference to be held under the
auspices of the United Nations to address the terrorist
phenomenon, its root causes and the ways and means to
combat it, as well as to decide on a clear definition of
terrorism. The lack of a clear definition of terrorism
may dilute international efforts to combat terrorism,
thereby weakening their effect.

In that regard, we reiterate our call for the need to
differentiate between terrorism and the right of peoples
to self-determination. It is simply unacceptable for the
two concepts to be equated and for those who are
fighting for freedom and independence to be treated in
the same way as those who turn to terrorism as a way
of realizing goals that are based in no logic, law or
right. There is no doubt that occupation and foreign
hegemony are among the worst forms of terrorism.

Libya, perhaps more than any other State, is
aware of the dangers of terrorism and its disastrous
consequences. We have suffered from various types of
terrorism and we have paid a heavy price for the
terrorism that was perpetrated against us for many long
years. State terrorism is the worst form of terrorism.
Many Member States have been subjected to it, and it
is currently a scourge on the Palestinian people.

We are therefore eager to ensure the success of
each and every initiative to combat and eradicate
terrorism in all its forms. Terrorism is an evil that must
be defeated and eradicated. All Member States and
members of the international community should
intensify their efforts in this regard in order to
strengthen international peace and security and
eliminate all the dangers that threaten them.

