Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): With regard to Syria,
Iceland welcomes the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), with the aim of ensuring access
for humanitarian assistance to the people in need
throughout Syria. We commend the non-permanent
members Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, which
relentlessy worked towards building the consensus on
the resolution that was long overdue.

However, humanitarian assistance can give only
short-term relief. Much more needs to be done by the
Security Council to seek a political solution to the
conflict. The situation is already having significant
consequences for regional peace and security and is
affecting the situation in neighbouring countries, as
well as the United Nations peacekeeping mission on the
Syrian Golan. The Council cannot sit idly by.

In Syria, we have also been witnessing flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law for more than three years now, especially by
the Syrian Government. We continue to condemn those
violations and reiterate our call to the Security Council
to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court.

On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, I want to start
by expressing Iceland's condemnation of the violations
of international humanitarian law by both sides in
the conflict. We condemn the indiscriminate rocket
attacks by Hamas and other militant organizations in
Gaza against civilian targets in Israel, which terrorize
the civilian population and have so far resulted in two
civilian deaths. We also condemn the use of force by
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), which has resulted
in more than 600 deaths in Gaza, the vast majority of
them civilians, and the injuring of more than 3,500
people, as well as immense destruction of homes and
other civilian infrastructure. The IDF's air and ground
assault raises concerns about respect for the principle
of distinction, proportionality and precaution in attacks
under international humanitarian law.

While the current situation in Gaza is more than
tragic, I will not dwell on it, since the core problem
is not what is happening today but the occupation.
The occupation of Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, affects all aspects of the daily life of
Palestinians and violates their human rights, including
their freedom of movement and property rights,
and their right to assembly, freedom of expression,
education, health and equal access to justice and due
process, to name a few.

In that respect, let us recall that this month it is
10 years since the issuance of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice in which the Court
clearly states that the wall, where built on occupied
Palestinian land, including East Jerusalem, is illegal
under international law. However, contrary to the
recommendations of the Court, not much has changed
on the ground. The wall continues to obstruct the
movement of Palestinians and to have a severe impact
on their livelihood opportunities. Let us also recall that
this summer the blockade on Gaza has been in place
for eight years, with dire consequences for the civilian
population.

We spend a great deal of time at the United Nations
discussing the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the importance of dialogue and mediation for peace
and security and so on. Those concepts are not meant
to be abstract. They do not exist in a vacuum. The
whole idea is to apply them to real life situations. We
therefore commend the Secretary-General for going to
Israel and the State of Palestine to try directly to seek a
ceasefire. We strongly encourage him to continue being
personally engaged and to make full use of his good
offices to find a lasting solution to the conflict.

The conflict also requires the urgent attention ofthe
Security Council. First and foremost, a ceasefire that
not only provides for laying down arms but also lays
the ground for achieving something more sustainable
must be agreed. Secondly, the Security Council must
firmly uphold its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Every effort must be made to bring
about a peaceful solution to the conflict that results in
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. The parameters are fairly clear and
well known to all. The Council can start by demanding
respect for its own numerous resolutions on the conflict
and for international humanitarian law.

