Mr. Baja (Philippines): We join colleagues in
extending our deepest condolences to you, Sir, your
Government and the families of the victims of the two
aeroplane crashes that occurred in southern Russia.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
public meeting at this crucial juncture of the peace
process in Afghanistan. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for the very informative update he has given
the Council on the preparations to be undertaken to
ensure full, free, fair and credible elections in
Afghanistan.

The Afghan people have shown to the world that
they are ready and determined to put their destiny in
their own hands. That is evidenced by the more than 10
million Afghans who have registered, 4 million of
whom are women. The number of candidates for
president - 18 - who want to govern a difficult
country like Afghanistan is another manifestation of
that determination. As the Secretary-General said,
through voter registration, the people of Afghanistan
are showing that they are prepared to seize the
opportunity offered by the Bonn process to build a new
country and a new State, and to take risks in the
process. We have also noted that overseas voting has
been extended to the Afghans in Iran and in Pakistan. It
would be interesting to observe the dynamics of that
aspect, as it may well affect the results of the elections.
One can hazard a guess that the elections in those
locations will be more trouble-free, fair and credible.

We note the positive developments and the
preparations being undertaken for the electoral process.
However, like other delegations, we find it disturbing
that, although there are only about five weeks left
before the presidential elections, the security situation
in the country has deteriorated significantly. The
security challenges to be addressed include Violent
incidents such as those in recent weeks, even in areas
in northern and western Afghanistan previously
considered to be low-risk. There has also been
insufficient progress in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of factional
forces. Many of the Violent incidents in recent weeks
have involved factional fighting and the use of heavy
weapons. Thus, the ability of the factional forces to
undermine the results of the elections underscores the
urgency of accelerating the DDR process. Again,
increased acts of violence have been directed at the
staff and offices of the electoral secretariat and at
United Nations workers, jeopardizing the electoral
process. And, as has been pointed out, there have been
increased attacks against humanitarian non-
governmental organizations - particularly the killing
of five staff of Medecins Sans Frontieres, which
resulted in the withdrawal of its operations from
Afghanistan.

The tenuous security situation has been created
by the forces of extremism, factionalism and the fast-
growing narcotics industry. Financial gains from the
burgeoning narcotics industry are being used to further
the activities of extremists. That situation not only puts
the electoral process in critical jeopardy in the short
term, but also very adversely affects the various
aspects of the peace process - DDR, governance, the
human rights situation, recovery, rehabilitation and
reconstruction - in the long term. The continued
presence of humanitarian organizations in Afghanistan
is essential, because their departure would adversely
affect much-needed humanitarian and development
activities in the country.

My delegation fully supports the Secretary-
General's conclusion on the vital importance of
security assistance to Afghanistan to ensure the holding
of a free, fair and credible electoral process there. That
in turn will provide the political legitimacy and the
foundation for the elected Government to make
decisions and to undertake the actions needed to
advance all aspects of the peace process. Indeed, as the
Secretary-General said, the international community
cannot afford to waver now. The international
community should match the courage and
determination that the Afghan people are showing.
Everyone has a stake in successful nation-building in
Afghanistan, because global security is affected by
what transpires in Afghanistan.

