Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, the report of the High
Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2019/364, annex) under discussion is far from an impartial
assessment of the situation in the country, contrary to
what its author, Valentin Inzko, would have us believe.
What we see is an effort to use every possible means
to justify maintaining elements of the international
protectorate of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to prove
that the Office of the High Representative is still
needed at the current stage of the Bosnian settlement.
The entire structure of the report is subordinated to that
dubious aim and that has continued to have a negative
impact on the substance of its content.

First of all, Mr. Inzko continues to settle personal
scores with the leaders of the Bosnian Serbs and Croats
by blaming them without justification for all of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's problems. Our substantive dialogue
with their leaders, including a meeting in Belgrade
on 17 January between President Putin and Milorad
Dodik, the Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, testifies to the exact opposite, which is
that all of the responsible Serb and Croat politicians
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are committed to the 1995
Peace Agreement. However, they are also determined
to ensure strict compliance with the Agreement's
provisions relating to the inviolability of the
decentralized architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the equality of its three constituent peoples.

The equality guaranteed by the Dayton Peace
Agreement has recently been increasingly attacked by
various Sarajevo actors, and that is the main reason
for most of Bosnia's problems. However, Mr. Inzko
stubbornly refuses to acknowledge that, only in
passing and uncritically mentioning some of the most
reprehensible examples of the undermining of equality.
They include the idea announced by the Bosniaks of
disputing in Bosnia and Herzegovina's Constitutional
Court the name of Republika Srpska, which is Dayton
terminology, and their reluctance to meet the Bosnian
Croats halfway on the issue of amending the Election
Law to afford sufficient guarantees that only legitimate
representatives of the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be approved for its
highest offices.

Much has already been said of Mr. Inzko's
affection for the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European and transatlantic integration, which does not
correspond to the High Representative's mandate and is
detrimental to his direct responsibilities related to the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda. As a result, there
has been no progress in that direction in the past few
years, and a good deal of the resources for the Office
of the High Representative have been wasted, for all
practical purposes. We are waiting for Mr. Inzko to
finally start giving proper attention to winding up the
Office of the High Representative, both in his reports
and, most importantly, in his practical work.

I want to address the issue of the relationship
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and NATO
separately. I would like to underscore that even the High
Representative has been obliged to acknowledge and
document the existence of substantive disagreements
on the issue of the country's further rapprochement
with NATO. Banja Luka has consistently opposed it,
finding it unacceptable that it would transform Bosnia
and Herzegovina's border with militarily neutral Serbia
into a new geopolitical dividing line. That simply
cannot be ignored, and attempts to bring Sarajevo
closer to NATO, in violation of the Dayton principles
of consensus on external policy decisions, threaten to
undermine all the work on the reform front and have
other destructive consequences.

We cannot help noticing that Mr. Inzko's report
contains a whole series of negative comments about
measures aimed at fully equipping and staffing law-
enforcement bodies for two of the constituent entities.
This is puzzling, because the High Representative,
of all people, should know that all the measures he
describes comply fully with existing law. Furthermore,
they represent a reaction to the massive increase in
the past few years in risks related to migration and the
terrorist threats that accompany them. Unfortunately,
those topics are not adequately reflected in the High
Representative's report.

The attitude to the creation in Republika
Srpska of independent international commissions
for investigating the crimes committed between
1991 and 1995 against members of all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's peoples in Srebrenica and against Serbs
in Sarajevo also seems extremely biased. The High
Representative straight out makes the a priori claim
that their ability to contribute to bringing justice and
reconciliation between the national groups would be
minimal. We think that is an unacceptable approach.
We want to emphasize that the establishment of the
commissions was the direct result of obvious gaps in
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which we have expressed our
justifiable concerns about many times. We hope that
the experts from 12 countries on the commissions
will be able to recreate a comprehensive picture of
inter-ethnic and inter-religious crimes in Srebrenica and
Sarajevo, since many of them fell outside of the scope
of the International Tribunal's activity. We also suggest
holding off on any conclusions until the commissions
issue their findings.

We would also like to draw attention to some quite
important procedural aspects. We first call on the High
Representative to accurately reflect in his reports the
work being done by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council and to make sure that citations
from communiques and statements are accompanied
by clear information about the countries that did not
support them, if there are any. The Russian delegation
did not approve the Steering Board communique of
5 December 2018 for a number of serious reasons. We
believe that the text's unsupported negative assessments
of the 7 October general elections in Bosnia, its
one-sided discussions of war crimes and condescending
attitude to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency only
undermine the Steering Board's authority. We hope that
this international mechanism will remain focused on
formulating consensus-based, long-term approaches to
the settlement in Bosnia so that the High Representative
will not have to disguise the real state of affairs.

We once again note with regret that Council
members had only a few days to study the High
Representative's report before discussing it in the
Council. We would have liked to have had more time
to familiarize ourselves with it. We want to point out
that all our colleagues who are interested in a deeper
understanding of what has happened in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can read the informative and very useful
report of the Government of Republika Srpska, which
covers the period from November 2018 to April of
this year and fills in many of the gaps in the High
Representative's report.

The Russian position on the stabilization process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to be based
on ensuring all parties' strict adherence to the Peace
Agreement, the active promotion of an intra-Bosnian
political dialogue, the socioeconomic development
of the country and its entities and the preservation of
cultural diversity. We are convinced that the time for
the external protectorate over Bosnia and Herzegovina
is gone forever, and that the Office of the High
Representative, with its extraordinary Bonn powers,
has become an impediment to the country's future
democratic progress. We think it is vital to continue
reducing the budget and staffing of the Office,
which is fully in keeping with the concept of local
ownership approved by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council more than 10 years ago.

We believe that the key issue for Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be the completion of the
formation of a new Council of Ministers at the central
level, and of Governments at the level of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and four of its ten cantons,
which should be based on a strong parliamentary
majority and focused on pursuing the incremental
reforms, which include improving the work of the
pan-Bosnian judicial authorities, including the
removal of foreign specialists from the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and enhancing the
effectiveness, professionalism and impartiality of the
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. However, it will
be crucial to ensure that the Bosnians themselves agree
independently on the content of all such reforms. That
is the only way to ensure that future solutions will be a
viable step forward for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
implementation of the Dayton accords.

We repeat that the continued external pressure on
Republika Srpska and the Bosnian Serb leadership,
primarily through illegitimate, unilateral restrictive
measures, is unreasonable and counterproductive.
Such actions, and the negative anti-Serb rhetoric of
a number of Western colleagues, have been visibly
worsening the political atmosphere in the country,
stirring up internal disagreements and hampering the
building of inter-ethnic trust. We would like to believe
that all the participants will soon acknowledge the
inappropriateness of those restrictions at the current
stage of the Bosnian settlement.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Russia's
desire to develop a mutually beneficial dialogue with
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a basis of respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the
broad powers provided for in the Peace Agreement for
the two entities and the equal rights of the country's
three constituent peoples. We sincerely wish the
Bosnian parties every success in building a coalition
and gradually resolving all the outstanding issues.

