Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga;
the Special Representative of the African Union to
the Central African Republic, Mr. Moussa Nebie;
the Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service, Mr. Vervaeke; and the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
Ambassador Adom of C6te d'Ivoire, for their important
updates and outstanding leadership. We also welcome
to the Chamber Ambassador Kpongo, Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic.

My delegation has some observations to share on
key salient points.

First, on the political front, we underline that the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic remains the principle
framework for the peace process in that country. In that
regard, we welcome the work of the Initiative's panel
of facilitators to prepare the dialogue between the
Government and armed groups. We express our hope
that all stakeholders will cooperate in a constructive
manner and are committed to pursuing dialogue and
confidence-building measures.

It is also important that all peace initiatives
within the framework of the African Initiative be
harmonized to ensure the coherence of the peace
process, and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) should be an integral partner.
In that regard, we welcome the decision of the United
Nations and African Union leadership to nominate a
prominent figure as a guarantor of the peace process
who will coordinate the efforts of all involved partners,
thereby facilitating enhanced regional engagement.
The committed support of regional and international
partners in that process is also crucial. In that
connection, we appreciate the mediation efforts of the
Sudan, with the support of the Russian Federation,
and look forward to peace negotiations in Khartoum,
hopefully in December. We believe that the Sudan
should be an important part of the solution.

We also note the important role that MINUSCA
plays in advancing the peace process through a wide
range of activities, including by providing its good
offices, formulating its security posture, offering its
substantive expertise and facilitating the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. It also plays
a critical role in security sector reform and transitional
justice. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation to reinforce MINUSCA's priority
mandated task to support the political process by
increasing its substantive and mediation components
to promote that initiative and to align its political and
security strategies with the African Initiative.

We also reognize the need for the Government,
the African Initiative and MINUSCA to undertake
comprehensive strategic communications and outreach
plans, aimed at informing the population about the
peace process, understanding local perceptions and
motivations, and explaining the Mission's mandate
and actions.

We further acknowledge the committed efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic, under
the leadership of President Touadera, to extend State
authority throughout the country, including through
the implementation of local peace and reconciliation
initiatives. We call on the international community to
extend greater support to the Central African Republic
authorities in order to increase the State's security
and institutional capacities, which take on greater
importance in the light of upcoming elections in 2020
and 2021.

Secondly, on the security front, we strongly condemn
the continued attacks by armed groups on civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. Intensified
sectarian rhetoric and intercommunal disputes result
in higher levels of violence, thereby undermining all
efforts to achieve national reconciliation.

We underline that with MINUSCA, as the primary
force providing security while at the same time being
overstretched, national authorities bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians. To that end, the
greater support of international partners to boost the
capacity of the national security forces is needed, as
is the development of a comprehensive strategy on the
protection of civilians involving all relevant actors. We
commend the invaluable contribution of the European
Union Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic, with the operational support of MINUSCA,
in training and deploying the Central African armed
forces. We also draw attention to the need to ensure the
security of peacekeepers.

On the humanitarian front, against a backdrop of
underfunding and a reduced humanitarian presence,
the increasing numbers of internally displaced people
and refugees from the Central African Republic in
neighbouring countries demand the international
community's immediate attention and financial support.

Finally, we would like to stress that all international
efforts to stabilize the Central African Republic must
be complemented by a comprehensive strategy to
address the root causes of the crisis, including through
increased investment in the economy, job creation and
better living conditions for the Central Africans. We
welcome the continued engagement of the European
Union and the World Bank in their efforts to create a
conducive economic environment. We also support the
draft resolution on MINUSCA, to be submitted soon
by France.

Lastly, it is just as crucial that MINUSCA and the
United Nations country team, along with other partners,
continue to support the Government in implementing
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan for the
2017-2021 period.

