Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Madam President,
I am pleased and honoured to take part in this debate
under your leadership. I look forward to getting to know
my other colleagues on the Council as soon as possible.

The problem of small arms and light weapons is
extremely important but also very difficult. One reason
that it is difficult is that it is a hard issue to consider
in the abstract. So much depends on the conditions
in the society, country or region where the problem
arises. Take my own country as an example. On a per-
capita basis, New Zealanders have quite an arsenal
of weapons in private homes, but they are mostly for
recreational purposes, and the use of firearms in social
unrest, crime and domestic violence is relatively rare in
my country, although, sadly, it is on the increase. Our
police are still not routinely armed when they are on the
beat. That is possible because the history, the economic
and social conditions and the physical location of our
country have meant that guns are not a major social
problem - at least not yet. But that is not the case in
many countries that are awash in firearms and where
firearms are all too often a weapon of first resort. We
do not buy the bumper sticker that people, not guns,
kill people. Guns are a problem in their own right, and
they warrant our attention. So, too, does the issue of
ammunition, as the Secretary- General has reminded us.

Experience has shown that firearms can make a
bad situation much worse; the presence and use of a
lot of firearms can tear the fabric of society, threaten
the security ofa country and destabilize a region. Even
a small number of guns in the wrong hands can have
devastating consequences, especially in vulnerable
communities. Too often, the innocent suffer the most,
children and caregivers - usually women - as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and Mr. Diakite have graphically pointed out.
There are numerous examples from all parts of the
world: from South and North America, the Caribbean,
the Middle East, Western and Eastern Europe, Africa
and Asia. My own region, the Pacific, is also not
immune, as has been shown in the Solomon Islands and
Timor-Leste. It is the ubiquity and seriousness of the
problem that has led to international efforts to control
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, in
particular the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and, most significantly, the
negotiation, adoption and entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty, which New Zealand has ratified.

New Zealand hailed the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty as one of the most important arms-controls
agreements adopted in recent years. That achievement,
together with the adoption of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, rank as signal successes. They stand in stark
contrast to the meagre returns in other disarmament
negotiations - a situation currently under critical
scrutiny in an adjacent chamber.

The Council has an important and long-standing
role in this issue, as it has shown in the imposition of
arms embargoes and the adoption ofmeasures to disarm
and demobilize combatants, secure the collection of
weapons and prevent their diversion. In resolution 2117
(2013), the Council provided a framework for a more
consistent approach to this set of issues. We sincerely
hope that the Council will be able, this week, to build on
that achievement by adopting a further resolution that
will: promote a more integrated approach to addressing
small-arms and light-weapons issues across the United
Nations agenda; encourage enhanced support from
United Nations agencies to host countries in countering
illicit transfers and the destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons; and strengthen
the implementation of arms embargoes.

We commend Lithuania for its concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) and for its preparation of a
comprehensive draft resolution. New Zealand is
concerned that there is serious contention over one
aspect of the draft resolution, namely, the language
bearing on illicit transfers to non-State actors, which
was not included in resolution 2117 (2013). For its part,
New Zealand could accept any of the formulations
under discussion, and we believe that, with a modicum
of goodwill, a solution can be found. While recognizing
the strength of the positions in play, we are concerned
that a battle over an issue on which none of the key
arms-exporting protagonists can plead a clean record
threatens to subvert the much larger gains that this
draft resolution represents for the wider United Nations
membership, especially the small and the vulnerable,
who suffer the consequences and reap none of the
rewards of the global arms trade.

