Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
commends the initiative of the Libyan presidency of
the Security Council to convene this crucial discussion
on peace and security in Africa. We appreciate the
statements made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Ms.Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma. We wish to express
profound gratitude to Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations,
for his able leadership, commitment and succinct
briefing. His panel deserves our full appreciation for its
dedication, hard work and well-articulated report
(S/2008/813). The broad agreements and
recommendations contained in the report attest to the
collective commitment of the panel to strengthening
peacekeeping efforts in Africa.

Nigeria believes firmly that the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security remains with the Security Council.
However, more than ever we recognize the importance
of regional organizations as integral and
complementary components of a broader global
strategy for maintaining and strengthening global
peace and security, within the ambit of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. For this reason, we have
been steadfast in our commitment to the United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.

Indeed, Africa has assumed its role and
responsibility in peacekeeping operations with utmost
seriousness, recognizing that peace and stability are
precursors of social and economic development. With
deployments to Somalia, Darfur, Burundi, Sierra Leone
and Liberia, Africa has demonstrated sufficient
political will to tackle the challenges confronting the
continent. During these deployments, our peacekeeping
forces have engaged in a variety of missions, including
protection of humanitarian aid, disarming of factions,
cantonment, mediation and peace enforcement. They
have also undertaken capacity-building and election-
monitoring activities in these countries.

If Africa is to continually undertake these
responsibilities effectively and efficiently, it needs
robust support for its existing peace and security
architecture, which consists of the Peace and Security
Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
Peace Fund. Africa also needs sustainable, flexible and
predictable funding of peacekeeping operations. In
addition, support is required to facilitate the building of
the continent's peacekeeping capacity and institutional
pedestals.

It is in this regard that Nigeria fully supports the
recommendations of the Prodi panel. We acknowledge,
as does the panel, that its proposals will not address all
the peacekeeping challenges on the African continent.
However, the recommendations constitute a very useful
starting point, a concrete basis for immediate action
and a foundation for the future. Overall, the report
reflects the need for greater United Nations action,
African peacekeeping self-sufficiency and the
development of indigenous conflict-management
capacities, within the context of shared responsibility.

The use of United Nations-assessed funding to
support United Nations-authorized AU peacekeeping
operations and the establishment of a voluntarily
funded multi-donor trust fund have been canvassed,
over a long period of time, as panaceas for the
lingering problems of peacekeeping in Africa.
Similarly, the proposed capacity-building development
of the AU's logistics capacity and establishment of a
joint United Nations-AU team to examine the
implementation of the panel's proposals are needed to
revitalize the AU's capacity to implement peace and
security on the continent.

Nigeria hopes that today's discussion will help us
to forge a new consensus and support for these
proposals. We urge the Security Council to take up the
responsibility and the challenge of implementing the
report within a reasonable period of time in order to
enhance the AU's capacity to respond to the ever-
growing peacekeeping and security challenges in the
region. We also hope that a more strategic relationship
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council, on the one hand, and
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission on the other, will eventually emerge.

