Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like respectfully to welcome the presence
of Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia. On behalf of the Government and the people
of my country, I convey to her our sincere condolences.
I also extend the same to the families, the peoples and
the Governments of all the victims. I also acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg
and of the Netherlands, to whom we express our most
heartfelt and profound solidarity.

Argentina would like to underscore the valuable
work undertaken by the Australian delegation in
facilitating the Council's consensus adoption of a
timely and necessary resolution. Such consensus is
especially important given that the text put forward
by Australia takes into account various different
points of View and concerns on the part of members
of this body, thereby illustrating the ethic of collective
responsibility prevailing and the unambiguous priority
of contributing, based on the Council's prerogatives, to
shedding light on this emotional event in order to arrive
at the truth of what occurred in a reliable, objective and
effective manner. That is what the victims and the entire
international community deserve. The international

community has a right to safe aviation without being
subjected to acts that possibly violate international law.
It should be fundamentally so as well as under the most
basic elements of respect for the dignity of human life.

Given the reports received in the past few
days about the limited access to the disaster site in
Ukraine encountered by the authorities responsible
for the investigation, the special monitoring mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and representatives of other international
organizations, the Security Council could not remain
silent or indifferent. It thus became as essential to
express our heartfelt concern over the possible obstacles
encountered by those responsible for the investigation,
as to demand that immediate safe, full and unimpeded
access be guaranteed to the site of the incident, while
preventing any action that might compromise the site's
integrity.

Although the Security Council underscored that
need clearly in its press communique of 18 July, today
we find ourselves morally and institutionally compelled
to demand the same. This continues to be the sole and
the unanimous demand notjust ofthe Council but of the
entire world: that an immediate international inquiry be
carried out under international civil aviation guidelines,
leading to a thorough and effective independent
investigation into the incident to determine objectively
and unequivocally what occurred, and, based on the
evidence gathered thereby, urging that the legal bodies
with jurisdiction hold the perpetrators to account before
justice for their acts.

Just as clearly and forcefully, we demand that any
investigation be conducted free of any obstacles and
based on the norms, principles and procedures set forth
by the International Civil Aviation Organization and
other international procedures on civil aviation.

By resolution 2166 (2014), the Council demands
that all military activities cease around the area of the
incident and that a safe environment be established in
the area to provide access to investigators.

Argentina welcomes all the efforts being made
by various States and organizations with a view to
coordinating the various steps required for an impartial
and coherent international investigation process.

We would also like to highlight the cooperation
offered by the Secretary-General. In the resolution, the
Council calls on him to identify possible options for the

Organization to develop. It also requests that he keep
the Council informed.

On 18 July Argentina said that we should be prudent
at this painful and difficult moment (see S/PV.7219),
including the members of the Council. We reiterate
that today, for now is not the time to profer opinions
or analyses of what happened based on geopolitical
disputes, nor to engage in pointless accusation. The
gravity and the pain resulting from this incident
require serenity and reflection and, by way of reliable
mechanisms, arriving at the full truth of the events and
determining who is responsible.

In conclusion, Argentina sponsored and voted in
favour of today's resolution. We have joined in the call
for all States and actors in the region to fully cooperate
with the investigation and to ensure the respectful and
dignified treatment of the remains of the victims.

