The European Union (EU) is the world's largest regional integration organization and an important partner of the United Nations and its Security Council. China welcomes the efforts made by the European Union in maintaining international peace and security. As the world of today is undergoing profound changes, it is faced with growing uncertainties and challenges. China supports the United Nations and its Security Council in deepening their cooperation with the EU, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Against this backdrop, the United Nations and the EU should work closer on the following areas. First, they should deepen their collaboration in order to firmly uphold multilateralism. Multilateralism is a collective choice made by humankind to avoid the cost of a world war. The founding and development of the United Nations and the EU are examples of multilateralism. As unilateralism and populism are on the rise, the United Nations and the EU need to jointly uphold multilateralism and build a community of shared future, through promoting mutual trust, shouldering responsibilities, ensuring equality and seeking win-win cooperation. Secondly, the United Nations and the EU should work for a more secure global environment. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic proves once again that all countries are connected and interdependent. Facing every sort of complex and severe risk and challenge, no country can stand alone. The United Nations and the EU need to uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and jointly promote global security governance in order to achieve common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We must stick to the peaceful settlement of disputes through such diplomatic means as dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation, and we must respect the sovereign equality of all countries and their right to independently choose their development paths. Thirdly, the United Nations and the EU should actively promote sustainable development. With its advanced economic development, the EU can work with the United Nations to provide greater financial and technical support to developing countries based on their needs, help them achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, eliminate the root causes of conflicts and achieve sustained peace through sustainable development. China has always attached great importance to its relations with the EU. We support the European integration process and are happy to see a united, stable and prosperous Europe. This year marks the forty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between China and the EU. We are ready to further deepen mutual trust with the EU, enhance cooperation in the United Nations and other multilateral forums and jointly make new contributions to world peace, stability and prosperity. COVID-19 has taken a heavy toll both in China and many European countries. Our European friends reached out to us with a helping hand, and we returned the favour with medical and technical assistance as early as we could. We are ready to work with the EU in fighting this battle together, and are firmly supporting the United Nations and World Health Organization in playing a leading role. We will join hands with European countries to continue to provide greater assistance to regions and countries in need.
