The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2
Members of the Council have before them the
text of a draft resolution submitted by France, Gabon,
Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
document S/2010/256.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/ 164, which contains the thirty-first
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1925 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 9.55 am.
10-37989

