Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their important updates. I would also like to congratulate the World Food Programme on winning the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize. This speaks volumes about its crucial work, including in Yemen. It has delivered food assistance to 13 million people, despite many challenges. We would also like to applaud the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Special Envoy's and his deputies' efforts to finalize arrangements for the release of 1,081 detainees, as part of the important confidence-building measures and of the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. We hope that this commitment will soon translate into more implementation. What Mr. Griffiths mentioned was good news: an airlift of hope, hope for the families of the detainees. It is an important first step, and we hope for more to come soon. Nevertheless, the overall situation remains bleak, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock alluded, with funding being the biggest challenge for humanitarian assistance in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is indeed not an easy time, and we are very disappointed that the joint declaration has not been agreed upon. In this regard, let me highlight three points. First, the escalation of violence needs to stop. It is very unfortunate that the Houthis have intensified their attacks, thereby increasing the level of violence across Yemen, despite the calls for de-escalation by the Secretary-General and resolution 2532 (2020). This intensified fighting is particularly worrying for Ma'rib and Al-Hudaydah. The Special Envoy has warned us that fighting in Ma'rib will undermine hopes for the political process and push hundreds of internally displaced persons to move. Furthermore, the military escalation in Al-Hudaydah undermines the Stockholm Agreement. We have consistently expressed our deepest concerns for these attacks by the Houthis, including to Saudi Arabia. They pose a serious threat to regional security, and we reiterate our call for immediate de-escalation across Yemen. Parties must also comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and fully protect both civilians and humanitarian personnel. I would like to underline the point that Mr. Lowcock mentioned on the unimpeded access for humanitarian workers. In our view, further restrictions by anyone sends a signal of not caring about the plight of the people of Yemen. My second point is the imperative of an inclusive political process. While it seems that the military approach is the preferable choice, it only brings greater suffering to the Yemenis. Since April, the Special Envoy has offered a choice for peace through his three-point proposal in the joint declaration. Without a doubt, only through an inclusive political solution can the crisis and the conflict in Yemen be solved. The joint declaration provides the building blocks for that. In that regard, Indonesia once again urges all parties, the Houthis and the Government, to agree on the joint declaration and resume dialogue towards a comprehensive political settlement. It is not an easy task, we know, but the people of Yemen deserve a ceasefire - a holiday from violence - and long-lasting peace. It is the right thing to do, and to quote Mr. Griffiths, "enough is enough". My third point is our concern over the humanitarian situation and the risk of famine. The continued battle complicates the movement of humanitarian workers as well and will increase the number of people who need assistance. In the shrinking economy where financing has been a major challenge for humanitarian assistance, we are worried that programmes may be cut back. We do hope that we will find a more sustainable approach to easing the humanitarian situation in Yemen, including addressing the cost of the economic crisis. We would also like to reiterate our support for the five urgent priorities updated by Mr. Lowcock, while emphasizing the importance of safe and unhindered humanitarian access. Again and again, we continue to talk about the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We understand that there are some details involving the need for the assessment team to repair the vessel. We hope that there are no further hindrances to the United Nations team starting its work to avoid a potential catastrophe. In conclusion, the 13 million Yemenis who will go hungry if they do not receive food assistance deserve a chance for peace and, for once, not to worry about food. We hope that there will be an immediate cessation of hostilities, and that the parties will start finding a sustainable solution to solve the crisis their country. We in the Security Council are united in finding a solution and in seeking peace in Yemen. It is now up to the people of Yemen and its leaders to also seek peace for future generations of Yemeni children. It takes courage and it takes compassion.
