Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Before
I begin, let me say that, as I think I am the fortieth
speaker in this debate, I promise not to speak for more
than half an hour. I shall, of course, read out the short
version of my statement.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would
like to convey the Movement's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, as well as to the Foreign Minister of
Jordan, for having convened this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine.

Another year has begun, and peace, justice and
stability remain elusive in the Middle East. The
ongoing Israeli military occupation of Palestinian and
Arab lands and the denial of the freedom and rights of
the Palestinian people continue to demand the attention
of the international community and require urgent
action for redress, in conformity with international law
and United Nations resolutions. This must be one of
the priorities on the global agenda for the year 2014, a
year that has been declared by the General Assembly
to be the "International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People".

The Movement remains seriously concerned about
the situation in Palestine as a result of the illegal
policies that continue to be pursued by Israel, the
occupying Power, against the Palestinian people and
their land. Over the past months, while the international
community has been exerting efforts for tangible
progress in the resumed negotiations and has articulated
its full support for that process on the basis of the long-
standing parameters rooted in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, Israel, the
occupying Power, has instead, regrettably, continued to
behave in a manner contradictory to those parameters,
to the good faith required for the negotiations and to the
overarching objectives ofthe peace process to achieve a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution.

Tensions continue to rise and to widen the gap
between the expectations for the political process and
the reality on the ground. A brief review of just the
recent period shows that Israeli settlement activities,
including the construction of settlements and the wall
and the confiscation of more Palestinian land, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, military raids and arrests,
and constant violence and provocations by extremist
Israeli settlers, all have continued unabated, in grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention and the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Such violations
are exacerbating the conditions on the ground and
reinforcing doubts about Israel's true intentions and
commitment to the just and lasting peace that the State
of Palestine, with the strong support of the international
community, including the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement, has been exerting serious effort to achieve.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains extremely
alarmed, in particular, by the escalation of acts of
aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, especially in
and around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and Al-Aqsa Mosque,
resulting from provocations by Israeli extremists. The
blatant disrespect for that holy site and those who come
to worship there and the continued threats of further
incursions are tantamount to grave acts of incitement
that are stoking religious sensitivities and aggravating
already high tensions. Israeli Government officials
continue to recklessly fuel such religious tensions by
encouraging extremists to acts of provocation that
threaten to ignite a religious conflict that would have
far-reaching and dangerous consequences for the region
and beyond. Therefore, the Non-Aligned Movement
once again draws the attention of the Security Council
to all these serious matters that threaten international
peace and security and calls for actions to halt all such
Israeli incitement and for respect for the sanctity of
religious sites.

NAM. also reiterates its serious concern over the
continued systematic Israeli violations of human rights
of the Palestinian people, including the killing and
injury of civilians in violent military raids, the excessive
use of force against civilian protesters, the forced
displacement of civilians and the arrest and detention
of still more Palestinians. Despite the recent release
of long-term Palestinian prisoners, Israel continues in
an almost daily manner to arrest Palestinian civilians,
including children. More than 5,000 Palestinians
remain in Israeli jails. These are all serious concerns
for the Movement.

The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip
also continues to inflict grave socioeconomic losses
and humanitarian hardship on the Palestinian people
besieged there. NAM. condemns those violations and
urges the international community to persist with its
calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately
end the blockade and cease its collective punishment
and all illegal actions against the Palestinian people
under its occupation and respect its obligations under
international law. If Israel persists in its contempt for
international law, it will soon be high time for the
international community to undertake measures to
uphold the law and ensure accountability.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
solidarity with the Palestinian people and support
for the realization of their inalienable right to self-
determination and freedom in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a just
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects.
It is hoped that the current negotiations will succeed
within the specified time frame in the achievement of
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that will bring
a complete end to the Israeli military occupation of
Palestine and other occupied Arab lands and usher in
an era of peace and stability in the Middle East.

At this critical juncture, the Non-Aligned Movement
renews its calls for continued support for the Palestinian
people in their legitimate historic struggle for justice,
dignity, peace and the exercise of their rights to self-
determination. The Non-Aligned Movement calls for
a redoubling of international efforts, including by the
Security Council and in line with our political, legal
and moral obligations, towards the realization of those
noble objectives this year.

Lebanon has suffered from repeated Israeli attacks
against its territory with a heavy human and material
toll, followed by subsequent years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to violate
Lebanese airspace and has intensified its incursions
into Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular, resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security of Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

The Movement condemns all the measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
that have been intensified since the outbreak of the
Syrian crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement demands
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967 in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

I thus conclude my statement given on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I now wish to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

In the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, the international community should
exert its utmost pressure on the occupying Power, the
Israeli regime, to end its aggressive and expansionist
policies and non-adherence to international law, norms
and principles. This year, the Security Council should
fulfil its long overdue responsibility and fully support
all of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
by compelling the occupying regime to withdraw from
all Palestinian and other Arab territories. Without a
doubt, continued inaction by the Council will only lead
to more atrocities by that criminal regime which, in the
past 65 years, has waged over 10 wars against all of its
neighbours, continues to threaten countries of the region
and uninterruptedly commits savage attacks against
peoples under occupation, in particular defenceless
women and innocent children, as documented by
competent international organizations and as is strongly
condemned by the international community, including
even supporters of the regime.

The Israeli regime, which is the only regime in
the region to possess every type of weapon of mass
destruction but is not a party to any of the treaties
banning them, should also be compelled to join such
treaties, in particular the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, without any further delay or
precondition, and place all its nuclear activities under
the comprehensive safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, in order to remove the sole
obstacle to the establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East proposed by Iran in 1974.

Over the past several months, the Middle East has

witnessed the escalation of foreign-backed terrorist acts
in Syria, Iraq and Lebanon, targeting hospitals, schools,
religious sites and diplomatic property and claiming
the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians, including a
diplomat from the Iranian embassy in Beirut following
a terrorist attack committed by a terrorist group led
by a Saudi citizen. Undoubtedly, those are only but
a few of the examples of the catastrophic impact of
violent and extremist narratives. Those developments
gave support to the very timely action taken by the
General Assembly when it rejected violent extremism
and promoted moderation and tolerance through its
adoption by consensus of resolution 67/127, entitled
"A world against violence and violent extremism", in
the final days of 2013 - a proposal that was based
on an idea presented to the General Assembly by the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Finally, we firmly believe that the recent strong
support of the international community for the efforts
of the Iraqi Government against terrorist groups should
also be extended to Syria by placing the question of
combating terrorism on the agenda of second Geneva
Conference on Syria. Likewise, every effort should
be made to end the ongoing conflict and to support a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process in order
to allow Syrian people to freely determine their destiny.

