Mr. Kyi Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate
in this open debate on such an important issue.

I would like to join preceding speakers in
expressing our thanks to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing on protection of civilians in
armed conflict as well as for his dedicated efforts to
further promote a culture of protection.

Armed conflicts breed a cycle of violence and
bring untold suffering to innocent civilians in many
parts of the world. It is most regrettable that even
United Nations staff and humanitarian workers fall
victim to armed conflict. Given the gravity of the
humanitarian impact of armed conflict, my delegation
appreciates the proposals and initiatives put forward by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to better protect civilians in armed conflict,
particularly at a time when humanitarian challenges are
becoming more complex.

The restriction of humanitarian access to innocent
civilians in some conflict zones is one of the key issues
confronting the humanitarian community today. We
feel that the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the Government of the country
concerned and with the parties involved in a conflict.
Both Governments and non-State actors must abide by
international humanitarian law and must do their
utmost to fulfil their obligations to protect civilians -
including humanitarian and relief personnel - from
harm. In that regard, the Council should take a
cooperative approach to secure their collaboration in
gaining improved humanitarian access and to avoid
further effects on civilians.

In the view of my delegation, the best way to
protect civilians in an armed conflict is to resolve the
conflict's root causes and to bring the conflict to an
end. In my own country, soon after we had regained
our independence, we had to face numerous
insurgencies, with all their negative consequences, for
more than 40 years. Until a few years ago, there were
18 insurgent groups in Myanmar, and our country and
its people suffered. However, owing to the
Government's national reconciliation endeavours, 17
insurgent groups came back into the legal fold. We
were also able to forge a ceasefire agreement with the
last remaining armed group, the Karen National Union.

As a result, we were able to end the armed
conflict successfully, and peace and stability now
prevail throughout the country. The armed groups that
came back into the legal fold are now working together
with the Government for the development of their
respective regions. They are also taking part in the
national convention that will lay down the principles
for a new constitution. Our national experience has
convinced us that the most effective means to protect
civilians in armed conflicts is to end the conflicts
through peaceful solutions.

My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will be able to further develop appropriate measures to
promote the effectiveness of United Nations
humanitarian work in accordance with the Charter. In
conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm its
continued support for United Nations efforts in
promoting a culture of protection in armed conflict.

