Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Like all the other
delegations of members of the Security Council that have
spoken before us, the delegation of Poland is seriously
concerned at the recent developments and the escalation
of tension in the occupied Arab territories. These events
pose a significant threat to the peace process in the
Middle East, which still remains, despite considerable
achievements, in its very precarious initial phase.

Others have already examined the current situation
in and around the Arab territories against a broader
regional and international background. We share their
views.

We also believe that the peace process in the Middle
East is the only feasible option for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. We call upon these two nations to
persevere in the determination that they have already
displayed to overcome emerging problems and to continue
working together, as provided for in the Declaration of
Principles of 13 September 1993 and subsequent
documents.

These were truly historic steps, demonstrating how
far-sighted the leaders of both parties have been. It has
been clear from the very beginning that it would take a
great deal of hard work, patience and courage to
implement the agreements as they are put to the test,
literally on a daily basis.

Terrorism has proved to be capable of shaking the
very foundations of the peace process in the Middle East.
It has brought death and suffering to innocent people. It
has caused despair and has augmented the feeling of
uncertainty so detrimental to the peaceful future of this
land that has been so severely tested by history. The
Government of Poland has condemned the recent terrorist
attacks against Israel. We strongly oppose any
manifestation of such conduct.

We understand and respect the Israeli Government's
concerns. It has the right and, indeed, the obligation to
provide security for its people. With the overall task of
further advancing the peace process in the Middle East in
mind, the Polish delegation sincerely hopes that the
measures devised by the Israeli authorities will be

 

commensurate with the acts of terrorism, which, after all,
are committed by individuals. The majority of the
Palestinian population who, we believe, support what the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have agreed upon, should not
be held responsible for the crimes committed by others and
left exposed to a new wave of humanitarian difficulties.

Every step that brings the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples closer to fulfilling their declared common goal of
living next to one another in a stable, secure and peaceful
environment contributes to making violence less and less of
an option for those who are not ready to rule it out yet. The
economic situation of the Palestinian population is of
paramount importance in that respect. We fear that the
security measures instituted by the Israeli Government
could obstruct the flow of the international aid pledged to
the Palestinians, thus causing an additional hardship to the
people who live in the area and slowing the whole peace
process.

We welcome the recent decisions by the Government
of Israel on easing some of the restrictions.

There will be no genuine and lasting solution to this
extremely complex situation without the will and
determination of both parties to achieve it. We believe that
they are truly committed to what they jointly designed. It
is our hope that they will refrain from undertaking any
measures that could increase tension in the region, and that
they will work together to overcome all the obstacles on the
path to peace, stability and economic prosperity in the
Middle East.

For its part, Poland will continue to work with the
international community to assist the people of Israel and
Palestine in their efforts to open a new chapter in their
common history.

My comments represent the contribution of the Polish
delegation to this debate to complement the statement
delivered by the representative of Italy on behalf of the
European Union and associated countries, including my
own.

