Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like, Sir, to start by congratulating you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would reaffirm my delegation's
cooperation in every way necessary. We would also

like to commend the Mexican delegation and
Ambassador Heller for their work last month in the
presidency of the Security Council, for which we are
very grateful.

My delegation is grateful for the briefing given
by Ms. Landgren. We are pleased to welcome her to the
Security Council for the first time, and we support her
efforts at the helm of United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) to ensure a successful outcome to the
reconciliation and peace processes in Nepal. We would
also like to also state our gratitude to Mr. Ian Martin
for his endeavours.

In View of recent political events, my delegation
calls upon the parties, in the interests of stability, to
strengthen the political dialogue which has come about
at the cost of so much sacrifice. We have reached a
crossroads where the political and military actors must
continue to work together in a spirit of compromise
that will enable them to carry out the agenda agreed to
at the time of the extension of the mandate of UNMIN
last January.

My delegation is of the View that it is crucial for
the parties to place national interests first and foremost
and that their conduct be in keeping with the
commitments expressed in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2006 and in conformity with the will of
the people as expressed in last year's elections.
Consolidating a multiparty political system that is
inclusive, transparent, democratic and respectful of
human rights is an objective that will favour peace and
reconciliation.

My delegation shares the concerns of the
delegations of Austria and Burkina Faso with regard to
the reintegration of minors, the issue of human rights
and the fight against impunity. We also hope that
particular attention will be paid to situations that could
jeopardize the peace process, in particular, situations
that concern the integration and rehabilitation of
ex-combatants into the Army as well as situations
regarding human rights. Political players who possess
the means to resolve the current crisis must work in a
greater spirit of cooperation.

This political process must make it possible to
build a better society in which the conditions necessary
for national unity are to be found. Costa Rica will
support all efforts to that end and encourages
Ms. Landgren, as the representative of the United
Nations, to continue the good offices that will ensure
progress on pending issues.

