Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
briefing by Mr. Zahir Tanin and the statement by the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie. We also welcome the
presence of Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Venezuela once again emphasizes that resolution
1244 (1999) remains the applicable international legal
basis for achieving a comprehensive settlement within
the framework of political negotiations on the issue of
Kosovo. We have reiterated on numerous occasions
the need for strict adherence to international law with
regard to finding peaceful settlements to disputes,
non-intervention and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Serbia.

The support of the United Nations continues to
be fundamental in Kosovo, in particularly through
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), in order to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights - efforts that
have been complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX, based
on their respective mandates, should continue to play a
proactive, balanced, neutral and complementary role in
the direct dialogue, with a View to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to the
question of Kosovo.

While the report (S/2016/407) of the Secretary-
General indicates that the security situation remained
stable in recent months, we are concerned about
the violent actions carried out by the opposition in
the Kosovo Assembly, which impeded the effective
implementation of the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. We are also concerned about the difficulties faced
by Serbs when it comes to the right of return. Given that
situation, the association/community of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo is yet to be established in
northern Kosovo. Among other things, therefore, we
urge the authorities of that province to work decisively
to achieve that goal as agreed in Brussels at the highest
level. In that context, we reiterate that violence is not
the way to achieve peace and stability. We hope that
the newly elected authority in the province of Kosovo
will support the normalization process that was agreed
in 2013, in an atmosphere of dialogue and mutual
understanding. Now more than ever, it is necessary
that meetings at the highest level take place between
Pristina and Belgrade.

With regard to regular discussions facilitated
by the European Union on the technical aspects, we
welcome the fact that modalities have been agreed
for the implementation of the 2011 agreement on
mutual recognition of teaching diplomas, whereby
the European University Association will handle the
certification of diplomas. Education is a fundamental
tool towards creating the values and principles of the
culture of peace.

Furthermore, we regret the lack of progress in
the integration of Serbian judges and prosecutors
into Kosovo's judicial system in accordance with the
agreements reached through the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. We urge that additional efforts be
carried out to facilitate further agreements in different
areas that can be supported at the highest political level,
with a View to fully implement the agreements of 2013.

The issue of shedding light on the situation of
persons who went missing during the war remains a
priority. In that regard, we encourage interested parties
to intensify joint work on the matter, and we welcome
the public holding of the forty-second meeting of the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons, with the
participation of Pristina and Belgrade. We also note the
establishment of the commission for the verification
and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-
related sexual Violence as civilian Victims, with the
support of UN-Women.

In terms of cultural and religious heritage, we stress
the need for the parties to work together to provide
effective protection for important cultural heritage of
the various Kosovar communities. In that regard, we
see as a positive sign that efforts are under way by the
Serbian Orthodox Church and the Kosovo authorities to
resume meetings of the Implementation and Monitoring
Council, which have been suspended since 2015.
In the context of the fight against impunity,
progress includes the ratification of the agreement with
the Government of the Netherlands to host the specialist
chambers to investigate allegations of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during the armed
conflict in Kosovo. We call on all stakeholders to
continue working so that the chambers can begin their
work as soon as possible. The application of justice
in such cases under the due process will contribute to
reconciliation and peace among all parties.

In the context of the fight against terrorism, we
highlight the efforts ofthe authorities of the province of
Kosovo to continue implementing measures to combat
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in order to
prevent the recruitment of citizens of the province by
terrorists within the framework of the five-year strategy
adopted on this issue. However, we are concerned about
information about the high number of citizens who have
joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

We remain convinced that the fight against
terrorism must be accompanied, among other things,
by effective strategies against social exclusion, poverty,
Violence and intolerant ideologies in order to prevent
radicalization, especially of youth. In addition, we
work must be carried out to effectively implement the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly prohibiting the financing, training and arms
transfers to such groups.

In conclusion, we once again encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in pursuit of a peaceful, just
and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) andthe 2013 Brussels agreements.

