Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation welcomes you, Sir, as
you preside over today's meeting of the Security Council to
conduct an open debate on the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Over the past year the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has, on the whole, been stable, and the peace
process has been proceeding smoothly. That is a concrete
manifestation of the political will and cooperative attitude
of the parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
welcome it. Because peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been hard-won, it should be doubly cherished and nurtured.

We believe that national reconciliation is the key to a
genuine, lasting settlement of the problem in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has laid down a basic
framework of that purpose, and the parties concerned
should implement the Peace Agreement in earnest.

Maintaining stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in
the fundamental interest of the ethnic communities of that
country, and is conducive to peace and stability in the
region. We hope that the parties concerned will take
account of the fundamental interests of the people, and that
they will set aside their grudges, restore mutual trust,
achieve national reconciliation and join in working to
achieve development. In that connection, the parties
concerned should continue their efforts to resolve
outstanding issues to bring about the full functioning of
common institutions.

There can be no talk of development without peace
and stability, and peace and stability can be better
maintained when there is development. At present, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is in the phase of consolidating peace.
Post-conflict economic reconstruction is a formidable
task, and we appeal to the generosity of the international
community to assist the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to heal their war wounds and to rebuild their
homes.

We support the diplomatic and political efforts of the
international community in behalf of the peace process for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also support the work of the
United Nations carried out, in its civilian aspects, in
accordance with the provisions of the Peace Agreement.
We believe that the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) should principally carry out
tasks mandated by the Peace Agreement.

Issues relating to judicial reform and economic
matters involve sensitive and complex questions, and
involve high stakes. The United Nations should therefore
proceed with caution in this respect.

We note that the countries contributing troops to the
Stabilization Force are reviewing its future mandate. On
the basis of past experience, operations authorized or
approved by the Security Council have always been
adjusted in response to changes in circumstances. In View
of the fact that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be stable, we hope that the countries
contributing troops to the Stabilization Force will report
to the Security Council in timely fashion on their thoughts
about the future. We would also like to point out that the
task of the Stabilization Force, as its name implies, is to
maintain stability. We hope that any action taken by the
Stabilization Force will be conducive to continued
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

China has always supported the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we have no self-serving
designs in that country. We sincerely hope that countries
in the former Yugoslavia, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina, can live in harmony. We also hope fervently
that, with the common efforts of the parties concerned,

 

Bosnia and Herzegovina can enjoy lasting peace and
prosperity.

