Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today on behalf of the European Union.

Since our last discussion of this issue in July 2013
(see S/PV.7003), the number of violent or even deadly
attacks on journalists has continued to grow. According
to the International Federation of Journalists, 118
journalists and media staff members were deliberately
killed and 17 suffered fatal accidents in 2014. We
mourn the death of the German war correspondent
Anja Niedringhaus, who was brutally murdered in
Afghanistan in April 2014. With her death, both
Germany and Afghanistan lost a tireless builder of
bridges, who was driven by a deep sense of humanism
and respect for other cultures.

Independent journalists are our eyes and ears in this
world of growing complexity. Our insight into current
wars and crises would be severely limited without their
courageous contributions. It is therefore our duty to
protectjournalists in the best possible way. To do so, we
first need to understand the challenges they are facing.
In the past few years, the media industry has undergone
vast changes. More and more citizen reporters and
independent bloggers are joining the more traditional
media corps. News corporations and agencies today
prefer to hire freelance staff. As a result, it is more
difficult to provide protection for an increased number
of freelance journalists who are often lacking the
logistical support of an employer organization.

In many of today's conflicts, non-State armed
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, have become main
actors. Journalists are usually in the greatest danger
in areas controlled by such non-State armed groups,
who flagrantly and deliberately ignore international
law. At the same time, these journalists are often
the only independent source of information left in
an environment marked by anarchy. In other words,
journalists are often at their most vulnerable exactly
where they are needed most. It is time to redouble our
efforts to improve the protection ofjournalists. Let me
point to four areas where more needs to be done.

First, on effective warning, we appeal to all
States to actively provide safety for journalists within
their territory. That also means that in so much as it
is possible, States should warn journalists and media
workers in conflict areas of imminent dangers and
risks in order to enable them to take the necessary
precautions.
Secondly, on accountability, all States have to
do their utmost to bring the perpetrators of crimes
against journalists to justice. It is simply unacceptable
that accountability for the perpetrators is virtually
non-existent at the moment. If accountability cannot
be achieved on the national level, the International
Criminal Court should be charged with the responsibility
of trying cases that amount to war crimes or crimes
against humanity. We encourage the Secretary-General
to include regular information on the safety of and
attacks againstjournalists in his reports. We agree with
the concept note (S/2015/307, annex) that this could help
to combat the culture of impunity for crimes committed
against journalists.

Thirdly, on training, journalists should be sent to
conflict zones only after having undergone professional
security training. News agencies should ensure that
their freelance staff is also well-prepared in that
respect. Germany is strongly committed to equipping
journalists with the proper skills for dealing with
conflict situations. The State-funded Deutsche Welle
Academy is supporting a wide range of locally based
projects on conflict-sensitive journalism, journalists'
security and psychological help. The Academy also
offers an online course for international journalists
to educate them about digital safety and to ensure
their protection against online attacks and targeted
surveillance.

Fourthly, we strongly encourage the Security
Council to continue the discussion on the protection
of journalists. We welcome the adoption of today's
resolution 2222 (2015), which Germany supports
as a co-sponsor. This substantial resolution sends
an important message. It also means that we need to
redouble our efforts to better implement existing rules.

The horrific attack on the French news magazine
Charlie Hebdo reminded us of the bitter reality
that journalists and the freedom of the press are not
only threatened in conflict zones, but potentially
everywhere. Even in otherwise peaceful societies, we
cannot take the freedom of the press for granted. We
have to stand up for it and defend it everywhere and
all the time. In this constant endeavour, an active and
vibrant civil society is indispensable. We therefore
appeal to all countries and regional organizations to
create an environment where civil society can operate
freely and to value the important role of the freedom of
the press. Attacks against journalists are thus not only
attacks against individuals, but they are also an attack
against a linchpin of free and democratic societies.
The Council may rest assured that the protection and
promotion of the freedom of the press and the freedom
of speech is and will always remain a top priority of
Germany.

