Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your outstanding presidency of the Security
Council this month. We also thank you for convening
this important debate on small arms.

The Secretary-General has submitted a report on
small arms that contains important information on the
various aspects of the problem throughout the world.
The report also identifies the different international
instruments that allow us to stem the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, including the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that respect, my
delegation appeals to all to make a firm commitment
fully and optimally to implement the Programme of
Action in order to curb the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. My delegation believes that we
must commit ourselves to that important instrument,
which must enjoy international support. Such support
will make the third Biennial Meeting, to be held in
July, a success.

My country submitted its report on the
Programme of Action at the United Nations Conference
to Review the implementation of the Programme of
Action on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons, held in new York in June and July 2006. We
thereby affirmed our support for and cooperation with
the international community through Governments,
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
combating the scourge of the uncontrolled
proliferation, illicit trade and brokering of small arms
and light weapons.

The danger posed by those weapons in the hands
of gangsters and terrorists threatens societies at every
level. My country, Syria, does not produce such
weapons, yet it enjoys the right to maintain them for its
own defence and for liberating its occupied land in the
Golan, and for all the reasons previously cited. The
Secretary-General's report insists on the fact that,
while only about 30 countries produce small arms and
light weapons, they manufacture approximately
8 million such weapons every year. It is to be noted
that the 2006 report of the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, which deals with issues of
armament and disarmament, refers to the fact that the
four major arms manufacturers of Israel exported
weapons worth some $3.5 billion in 2006.

While the credibility of confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional arms and
adequate arms control must be ensured, it is
unfortunate that Israel has not respected the deadline
for a just and comprehensive peace in our region by
withdrawing from all occupied territories to the 4 June
1967 lines in conformity with the terms of reference
for peace known to the Security Council.

The situation in the Middle East could be the best
possible example in this context. The Israeli
occupation of Arab territories is directly supported by
certain major States that are exporters of conventional
weapons. Those very States, indeed, are engaged in
joint projects with the Israeli military industry to
perfect technologies for the manufacture of Israeli
weapons and to open export markets for Israel. That is
enough to encourage Israel to reject the hand of peace
that the Arab States are extending. It also encourages
Israel to continue to occupy Arab territories and to
escalate tension and violence in the region.

For decades, Israel has practiced what it calls
weapons diplomacy. That was stated explicitly in 1981
by Israel's then economic affairs minister, Yaakov
Meridor. He said, "We are going to say to the
Americans, 'Do not compete with us in South Africa;
do not compete with us in the Caribbean or in any
other country where you cannot operate in the open.
Let us do it. You sell the ammunition and equipment by

a"

proxy. Israel will be your proxy .
It is absolutely clear that the Israeli
representative's statement during this Council meeting
was not consistent with Israel's actions. Israel has been
illegally trading in arms worldwide. That in fact fuels
international terrorism; it protects drug traffickers and
secessionist movements and saps all international
efforts in those areas.

