Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the brotherly Argentine Republic
for having organized this meeting.

(spoke in English)

I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Brazil also wishes to acknowledge the interventions by
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel and by
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.

This quarterly exercise of reviewing the situation
in the Middle East is once again happening against
the backdrop of increasing tensions and threats to
international peace and security in different parts of
the region.

In Gaza, almost two months of conflict - the
third in six years - left us with a legacy of extensive
destruction and exacerbated distrust. The appalling
number of Palestinian civilians dead, injured and
displaced and the scale of destruction of homes, basic
infrastructure and even United Nations facilities are no
less shocking. It is time to break the cycle of violence
and to ensure that both Israel and Palestine live side
by side in peace and security. We must confront the
recurring dramatic consequences of our collective
failure to deal with the fundamental aspects of the
Palestine question, including the settlement policies
pursued by Israel in the occupied State of Palestine. A
clear, united message against business as usual in the
aftermath of conflict is urgently needed. We believe
that there should be a fundamental change in the way
we approach the question of Palestine, including in
the Council. As President Dilma Rousseff stated on
24 September at the opening of the general debate of
the General Assembly, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
"must be properly resolved, not precariously managed"
(A/69/PV6, p. 8). If the international community can
be convened to help rebuild Gaza after each conflict,
why not help devise a political solution to prevent new
episodes of destruction so as to make peace much more
than the mere absence of war?

There is some solace in the fact that the ceasefire
agreed under Egyptian auspices is currently being
maintained. We strongly encourage the parties to
consolidate the basic agreement so that they can resume
substantialtalks aimed atresolving the underlying causes
ofthe conflict. The trilateral agreement between Israel,
Palestine and the United Nations for the reconstruction
of Gaza is important and commendable, but it is not
sufficient. The blockade should be completely lifted,
allowing for the urgently needed humanitarian aid to
enter the Strip and granting the people of Gaza their
right to start rebuilding their lives.

At the international donors Conference held in Cairo
on 12 October, another significant measure aimed at
mitigating the effects of the destruction in Gaza, Brazil
recalled its recent efforts to contribute to the objective
of a viable, peaceful and sustainable State of Palestine.
We also pledged an additional contribution of6,000 tons
of rice and 4,000 tons of beans to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East to be distributed in Gaza. While supporting
the reconstruction of Gaza, this must be the last
occasion on which Gazans need to rebuild. All efforts

should be undertaken to ensure accountability on both
sides for the human rights violations and violations
of international law and humanitarian law committed
during the conflict. Fighting impunity is another way
of preventing the recurrence of abuses and violations.

Brazil is increasingly concerned with the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
Iraq. We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks and
heinous executions perpetrated by the so-called Islamic
State ofIraq and Syria (ISIS), which seeks to destabilize
the region and spread extremist ideologies. The steps
taken by Iraqi leaders in forming a new Government and
declaring their commitment to stay united against the
threats posed by ISIS are commendable. We encourage
the new Government to ensure inclusiveness and to
work to meet the needs of all Iraqi citizens, irrespective
of their ethnicity, religion or sect. The international
community should support Iraq in combating terrorism
in a way that is fully and strictly compatible with the
Charter of the United Nations.

Turning to Syria, it is greatly disturbing thatviolence
continues unabated and the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating further, despite the adoption of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) and the United Nations
efforts to implement them. We strongly condemn the
continued violations of human rights committed by
all sides, as has consistently been denounced by the
Human Rights Council's Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
As the Commission's Chair, Mr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro,
stated during the presentation of the Commission's
latest report in August 2014 (A/HRC/27/60), the
number of innocent Syrians killed, including at the
hands of terrorist groups, is climbing even higher, and
their stories and their pain seem increasingly obscured
by the extent of the tragedy.

It is as clear as ever that there is no military
solution for the crisis. It is, however, dismaying to
learn that there continues to be a belief in the merits
of putting more weapons in the hands of armed groups.
Brazil commends the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission, which concluded its activities in September
and whose efforts led to the successful removal and
destruction of the chemical weapons declared by
Syria. We expect the destruction of the 12 remaining
production facilities on Syrian territory to start as soon
as possible.

We applaud the outstanding generosity shown
by many countries in the region, including Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey and Egypt, in receiving Syrian refugees.
The international community should support that
honourable effort. Brazil has also contributed to that
effort by receiving more than 1,500 refugees from the
Syrian conflict.

Brazil is also concerned about security and stability
in Lebanon. We strongly condemn the terrorist acts
perpetrated by extremist groups in the Beqaa Valley
and surrounding areas, including the towns of Aarsal
and Brital. We stand by the Lebanese Government in
its fight against terrorism. Our participation at the
Ministerial Conference on International Support for
the Lebanese Armed Forces, held in June in Rome,
derives from our firm solidarity with Lebanon's State
institutions. We would like to underline once again our
support for the policy of dissociation from regional
crises agreed in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.
Brazil's participation in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, whose Interim Maritime Task
Force has been led by Brazilian officials since 2011,
plays a prominent role in translating our commitment
into practical actions. In addition, the Brazilian Navy
School in Rio de Janeiro trains Lebanese Navy cadets.

The Security Council has a paramount legal and
political responsibility and cannot abstain from its
duties. Brazil expects the current situation in the Middle
East to prompt the Council into a new phase of active
diplomatic engagement to resolve those questions to the
direct benefit of Palestinians, Israelis, Iraqis, Syrians,
Lebanese, Libyans and other peoples in the region.
Brazil is ready to offer assistance and support.

