Dr. Nabarro: I would like to thank the Security
Council, especially the Nigerian presidency, for this
initiative. I should also like to thank the Director-
General of the World Health Organization, Dr. Margaret
Chan, for her leadership. I also greet all the others who
have been invited to offer briefings today, and who
have really played very key roles in the global response
to the Ebola outbreak.

I should like to focus on three components of the
Ebola response. The first is the impact of decisive and
powerful leadership. The second is the importance of
community ownership of the response. The third is the
value of working together in long-term solidarity

First, with respect to powerful and decisive
leadership, national Governments, regional
organizations and global leaders have stepped up to
the challenge of Ebola like never before. The leaders
of countries that have been affected by the outbreak
have taken charge, articulated clear visions, provided
strategic direction and enabled a massive response to
unfold. The Governments of the affected countries
created mechanisms to engage all the necessary
stakeholders. Local and national health actors have been
playing an essential role alongside other government
sectors, civil society, private enterprises, scientific
institutions and the media.

Regional and subregional organizations have
been instrumental in channelling attention and
fostering action from the start. This has really been
an extraordinary, collective response. The African
Union established its support to the Ebola Outbreak in
West Africa (ASEOWA) in September 2014. ASEOWA
deployed more than 850 medical workers from
several African countries, and recruited over 4,000
local volunteers, including people who had survived
Ebola. I am sure that we will hear more about that
from Mr. Antonio. The African Union Chairperson,
Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, stimulated a private-sector
fundraising drive in November 2014, which engaged
senior African businesspeople and mobilized more
than $32 million. On 20 July 2015, the African Union
Health Ministers adopted the statute for the African
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, during
the International Conference on the theme "Africa
Helping Africans", held in Malabo. The Mano River
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States have worked intensively on inter-country issues
and reinforced national systems for prevention and
response.

At the global level, world leaders have showed
extraordinary initiative and commitment. They have
mounted massive, rapid and coordinated support
to help affected countries take the heat out of the
epidemic. For example, in September, the Secretary-
General called for the whole of the United Nations
system to step up its support to the Ebola response.
That followed a request from the Presidents of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone that the Organization help
them to coordinate the international response. To that
end, the Secretary-General proposed the first-ever
United Nations emergency health mission. Known
as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER), the Mission was endorsed by the
General Assembly at the end of September 2014 under
the presidency of Mr. Sam Kutesa, Foreign Minister
of Uganda, as one of his first acts as President of the
General Assembly. UNMEER incorporated enhanced
action from many United Nations entities, and deployed
to the region just 10 days later.

At the same time, the Secretary-General also
established the multi-partner Global Ebola Response
Coalition. It has become an integrated platform
that engages Governments, non-governmental
organizations, intergovernmental groups and academic,
philanthropic and private-sector organizations in
weekly meetings. Forty such meetings have taken place
thus far, wich serve as a venue for high-level strategic
coordination and for identifying challenges, enabling
collective and timely adjustments to strategy and
encouraging continued innovative research, along with
incorporating scientific advances.

UNMEER closed on 31 July 2015, having achieved
its core objective and contributed to a scaled-up
response and improved coordination. The World Health
Organization has now taken on the stewardship of the
collective response of the United Nations system and
will continue to encourage everyone to work effectively
together.

The past 12 months of the response have been
financed from multiple sources. One example is the
United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund, where 40
Member States have joined together with private
businesses, charities and individuals to contribute
funding to the Ebola response that can be used where
it was most needed. That is going to support logistics
and air travel, clinics and staff, as well as the necessary
elements to ensure community ownership.

On 10 July, the Secretary-General convened the
International Ebola Recovery Conference. Together
with partners, the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union, the World Bank and the African
Development Bank worked to generate more than
$3.4 billion in new financing. The significant pledges
are catalysing national and regional Ebola recovery
efforts. But I must stress that that work is not cheap, and
the response and the recovery need continued solidarity
and support from Member States.

Moving on to the second of my three points, I
should like to say a little about the response.

I want to stress something that we have come to
recognize in recent months. The response works best
when it is owned by the affected communities. What
we seen is that the implementation of the response has
gone well when people whose health is at risk have felt
in control of their own lives, as well as their deaths,
and when they have been able to shape the response
to suit their interests. People's concerns and fears are
more easily addressed, important cultural practices can
be made both safe and dignified, and concerns are more
easily addressed. Transmission chains are identified
more quickly, contacts are traced more readily and
the outbreak ends more rapidly if communities own
the response. The response works really well when
community leaders are part of its direction. Therefore,
when people themselves define the support they
require, and when their leaders help them to access
the assistance they need quickly, when they need it,
challenges and obstacles are swiftly overcome. On
ocassions, however, we have seen that the response
has not consistently prioritized community ownership.
As we move forward, it is now always been seen as an
essential and vital ingredient of the response.

I now turn to my third point, namely, working
together in long-term solidarity. The Ebola outbreak in
West Africa is not over. Doctor Chan has briefed us on
the remaining work to be done. She has also pointed
out the need for technical, operational and financial
solidarity with the thousands of people who are hard at
work in the affected countries, who are stemming the
tide of the current outbreak and who remain vigilant
and ready to respond. They cannot afford to let up on
the response, and they need our collective solidarity.
But there is more.

The thousands of people who have survived Ebola
need dedicated support, because the longer-term
consequences of living through Ebola area becoming
more apparent every day. Far too often, the survivors
face stigma. Their convalescence is often painful
and debilitating: loss of eyesight, severe joint pain,
headaches and extreme fatigue. It is really a serious
issue. Many survivors now need access to dedicated
health care, as well as help to rebuild their lives. Only
then are they able to contribute fully to their families,
to society and to the economy.

Let us now look at the nature of the response. The
importance ofanall-of-societyresponsetothe emergency
is necessary. That means different actors - from local
leaders to mining companies - contributing their
specialty knowledge and expertise. The contribution is
greatest if all those different stakeholders are helped to
align their activities and coordinate their work with one
another. Strong engagement by all actors is necessary
until the outbreak is brought to an end, and as recovery
is advanced.

Countries need help to comply with the International
Health Regulations and to ensure their people's health
security. Looking ahead, that means predictable
funding for accessible and effective health systems, as
well as predictable support when a health emergency is
suspected.

I would go a bit further in that regard: the coming
years will see unexpected new outbreaks of disease;
we just do not know where, when or how they will
strike. That means that the security of humankind
depends upon being able to anticipate such outbreaks,
to react quickly, to curtail the spread of disease and
to prevent people's suffering. To get that kind of
response in place depends upon the whole of society
everywhere being meaningfully engaged, with ring-
fenced support for strong basic health systems and for
community resilience, together with proven capacities
for surveillance, analysis, early warning and rapid
reaction. Societies that collectively recognize those
threats to health, proactively address the challenges
and engage with their health systems in the response
will be at the heart of secure nations and a safer world
in the future. Reducing the risk of health crises does
contribute to a peaceful and a more secure future for
everyone around the world. It needs our collective and
continued engagement, and that is why I am so pleased
to have had the opportunity to brief the Security
Council this morning.

