Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
pleasure to see you, Madame, presiding over today's
meeting. I take this opportunity to welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and to thank him
for his briefing and update on the situation in Somalia
and recent events there. We also welcome and thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, and Mr. Boubacar
Gaoussou Diarra, Special Representative of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, whose briefings were
most enlightening on the situation in Somalia.

Since our most recent meeting on Somalia
(S/PV.6599), we have seen significant positive political
developments in the area of security. The unity
agreement adopted by the Transitional Federal
authorities at the consultative meeting of 6 September
is undoubtedly a political milestone of great
importance. We would like to highlight the work
carried out by Mr. Mahiga and his efforts to facilitate
the consultations that led to this important agreement
between the parties.

1 1-49644

The road map adopted by the various parties and
the four tasks identified as priorities in ending the
transition period in 2012 constitute a solid basis for the
process of stabilization and unification. The federal
authorities must lead its implementation, consolidate
the security gains and make progress towards the
adoption of the Constitution, which should occur
alongside a dialogue for reconciliation.

Transparency and good governance are also
essential to national reconstruction and will help to
strengthen its legitimacy and credibility and maintain
the firm support of the international community. The
achievements in terms of security will be sustainable
insofar as the Transitional Federal Government is able
to strengthen its political management.

We are alarmed by the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. The news reaching us every
day is truly dramatic. International agencies are
reporting that that current crisis is one of the most
serious to affect the region for the past two decades. It
is important that we continue to work to guarantee
security and access for aid organizations and ensure
that aid reaches the populations most in need. We
reiterate that the parties to the conflict must respect
humanitarian principles, guarantee protection for the
civilian population and cooperate to ensure efficient
logistics.

With famine having been declared in six of the
eight regions of southern Somalia, the transitional
federal authorities must show that they are able to deal
with the situation and that their primary goal is
meeting the immediate needs of the population. We
urge them to employ every means at their disposal to
guarantee the security of the civilian population and do
everything possible to help and protect them.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it is
crucial for the international community to support the
Transitional Federal Government so that it can assume
its responsibility of protecting civilians and play a
coordinating role in providing assistance. While the
Transitional Federal Government has the responsibility
of demonstrating such leadership, the United Nations
and the international community must also continue to
contribute so that, through a comprehensive approach,
emergency assistance is increasingly linked to creating
conditions conducive to sustainable development and
the recovery capacity to ensure food security and
livelihoods in the long term, while contributing to the

development of sustainable structures after the crisis
and to the prevention of future emergencies.

We must continue to strengthen State institutions,
recognizing their primary responsibility in the
restoration of security, political stability, the rule of
law and economic development. The Secretary-General
warns that, as the end of the transitional period
approaches, there has been a proliferation of entities
that claim to be regional administrations. This requires
Organization and the international community to
maintain a unified dialogue within the framework of
the commitments and goals contained in the road map,
and thereby prevent the fragmentation of the State and
contribute to its stabilization.

The work and presence of the African Union
Mission in Somalia is crucial to the stabilization of
Somalia. We must therefore urgently ensure that it has
the necessary resources and appropriate equipment to
fulfil its mandate and improve the troops' living
conditions. My country supports the efforts undertaken
to that end.

To conclude, I urge the Transitional Federal
Institutions to comply with the terms agreed in the road
map with respect to both the principal tasks and
priorities and to the deadlines and implementation
mechanisms for the next 12 months. The role of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and of the
joint international coordination committee will be
crucial in this regard.

