Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
joining previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on

your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We wish you every success in steering the
work of the Council to a successful conclusion. We
extend our appreciation to Panama for convening
today's debate, which provides an opportunity to
reaffirm our collective commitment to ensuring the
protection, rights and well-being of children in armed
conflict.

We also thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary General, and
Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
their insightful briefings, delivered this morning.

Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), a
number of important steps has been taken to ensure the
protection of children in conflict situations. These
include the creation of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism to provide accurate and timely information
on grave violations against children in war and of the
Working Group to develop concrete recommendations
on child protection in country-specific situations.
Nevertheless, it remains a grim reality that children
continue to be subject to grave violations in conflict
situations worldwide.

Today's meeting is of particular importance to
Afghanistan as a country that has suffered from
decades of armed conflict that has had a devastating
impact on the most vulnerable part of our population,
namely, children. Nevertheless, since 2001, we have
achieved considerable progress in promoting and
safeguarding the rights of our children.

We remain firm in our commitment to ensure the
security and well-being of our children at every stage
of their lives. Afghanistan is a party to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols;
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and
on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography. National legislation has been enacted to
implement the Convention and its two Protocols. With
the conclusion of our nationwide child demobilization
programme, 7,444 underage soldiers recruited by
illegal armed groups have been demobilized. As a next
step, we have put in place reintegration committees and
vocational schools in many provinces to reintegrate
former soldiers into civil life. In that regard, we call on
our international partners to assist us in implementing
such programmes and to facilitate the creation of
employment opportunities for our young people.

In addition, strict measures have been adopted to
prevent the recruitment of soldiers under the age of 18
into our armed forces. Mechanisms are in place in our
security institutions to assess and monitor new soldiers
during both the recruitment and training stages to
ensure that the minimum age requirement for
recruitment is being met.

Regarding child trafficking, our Government has
established a special task force to prevent children
from being abducted and falling victim to traffickers.
Since 2002, 429 cases of child trafficking have been
reported, from which 329 children have been rescued.
Our Penal Code is one among various domestic laws
addressing the abduction and kidnapping of children.
Those measures have been complemented by President
Karzai's initiative to create an inter-ministerial
commission for the prevention of child trafficking in
November 2003, as well as by the launch of our
national action plan to combat child trafficking.

Despite our progress, terrorism remains a harsh
reality in the lives of our children. Terrorists have
increased attacks against schools, teachers,
schoolchildren and clinics. Attacks on schools and
school burnings have kept approximately 300,000
children from attending school out of fear of violence.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General,
between August 2006 and July 2007 alone, at least 133
incidents of school attacks were reported. Such attacks,
which have occurred mainly in the southern provinces,
have led to the closing of 384 of the 721 schools in the
provinces of Helmand, Kandahar, Uruzgan and Zabul.

Terrorists have spared no effort to harm all
segments of society as they have increased their attacks
in densely populated areas or in the vicinity of public
gatherings. Such acts have had a devastating impact on
the lives of our children. Just three months ago, a
terrorist attack against a parliamentary delegation in
Baghlan province led to the death of more than 50
children, while another 90 were severely wounded. In
that context, I express my delegation's appreciation to
the Council for its swift response in condemning the
attack on 8 November.

Afghanistan's enemies have resorted to new and
brutal tactics. In the most malicious practice
conceivable, terrorists are recruiting children and
sending them out to function as suicide bombers. As
documented in a UNICEF report entitled "Child Alert:
Afghanistan", released in October of last year, a

16-year-old Afghan boy was ordered to wear a vest full
of explosives and to detonate it in Ghazni province.
The report quotes the boy as saying, "The remote
control battery was with me, but I could not do it and
threw the battery away If I didn't do it, they said I
would go to hell". In that regard, we remain extremely
concerned about the use of religious schools in the
region where children are indoctrinated and deceived
into carrying out terrorist acts.

We are also concerned about the loss of life and
injury suffered by children during counter-terrorism
operations, mainly as a result of the Taliban's use of
the civilian population as human shields. In that regard,
we call on our international partners to exercise the
maximum caution and to enhance coordination with
Afghan security forces during counter-terrorism
operations to avoid the loss of civilian lives.

Despite considerable progress in improving the
lives of our children - as seen in the reduction in the
infant mortality rate by 85,000 per year and in the
increased access to health centres throughout the
country - the humanitarian situation of our children
remains dire, owing to the prevailing security situation.
Hundreds of thousands of Afghan children lack the
basic necessities for a decent life. These include food,
water, adequate shelter and sanitation facilities. Their
situation is further complicated by the difficulty in
gaining access to supplies and humanitarian assistance.
In that regard, we welcome UNICEF's latest appeal for
financial assistance in support of the situation of
children in Afghanistan.

Addressing the protection of children in armed
conflict requires the collective commitment of the
international community. It also necessitates a
comprehensive strategy encompassing key pillars. As
part of the effort to safeguard the rights of children, the
international community should place a special focus
on poverty alleviation, lending financial and economic
assistance to post-conflict countries so as to enable
them to achieve their development goals. By doing so,
we will meet the preconditions for the creation of an
environment conducive to sustainable human
development and the well-being of our children.
My delegation commends the work undertaken by
the relevant United Nations agencies to protect and
promote the rights of children in armed conflict,
particularly the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We are particularly grateful
to UNICEF for its ongoing efforts in support of a better
and brighter future for our children.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
commitment of Afghanistan to ensure the protection of
children's rights in general. We remain committed to
supporting every measure, both within the Council and
within other relevant organs of the United Nations, to
protect the rights of children in armed conflict. After
all, by protecting our children, we are securing our
future.

