Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the convening of this
Security Council meeting devoted to the briefing by
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
is the product of the vision and the commitment of
57 countries from Europe, North America and Asia for
peace through cooperation. On this important occasion,
my delegation also welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany in his capacity as the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office. I thank him for his briefing.

As a follow-up to the open debate (see S/PV.7621) on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key element for the maintenance
of peace, we are meeting this morning to discuss an
organization whose vision and actions are inspired
by those principles. As a witness to two world wars
in the space of a generation, Europe has put in place
an instrument for regional cooperation in the fields of
early warning, conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict rehabilitation. The ups and downs
that have marked the existence of the OSCE since the
signing of the Helsinki Final Act and the subsequent
Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe
attest to the urgent nature of the OSCE's mission with
regard to the scope of the challenges still to be met.
That is why I would like to welcome the strategic option
of structuring the OSCE's action around the political,
military, economic and environmental dimensions, as
well as the human and security dimensions.

The German chairmanship of the OSCE comes
at a time when Europe is experiencing one of its
most turbulent periods since the end of the Cold War.
From Georgia to Nagorno Karabakh to Donetsk in
Ukraine - in all of those regions the OSCE is facing
daunting challenges, in addition to transnational
threats such as terrorism, arms control challenges,
crime, cybercrime, migration and trafficking in drugs,
weapons and human beings. That is why I welcome
the approach that Mr. Steinmeier intends to use in his
chairmanship - that of renewing dialogue, rebuilding
trust and restoring security. For its part, Senegal, as a
firm believer in the peaceful settlement of conflicts in
Africa and the rest of the world, can only welcome the
choice of Germany, which squares perfectly with the
ideals of the United Nations.

In that regard, I would like to highlight and welcome
the OSCE Permanent Council's decision to extend the
mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
until 31 March 2017, and that of the Observer Mission
deployed at the Gukovo and Donetsk checkpoints until
30 April of this year. We should remember that those two
Missions, together with the OSCE Project Coordinator
and the Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine, make up
the institutional mechanisms established to encourage
a diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis. In that
regard, we should support the efforts that have already
been launched to reduce tensions and promote peace,
stability and security, as well as to facilitate among
between the authorities, civil society and ethnic and
religious groups. Combined with strengthened technical
and operational capabilities, the extension should help
to stabilize the ceasefire, the arms withdrawal and
the building of a national dialogue, in accordance
with the Minsk agreements and with respect for the
Normandy format.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict should also remain
at the centre of the efforts of the OSCE, which should
continue to work to convene a conference capable of
serving as the basis for a peaceful negotiated settlement
of the crisis, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. If that is to be achieved, it is
important to intensify efforts aimed at concluding an
agreement on a cessation of hostilities and setting up a
peace process under the auspices of the Minsk Group
with respect for the States' territorial integrity and
the sovereignty.

I would also like to highlight the importance
of continuing the efforts to resolve the conflicts in
Transnistria under the 5+2 negotiations format, and
in Georgia through the international discussions in
Geneva. While it is clear that those tasks remain complex
and highly challenging, ifthey are to succeed the OSCE
will have to work to strengthen confidence-building
measures among the various parties. Hence the
importance of a dynamic partnership with the United
Nations, whose cooperation in that regard will continue
to be valuable. Overall, however, we feel reassured by
the commitment of the Chairperson-in-Office to the
Helsinki+40 Process, to the Review Conference on
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
scheduled for this autumn and to combating common
threats such as terrorism.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Senegal's
full support for the ideal on which the Helsinki Final
Act was founded, establishing on the basis of shared
principles and objectives a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
community from Vancouver to Vladivostok that is free,
democratic, united and indivisible.

