Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for presenting his quarterly
briefing on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Australia acknowledges
UNMIK's continuing efforts, together with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo.

We extend a warm welcome to Mr. Ivica Daeic',
Prime Minister of Serbia, and to Mr. Hashim Thaci,
Prime Minister of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements today.

Australia welcomes the concrete progress made
towards the implementation of the 19 April agreement on
normalizing relations between Serbia and Kosovo. The
progress made in key areas, such as the establishment
of the regional police command in northern Kosovo,
are good first steps. That progress is due, in no small
part, to the leadership of both Prime Ministers. We
commend them for their determination to overcome the
many political, security and administrative challenges
to the implementation of the agreement. We would also
like to acknowledge the central role of the European
Union, and High Representative Catherine Ashton in
particular, in facilitating dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.

The key political development in recent months
has been, of course, the holding of municipal elections.
Australia welcomes the holding of the elections,
which are evidence of the commitment of the Kosovar
authorities to the realization of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We also acknowledge the positive
role played by the Serbian leadership in support of
participation in the elections, and by the OSCE in
facilitating logistical and procedural arrangements in
challenging circumstances.

Australia condemns the attacks on three polling
centres in northern Mitrovica and other disruptive
actions during the first round of the elections held on
3 November. We welcome the commitment of Serbian
and Kosovar authorities to ensuring that those who
have triggered the violence are prosecuted. Despite
the intimidation of voters in northern Kosovo, we are
encouraged by the turnout across the country, including
by Serbian Kosovars, especially south ofthe Ibar River,
in the first round.

Despite the temporary setback witnessed in
northern Mitrovica on 3 November, we are very
encouraged by reports of the smooth and peaceful
conduct of the repeated elections there on 17 November.
We hope that the success of those rerun elections will
contribute towards permanent peace and stability in
Kosovo, for all of its citizens.

This year's municipal elections are critical to
ensuring the legitimacy of Kosovo's local governing
institutions, particularly in the North, thereby
providing a basis for further implementation of the
19 April agreement. It is now imperative that no effort
be spared to ensure the broad participation of Kosovars
of all ethnic backgrounds in the second round of the
elections, scheduled for 1 December, Where such
elections are taking place.

Despite generally positive developments during
the reporting period, there have been some incidents
of serious concern. Australia unreservedly condemns
the attack perpetrated against two EULEX vehicles in
the vicinity of Zvecan municipality in northern Kosovo
on 19 September. We were saddened by the death of
a Lithuanian member of EULEX in the attack and
welcome the efforts made by all parties to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

The good progress achieved over the reporting
period has allowed Serbia and Kosovo to advance on
their respective paths towards European integration.
Serbia will soon commence accession negotiations
with the European Union (EU), and in October
Kosovo commenced negotiations on a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. We commend both Prime
Ministers for their continued active engagement in the
EU-brokered dialogue to help achieve a peaceful and
prosperous future for their countries.

