Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let be begin by
conveying my thanks to the Council for allowing this
to be an open meeting. The Council is obviously
preoccupied with momentous global issues at present,
but the peace process on the Papua New Guinea island
of Bougainville has been of great concern to my
Government and to other Governments of the region. It
is therefore very appropriate that we are able to
participate in the Council's consideration of this issue.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (S/2003/345). I would also like to thank
Mr. Turk for the presentation he made this morning to
update us on the situation. Since its inception, in 1998,
the Office has provided a welcome complement to the
efforts of Bougainvilleans, the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the contributors to the Bougainville

Peace Monitoring Group - Australia, Fiji, Vanuatu
and New Zealand - to bring about lasting peace in
Bougainville.

The Bougainville peace process is entering its
final stages. After nearly 10 years of civil war and five
years of negotiations, the process continues to move
forwards on a number of fronts. Factions on the island
are close to completing weapons collection and
containment. It is time now for the people of
Bougainville to turn their attention to the formulation
of a Constitution and the election of an autonomous
Bougainville Government. The Bougainville
Constitutional Commission has undertaken some useful
preliminary work in that regard.

Before Bougainville can progress to the next
phase of the peace process, however, there is a need for
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville to
verify that former combatants have substantially
complied with the requirement to surrender their
weapons. There is clearly currently some concern on
the part of the Office that not all weapons will be
contained. The United Nations Representative is
therefore reluctant to certify substantial compliance.

The Political Office is also concerned that the
leader of the Me'ekamui Defence Force faction,
Francis Ona, remains outside the peace process and has
the potential to disrupt its progress, especially once the
Peace Monitoring Group has departed after 30 June.

New Zealand understands the concern expressed
by the United Nations Political Office on those two
counts. Nevertheless, in our view, it is unrealistic to
expect that every weapon in Bougainville will be
removed from the community. Furthermore, since
Francis Ona has not been a party to the peace process
he should not be allowed effectively to veto the whole
process and frustrate the aspirations of the vast
majority of Bougainvilleans when the process is so
close to completion. New Zealand certainly welcomes
efforts to engage with Francis Ona; but if he will not
participate constructively, the process must move on
without him.

The countries contributing to the Peace
Monitoring Group have announced that the Group will
depart Bougainville after 30 June. The Group, as has
been acknowledged by a number of speakers in the
Council and by the Assistant Secretary-General, has
played a vital role in the peace process. Not only has it
provided logistical support to the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville through the provision
of helicopter and ground transport, it has also patrolled
the length and breadth of the island, providing the
people with information on developments in the peace
process, encouraging cooperation between all the
parties and supporting the efforts of former combatants
to collect and contain weapons. But the Peace
Monitoring Group cannot remain in Bougainville
forever, and it is important that Bougainvilleans take
up the full responsibility for all aspects of the peace
process.

Former combatants have recently agreed among
themselves on a plan to complete the weapons
collection and containment process. They must now
make every effort to contain outstanding weapons -
particularly the high-powered weapons still in the
hands of former combatants - within weeks rather
than months, so that the United Nations Political Office
in Bougainville can certify substantial compliance to
the satisfaction of the Papua New Guinea Government
and the international community.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville has indicated that it intends to certify
substantial compliance on the basis of affirmation from
the village and district communities in Bougainville -
chiefs, women and church leaders - that they are
satisfied that the weapons that were in their areas have
been contained and that the communities feel safe. The
New Zealand Government would accept that criterion
for verification, as well as a judgment on verification
by the Political Office on that basis.

It is therefore important that the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville formally declare that
criterion without further delay and that it move quickly
to certify that former combatants are in substantial
compliance with regard to stage II of weapons disposal,
as set out in the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

The New Zealand Government supports the
proposal by the former combatants that they make one
final effort to collect outstanding weapons. This
support is reflected in our financial support for
UNPOB's final activity plan - our third and final
contribution to the weapons disposal trust fund. New
Zealand would hope that a declaration of substantial
compliance and an announcement that stage II of
weapons disposal has been completed would follow
quickly once this final effort at weapons collection has
been successfully concluded.
Once UNPOB has certified that stage II of
weapons disposal is complete, it is vital that stage III, a
decision on the final fate of the weapons, be made
without further delay. There is currently a range of
views on what the final fate of the weapons should be.
New Zealand's strong view is that all weapons should
be destroyed in order that the people of Bougainville
can be assured that their safety and security are not
going to be compromised by the return of weapons into
the hands of those with criminal intent.

Lasting peace in Bougainville is tantalizingly
close. New Zealand urges all parties to the peace
process to work determinedly for an early conclusion
to both stage II and stage III of weapons disposal. The
longer weapons disposal is allowed to drag on, the
longer it will be before Bougainvilleans attain the
control that they so deeply desire over their own
affairs. It is time for the parties to move on and to
focus their attention on more positive issues, in
particular the finalization of the Bougainville
Constitution and preparations for the election of an
autonomous Bougainville Government. Only once
weapons disposal is behind them can the people of
Bougainville also turn their attention to social and
economic development and concerted efforts to
improve the living conditions of the community.

