We thank Ms. Khawla Matar and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings today. We are glad to see Ms. Matar in good health. We would like to convey, through Ambassador Ja'afari, our heartfelt condolences on the passing away of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, Walid Al-Moallem, to his family, as well as the people and the Government of Syria. We will remember him as a wise and principled diplomat. He effectively tackled the foreign policy challenges that he faced during difficult years for Syria. He also significantly contributed to the development of Syrian-Russian bilateral relations. We welcome the agreement reached by the Syrian delegations to the Constitutional Committee on the agenda and schedule for the upcoming meetings of the Committee's small group responsible for drafting. We trust that it will continue its work without disturbances this year and next. Unfortunately, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and related restrictions must be taken into consideration, since it is important to protect the health and safety of all Syrian representatives, Mr. Pedersen's team and the Swiss side as host. We hope that the pandemic will not disrupt the Syrians' plans. We will continue to support the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy. The negotiations held in Moscow on the 19 and 20 of November were very useful. Another important element is maintaining a Syrian-owned process, free of external interference. The work of the Constitutional Committee must not be subject to any deadlines. We believe that the role of the international community is to create a constructive environment for Committee's operation. The situation in the territories under the control of the Syrian Government remains generally calm. The Syrian army is rebuffing attacks by terrorist sleeper cells. Idlib remains a hotbed of tension and a stronghold for terrorists from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. Despite the suspension of hostilities, they continue their provocations and fire at army positions and villages. Clashes among various groups, mistreatment of civilians in Idlib and executions and attacks on humanitarian workers continue. Efforts to combat terrorism will persist despite the attempts of some Western representatives to protect the militants by calling for a ceasefire with them. The rebranding of terrorists is unacceptable. Nevertheless, it is public knowledge that some Western States have sponsored large media campaigns supporting an overthrow of the legitimate Syrian Government by force. We all saw those appalling and inhumane videos, the filming of which clearly had received funding from external sponsors. We are deeply concerned by what is going on in the territories where there is still an illegal United States military presence. Foreign occupation is not only provoking separatist tendencies and disrupting the historic ties among various ethnic and religious groups in Syria, but it is also undermining efforts to restore the territorial integrity of the country. Our Western colleagues offer verbal assurances that they "zealously commit themselves to promoting human rights" only when it is expedient. But in fact, they assiduously turn a blind eye when it comes to human rights in that part of Syria and in Idlib. At the same time, there are reports about militants being released from prisons and relocated to Damascus-controlled areas, and about planned trials, among others, of foreign citizens, but it is not clear what courts. The oppression of the Arab population is silenced and the plundering of oil fields and the polluting of the environment continue in Syria, but the United Nations, unfortunately, says nothing about that. Russia consistently advocates preserving Syria's unity and respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We call for the rejection of plans to divide the country and draw out the armed conflict there. That pertains to both eastern and western Syria, as well as the occupied Syrian Golan, the visit to which by senior United States officials we consider an act of provocation. We note that the delivery of United Nations humanitarian assistance is sustainable through the cross-border mechanism in north-western Syria. We are convinced that humanitarian workers have enough capacity to prepare for the winter. We cannot fail to mention an issue that we are already tired of, namely, humanitarian cross-line convoy to the towns of Atarib and Darat Izzah, in north- western Syria. Since April, we have been hearing about a lack of agreement with all stakeholders regarding the organization of this convoy from within Syria. Surprisingly, our colleagues say nothing about the parties' unwillingness to reach an agreement or their violations of humanitarian principles, even though such criticism is constantly heaped upon Damascus, which is actually increasing the number of authorizations for humanitarians convoys to different regions of the country. We already heard today - and will most likely hear more - about the utterly humane principles of the sanctions that the European Union (EU), the United States and other countries have imposed on the Syrian people. We recently familiarized ourselves with the latest version of the guidance note entitled "Commission guidance note on the provision of humanitarian aid to fight the COVID-19 pandemic in certain environments subject to EU restrictive measures". This time the guidance addressed Venezuela, Nicaragua and Iran, while the previous issuance had been dedicated to Syria. If one reads this document carefully, they will soon understand that all this humanity is not worth a dime - the guide stipulates such conditions for interaction with Syria that will scare away any prospective humanitarian actor. Despite external pressure and ongoing tightening - even amid the coronavirus pandemic - of illegitimate unilateral sanctions that target ordinary Syrians, the Syrian Government still makes efforts to reach a post-conflict settlement. Among its pivotal tasks is the restoration of housing and infrastructure for Syrian refugees who voluntarily return to their homes on a daily basis, no matter how our Western colleagues may dislike it. On 11 and 12 November, Damascus hosted an international conference to facilitate the return of refugees, which brought together representatives of more than 20 States and international organizations. Russia rendered assistance to the Syrian side in convening this event and took an active part in it. Unfortunately, the United Nations was represented only as an observer, which cut its ability to engage in the conference meaningfully. We hope the United Nations will participate in this purely humanitarian process more actively, without reference to political goals of some Member States. These goals of Western colleagues - in the first place of the United States, which boycotted the conference and called on others to do the same - are very self- explanatory. They once again demonstrated the double standards applied to Syria and its people, or rather, those Syrians perceived by the West as the "bad" ones, who basically just want to live on in their country without overthrowing the Government. Thus, concrete efforts have been taken to undermine the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) - the resolution they relentlessly call for upholding and that directly states that refugees need to return to Syria. I am afraid I will have to disappoint our colleagues: the conference confirmed the need for substantive work on this track and gave start to this systemic and targeted process. Russia has set forth its efforts aimed at repatriating the children of our citizens from Syria. On 13 November, another group of 27 Russian children returned home. In total, 133 Russian minors have been repatriated from Syria since 2017. Taking into account plans of the administration of north-east Syria to disband the Al-Hol camp, we draw the attention of our colleagues to the growing need for them to repatriate their citizens. At the same time, we should pay closest attention to the dire humanitarian situation in this camp. Also, we remind of the responsibility of the United States, as an occupying Power, for everything happening in the Rukban camp. We welcome the decision to hold a joint meeting on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria, as it optimizes the work of the Security Council and provides an opportunity to address the situation in the country in a comprehensive manner. We hope this practice will continue.
