Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Let me start by expressing our sorrow over the
loss of life during the recent attacks on Shiite
worshippers in Kabul and other Afghan cities and
extending our deep condolences to the bereaved
families. We also wish a speedy and full recovery for
those injured. This is a moment to recall the
importance of protecting the values of tolerance, which
have traditionally marked religious life in Afghanistan.

Let me continue by thanking the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2011/772*)
and Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his
excellent briefing. My thanks also go to Deputy
Foreign Minister Jawed Ludin for his insightful
presentation.

In addition, I would like to express my gratitude
to the outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for sharing his
experiences over his tenure with us by video link.
Mr. De Mistura has overseen a period of important
developments, including parliamentary elections and
the beginning of the transition process. By his
unremitting engagement he has greatly enhanced the
positive image of the United Nations in Afghanistan
and beyond. We are very grateful for his outstanding
contribution to progress in Afghanistan.

The period we are entering now is no less
significant, and we are therefore very pleased that the
Secretary-General has recently appointed J an Kubis as
his new Special Representative. Let me add, in a
personal capacity and also on the basis of my former
experience, that I have had the opportunity to get to
know Mr. Kubis in his many activities, as Prime
Minister of his country, as Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
Geneva and in Central Asia. We are sure that he will be
outstanding in the position. We look forward to
cooperating with him. His tremendous experience in
foreign security policy will be of great value to our
joint efforts in Afghanistan.

As the international engagement in Afghanistan is
evolving, it is important that the international
community and Afghanistan be unambiguous about
their mutual commitments for the decade ahead. The
European Union is therefore pleased with the
conclusions agreed at the recent Bonn Conference.
Building on the outcomes of the London and Kabul
Conferences and a decade of international engagement
following the landmark Petersburg Conference of
2001, the Bonn Conference underlined firm mutual
commitments in governance, security, the peace
process, development and regional cooperation. Bonn
has opened a new perspective for continued
international engagement beyond the end of the
transition through the new 2015-2024 Transformation
Decade.

It is also very encouraging that the Government
of Afghanistan emphasized the importance of
governance reform and recognized that democratic
institutions at the central and provincial levels need
decisive strengthening, including the independence and
effective operation of oversight bodies, notably those
overseeing public finances. The transparency and
accountability ensured by those bodies are essential, in
particular for combating corruption. The European
Union welcomes the recommitment of the Afghan
Government to the full implementation of the Kabul
commitments.

It is important that our work in the security field,
notably policing, be complemented by developing an
effective and independent justice sector. That will be
essential if Afghanistan is to build on the progress it
has made in the past decade in strengthening civil
freedoms and human rights, including women's rights.

At the Bonn Conference we heard the voice of
Afghan civil society, and we stressed the need for
enhancing the participation of that sector in the
country's democratic processes. We also welcome that
the Bonn Conference conclusions reaffirmed the
principle that the peace and reconciliation process must
be inclusive regarding gender and social status and
reasserted that the process and its outcome must
respect the Afghan Constitution, including its human
rights provisions and notably the rights of women. We
believe that Afghan women should be able to
participate in all aspects and on all levels of the peace
and reconciliation process. The European Union wishes
to reiterate its firm commitment to resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.

The Bonn conclusions also emphasized the
importance of strengthening and improving
Afghanistan's electoral process, a crucial step forward
in the country's democratization. We believe that
continuous involvement by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
electoral reform is needed.

Counter-narcotics efforts were also addressed in
the Bonn conclusions. The rise in poppy cultivation
and potential opium production, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, is of concern. The
European Union will continue to support the Afghan
Government in combating the narcotics industry and
welcomes UNAMA efforts in that regard.

I can assure the Council of the European Union's
firm commitment to remain engaged as a strong and
reliable partner, including after the transition has been
completed, as detailed and specified in the European
Union council conclusions of 14 November on
Afghanistan. In addition, the European Union has
extended the mandate of its police mission until the
end of 2014. We will remain committed after the
transition to supporting Afghan efforts to strengthen
civilian policing and the rule of law.

Allow me to touch upon one aspect that deserves
particular attention and encouragement. That is the
follow-up to the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan:
Security and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia. The
Istanbul Conference laid down a useful basis for a
process of political cooperation in Afghanistan's
neighbourhood, owned and led by the countries of the
region. But further progress will be needed in order to
translate the promises into tangible benefits of
improved security and economic development in the
region.

It will therefore be important to work towards the
Kabul ministerial conference in 2012 with the aim of
solidifying the commitments of the Istanbul
Conference. All countries in the region stand to benefit
from a stable and prosperous Afghanistan and from a
peaceful solution to the conflict. They should therefore
be encouraged to open up trade and transit and
encourage cross-border investment, both with
Afghanistan and among themselves.
The United Nations can play a central role in
supporting any commitments in those areas entered
into by the countries in the region. Members of the
United Nations family and the Bretton Woods
institutions - including the World Trade Organization,
the World Customs Organization and many others
can give much needed concrete assistance to
integration in the heart of Asia. The European Union
stands ready to assist initiatives as well.

 

In conclusion, the increase in civilian casualties
caused by anti-Government elements, including the
recent attacks on worshippers, raises the utmost
concern. Yet the progress reported on by the Secretary-
General also inspires hope for Afghanistan's path from
transition to transformation. The role of the United
Nations on that path will remain vital for years to
come, which will include assertively coordinating the
international community and holding the Afghan
Government accountable for its commitments to the
Kabul process and Bonn conclusions.

In that regard, a continuous UNAMA presence
beyond 2014 is important. The European Union is
looking forward to the outcome of the current review
of UNAMA's mandated activities and United Nations
support in Afghanistan. We stand ready to offer our
views on further strengthening the effectiveness of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. The aim of our joint
efforts remains clear: to improve the lives and
livelihoods of the Afghan people.

