The President: I thank the Foreign Minister of
Namibia for participating all morning long, for his
friendship and for his support. I will use the remaining
hours of the American presidency - ten and a half, to be
precise - to urge in writing every member of the Security
Council to offer at least symbolic support of the Joint
Military Commission and the facilitation, as Mr.
Chowdhury proposed, and to follow up on it.

I shall now make a statement, as briefly as possible,
in my national capacity. I thank the President of the
General Assembly, President Chiluba, Foreign Minister
Dlamini-Zuma, the representative of the Organization of
African Unity and Louise Frechette, who is representing
both the Secretary-General and herself, for all of their
remarks. I was profoundly moved by the generosity of their
comments today and by the unstinting support which the
American delegation has felt from all of the other 14
members of the Security Council over the past month.

As Ambassador Hamer said, many attempts were
made to introduce innovations this month, and the good
news is that the 14 other members of the Security Council,
without exception, responded positively. I hope that over
the next few months the Presidents of the Security Council
will continue to test the limits of what is possible here. Our
fundamental goal - I am talking at the organizational
level - is to maintain, restore or reaffirm the central role
of the Security Council in dealing with many of the world's
problems today. The best way to do that is to display the
flexibility, creativity and transparency that Ambassador
Hamer showed. I particularly liked the fact that he
referred to the transparency of our efforts.

This is the last statement that I will make before this
body as President, and it is my hope that when we look
back on January 2000, we will consider it a turning point
for Africa, the United Nations and the relationship of the
United States with both. Nearly two months ago, during
our delegation's ll-day trip to 10 African States, we
decided to make January the "month of Africa", and
announced this in a speech in Pretoria. What we saw in
Africa - the good and the bad, the stories of inspiration
and the horrors that keep one up at night, the things the
international community is doing and what it must do
better - convinced us that these issues could not be
properly addressed by a single event.

Building on the excellent efforts of Ambassador
Greenstock last month, we decided to try to make a
sustained, consistent and energetic effort, and set out to
use the 30 days of the presidency - in fact, we had only
21 days because, as a result of the holiday schedule, we
were able to begin only three weeks ago today - to set
forth a United States policy of sustained engagement
towards that great continent of Africa.

We focused on three objectives. First, and most
fundamentally, we aimed to focus international attention
on African issues. We aimed to put to rest the canard that
Africa does not matter, to refute the belief that the
international community has one set of rules for Europe
or Asia and another for Africa. In fulfilling this objective,
I think that so far we can say we have succeeded,
although, as everyone has said, we will not have been
successful if our efforts end tomorrow or at any time in
the future.

Our second goal was to broaden the paradigm of
security and to discuss, here in the Security Council -
the international community's premier forum for peace
and security - issues that have not typically been our
central focus: AIDS and refugees. Because of their direct
effect on Africa's stability and security and the common
threat to humanity that they pose, we believe strongly that
they should be defined henceforth as security threats, and
treated as such. The meeting on the threat of HIV/AIDS
was historic, as we all agree. All of us understand that, if
left unchecked, AIDS will kill more Africans than all of
the conflicts in the region combined - as it did last year.

 

I think that we reached a consensus that AIDS is,
indeed, a threat to security. I am delighted with the fact that
we are moving towards additional meetings on this subject,
the details of which can be worked out. The President of
the General Assembly has just given his view of this, and
I know that my successors as President of the Security
Council will wish to address this in consultation with the
Ambassador of Indonesia, who is the current President of
the Economic and Social Council, and with other officials.

We must match our words with deeds. For my
country's part, the Vice-President's announcement that we
will contribute an additional $150 million towards fighting
AIDS, while it is far from enough to deal with the problem,
will, we hope, be the beginning of a greater involvement.
We welcome the activities of other countries and hope that
there will be further action in this regard.

With regard to refugees and Mrs. Ogata's important
participation here this month, I think that we have to
continue to challenge the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World Food
Programme (WFP) and ourselves to re-examine our
structures so as to deal honestly with the fact that over two
thirds of the people in the world who are homeless are
classified as something called internally displaced
persons - a terrible term for people who are just as much
refugees as those who have crossed an international border.
We must expand the definition of a refugee and erode, if
not erase, the distinction between a refugee and an person
who is internally displaced.

This is not just some meaningless bureaucratic
distinction. Such definitions have real human consequences,
particularly in a place such as Angola, where over 90 per
cent of the homeless are so-called internally displaced
persons. We cannot let this entire category of innocent
Victims fall through our bureaucratic cracks. I have already
been contacted by the head of the WFP to tell me that I
had underestimated the importance of her organization in
this field, and that she should have the primary point of
pride. I report that fact to the Council for further
discussion. My own view is that this should not be a
bureaucratic argument between UNHCR and the WFP.
UNHCR has the infrastructure and experience. It should get
support from others.

I cannot imagine why, in a country like Angola, we
would have two organizations dealing with refugees, one -
the big one, UNHCR - dealing with the smaller problem,
and the other, WFP - an excellent organization, but not
historically equipped for this - trying to put Band-Aids on
90 per cent of the problem. I have invited Mrs. Bertini to
join us here in New York to talk to all of us about her
strong views on this issue, because it is an excellent
organization and I commend it. But I want to bring to the
Council's attention that I have already received a bit of
feedback from my own comments about UNHCR.

The third objective of our month was unquestionably
the most urgent: to help Africa's leaders solve the
festering conflicts that are ripping the continent apart. For
the United Nations and the United States to meet our
objectives in Africa, African societies need peace. We
must accept a basic fact: Africa's political, economic and
social transformation flows from its peoples' ability to
maintain peace, stability and a just order. All that we
hope for for Africa will not be possible if the conflicts in
Angola, Burundi, the Congo, Ethiopia/Eritrea, the Sudan,
Sierra Leone and elsewhere are allowed to continue.

I want to point out again that those conflicts we did
not discuss this month were left off the agenda not
because we wanted to leave them off, but because those
people dealing directly with them asked that they be
delayed to later in the calendar year. I am thinking
specifically of Ethiopia/Eritrea.

In Angola and Burundi, we face humanitarian crises
of epic proportions. We heard and viewed, thanks to
Ambassador Fowler's video, evidence that the United
Nations sanctions on Angola are being flouted. The
Security Council has established its agenda for Angola:
strengthening sanctions, putting a spotlight on UNITA's
culpability in evading them; supporting operations for a
proposed United Nations office there; and, of course,
continuing to address the horrific state of refugees there.

In the Burundi meeting, we heard from President
Mandela as he shared with us his vision for strengthening
the Arusha peace process. With resolution 1286 (2000),
adopted 10 days ago, the Security Council took an
important step in supporting President Mandela.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our
meetings last week with seven Presidents culminated in a
clear recognition that the time has come for our next
steps. With the parties' recommitment to Lusaka, which
we heard again this morning, and their return next week
to the region to follow up, we can move forward. With its
presidential statement, the Security Council affirmed the
international community's commitment to supporting
them. As President of the Security Council, we have
begun consultations with the Congress and with all

 

Council members on the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers. As long as the parties to the conflict prove
they are prepared to live up to the commitments they made
for peace, the international community embodied in this
great Organization has a responsibility to support them.

Peace in the Congo, like everything else we have
discussed this month, requires a sustained and steadfast
commitment. The coming days will answer the question
asked by everybody this morning about follow-up: Can the
United Nations be more than what its critics often call a
"talk shop"?

I should like to conclude by mentioning another
critical aspect of this month's activities: the revitalization of
the American role in the United Nations. While not directly
related to Africa, it is absolutely essential to everything we
have discussed today.

As all here know, for the past few years that role has
been deeply questioned. After the setbacks earlier in the
past decade, especially in Somalia, Bosnia and Rwanda,
many Americans lost confidence in the United Nations.
Some even speculated as to whether the United States
should remain a part of it. During the last presidential
campaign, members will recall that the Republican
candidate used the United Nations and the Secretary-
General at that time as targets for much of his campaign
rhetoric.

What a difference four years make. To be sure, many
concerns about the United Nations remain, but Senator
Helms, in his unprecedented visit to New York and in his
speech in this Chamber on 20 January, made his View
absolutely clear. As promised, he gave a frank and open
assessment and I congratulate all Council members for the
skillful and brilliant way they addressed his points,
welcoming him to the Chamber with the graciousness
which is the hallmark of the United Nations diplomatic
world, but also one by one taking issue with him on
substance. I know from my private talks with him that it
made a significant impression on him and his colleagues.

The view he expressed, however, is just one View. As
Senator Biden, Senator Warner, Senator Grams, Senator
Feingold and other visitors from the Congress made
clear - as Secretary Albright and I both pointed out in the
last week - most Americans see our role in the world and
our relationship to this Organization in a different light. I
would mention that President Clinton mentioned the United
Nations, Africa and AIDS in Africa several times in his
State of the Union message last Thursday.

But the very fact that Senator Helms, Senator Biden
and his colleagues spent two days here, as well as the fact
that Vice-President Gore and Secretary Albright presided
over meetings of the Security Council, should speak
volumes to all of us about the Administration's
commitment, about our nation's commitment to the United
Nations and a recognition - or perhaps, in some cases,
a re-recognition - of what it can accomplish.

What the United Nations is doing and what it needs
to do in Africa illustrates that it is truly, as President
Clinton has said, an indispensable Organization, despite
its flaws. We do not wish to turn a blind eye to the flaws;
in fact, one of the most valuable things we can do is
address those flaws, but always within the context of its
indispensability to peace, in Africa and around the world.

So, at the close of our month as Security Council
President, I am happy to say that, at the United Nations,
America is back. The United States begins the twenty-
first century with renewed hopes for the United Nations
and renewed commitment to making this vital
Organization work better.

It will be my great pleasure to turn the gavel over to
our friend from Argentina in a few hours. Meanwhile,
once again, I thank the members of the Security Council
 

deeply 7 on behalf of all the United States delegation,
including Secretary Albright. Vice-President Gore and, by
extension, President Clinton, who is well aware of what we
have been doing here this month - for their very gracious
support.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.
