Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Since this
is the first time that I am taking the floor in the
Security Council in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Chile, I should like at the outset to
thank you, Sir, for your words of welcome and to
congratulate you on the excellent way you are
conducting the work of the Council. Through you, I
should also like to express my best wishes to the other
Council members and to the Member States that are
participating in this open meeting, and to thank
everyone for their words of welcome.

My Government attaches great importance to the
situation in Afghanistan. It is one of today's most
important issues and is probably one of the greatest
responsibilities ever assumed by the United Nations in
its history.

I thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for their
interesting and comprehensive briefings, particularly
for their valuable information concerning recent events
in Afghanistan, with respect both to the progress
achieved and to the remaining challenges.

The task facing Afghanistan is enormous, because
it is a matter of building a State and its institutions, of
rebuilding its army and its police, of preparing a
constitution and of effecting the profound cultural
change implicit in the necessary respect for and
recognition of human rights - all tasks of enormous
scope. Building a democracy is not an easy task; it is
obviously a long-term domestic challenge. What is
indispensable in order to overcome the many obstacles
inherent in the process of Afghanistan's democratic
stabilization is that the international community must
continue to resolutely support the country.

We fully support the process of preparing a new
constitution. In that connection, we note the creation of
a constitutional drafting commission whose members
reflect Afghanistan's regional, ethnic, professional and
religious diversity and, in particular, with the
participation of women in the process.

While we welcome the public consultations that
have begun, we share the concern expressed by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and by the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission at the increase in the number of
threats, acts of intimidation, physical attacks and
detentions carried out against citizens who have
publicly expressed divergent political opinions or
views. We believe that only through full and broad
participation will the new constitution reflect the needs
and aspirations of the Afghan people. Therefore, we
hope that the agreed timetable will be respected and
that a new founding charter can be adopted in
September, as Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
indicated.

As the Security Council, we have the additional
responsibility of assisting whenever necessary in the
preparation of free elections. In that context, we
warmly welcome the Council mission to Afghanistan
planned for October, aimed at supporting that very
process.

We agree that security continues to be the most
serious challenge facing Afghanistan. We also share the
concern expressed at the increase in attacks against
personnel of international humanitarian organizations,
the International Security Assistance Force and the
Afghan Interim Administration by Taliban groups and
other rebel elements. We therefore share the View that
the priority should be to speed up reform in the area of
security, including disarmament, demobilization and
the reintegration of ex-combatants.

We welcome the information provided by
Mr. Costa about the work being done in Afghanistan by
the Office on Drugs and Crime, which is all the more
valuable given the serious obstacles that it has had to
face in the performance of its duties, notwithstanding
the cooperation and commitment of the Afghan
Government.

In Afghanistan, concerns have been raised about
the results of the rapid assessment survey of opium
production conducted last March, which revealed that
poppy crops have been detected for the first time in
various districts of the country in areas beyond where
they have been traditionally grown. Nevertheless, we
note the success achieved in the eradication of crops in
the provinces of Helmand, Kandahar and Uruzgan. We
also salute the anti-drug efforts being made by the
United Kingdom and the police control activities being
carried out by Germany.

The production, trafficking and consumption of
narcotic drugs reveal the vulnerabilities with which
societies are confronted throughout the world. States
cannot address this problem in isolation. It is a shared
responsibility in which cooperation is essential.

While there is no single formula for dealing with
this scourge, a number of approaches might possibly be
helpful to this process. We agree on the importance of
having a broad international approach under the
auspices of the United Nations in support of the
national drug strategy of the Afghan Interim
Administration to eradicate the illicit cultivation of
poppies, as well as efforts to combat drug trafficking,
both in Afghanistan and in neighbouring countries.

In this connection, we welcome the
recommendations contained in the most recent report
of the Office on Drugs and Crime, including on the
need to address certain problems that contributed to the
emergence of an economy based on the production of
opium. Noteworthy among these is support for farmers
to produce viable alternative crops, including the
provision of equipment, seeds and fertilizers; the
generation of alternative sources of income for non-
farm work and, in particular, for refugees returning to
the country; employment for women and access to
education for children; macroeconomic structures in
which the market for raw materials can be
disassociated from the perverse incentives of opium
production; microcredits for farmers and returnees;
and, of course, the effective implementation of the law
against trafficking in opium.

Lastly, I wish to note our full agreement with the
consensual recommendations to be expressed by the
President of the Security Council in a statement
concerning the need to appeal to the international
community, in collaboration with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the Office on
Drugs and Crime, to promote cooperation aimed at
strengthening border controls between Afghanistan and
its neighbours and at combating the traffic in and
consumption of drugs. The challenge is undoubtedly
enormous, but the first steps on this long road have
already been taken.

