Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and la Francophonie of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I take the floor on behalf of my Government to
explain our vote on resolution 2098 (2013), which has
just been adopted. I should also thank the delegation of
France for preparing the resolution and conducting the
negotiations on it. I should like also to thank all of the
members of the Security Council for their very valuable
contributions, which led to a significant improvement
of the text.

Rwanda voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that it is an important instrument for the
implementation of the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February in Addis
Ababa under the initiative of the Secretary-General, to
whom we would like to express our appreciation.

We applaud the creation of an Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), which, as the Council will recall, is a
regional initiative. We hope that the brigade will be
able to support the Congolese Government in its efforts
to strengthen its territorial integrity. We await with
interest the operationalization of the Brigade and believe
that it should bolster the peace process in the region,
including the Kampala talks. It is therefore important
that it focus on the negative forces that are active in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially
the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
(FDLR), which, let me recall here, are responsible for
the genocide perpetrated in Rwanda against the Tutsis
in 1994 and who made sexual violence into a weapon of
war in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We would like also to recall that resolution 1925
(2010) mandated MONUSCO to promote strategies
aimed at achieving a lasting settlement to the
FDLR problem, especially through the repatriation,
reintegration and reinstallation ofthe persons concerned
to other regions, or judicial prosecution as appropriate.
Unfortunately, despite some progress, that objective
has not yet been met, and FLDR forces, which twice
attacked Rwanda towards the end of last year, continue
to pose a threat to Rwanda and to the region.

By deploying the Intervention Brigade, we
underscore the need to ensure that the impartiality of the
military component of MONUSCO and the protection
of Blue Helmets not be endangered at any cost. We
reiterate the importance of a clear separation between
the role of the Intervention Brigade and that of the
regular forces of MONUSCO, whose main purpose is
to protect civilians, especially against sexual violence,
which has reached alarming rates in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Rwanda remains committed to peace in the region,
and it is in that context that we were one of the first
supporters and one of the first countries signatory to
the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We take this opportunity to express once again our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his pivotal
role in the process, and we welcome the appointment
of Mary Robinson as his Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes region.

During the regional summit held last weekend
in Oyo, Republic of the Congo, Presidents Denis
Sassou Nguesso, Joseph Kabila, Yoweri Museveni
and Paul Kagame reaffirmed their commitment to the
implementation of the Framework and of all of the
decisions adopted at the various summits held at the
level of heads of State of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes region on the security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That is a sign that the region has mobilized for peace,
security and cooperation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we hope that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support
of the region and the international community, will be
able to carry out the reforms necessary to ensure the
success of the process.

Rwanda reiterates its support for the efforts made
by the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and of its Chairman, Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda, which led, inter alia, to a ceasefire between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Mouvement
du 23 Mars (M-23), and to the Kampala talks.

We welcome the use of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. We believe that cooperation
among regional and subregional organizations cannot
take place selectively. We therefore ask the Security
Council to always bear in mind the decisions of the
African Union and regional organizations during its
deliberations on peace and security on the continent.

However, we would recall the Security Council's
consistent rejection ofa military solution. We condemn
anti-constitutional changes of Government, and we
underscore the promotion of an inclusive dialogue
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, enshrined in
doctrine by the Council. It is therefore important that
the position of the Council with regard to armed groups
opposed to a legitimate Government be constant and
consistent.

Rwanda, above and beyond its regional
responsibilities, has also met its international obligations.
As the Council is aware, we facilitated the transfer of the
prisoner Bosco Ntaganda to the International Criminal
Court, and we are cooperating with the United Nations
and other international organizations to ensure that the
672 M-23 combatants who fled to Rwanda on 16 March
2013, including individuals subject to United Nations
sanctions, be demobilized and treated in keeping with
international law.

To conclude, we call once again on the Security
Council and all of its member States to endorse without
reservation the Framework agreement, the regional
process of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the individual and collective efforts
of the countries of the region. We hope that following
the adoption of this significant resolution, the Council
will finally be able to free itself from preconceived
notions from the past, distance itself from the policy of
scapegoating and support the efforts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region to
restore peace, security and stability to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, thereby making
it possible for the Congolese Government to tackle the
deep-seated causes of the conflict in that country.

