Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): My delegation is
pleased to address this public meeting of the Security
Council. We welcome the report of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the issuance of its work
programme for its thirteenth 90-day period
(S/2004/820, annex). We would like to express our
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, for his
clear and comprehensive report and his presentation of
the work programme, as well as for his personal
commitment to the Committee's work. We also thank
Mr. Javier Ruperez, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate, for his presentation.

My delegation is encouraged by the reaffirmation
that the Committee will intensify its efforts to monitor
and promote the implementation by United Nations
Member States of all aspects of resolution 1373 (2001),
operating on the principles of cooperation,
transparency and equal treatment.

My delegation welcomes the Council's August
2004 endorsement of the organizational plan of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED). The stage has now been set for the
implementation of the plan to make the new structure
operational. As the establishment of the CTED was
aimed at strengthening the CTC and providing it with
additional tools and resources, we welcome the
Committee's efforts to ensure the full operational status
of the CTED, to maintain a close and cooperative
relationship with the Executive Director and his staff
and to further increase the Committee's capacity,
including through enhanced cooperation with the Al
Qaeda/Taliban sanctions Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

I should like to inform the Council that Malaysia
has fulfilled all its obligations as set out in paragraph 6
of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We
submitted our fourth report on 17 September 2004 in
response to the queries of the Committee. In that
respect, we note the delay in the submission of reports
by some Member States. We urge the Committee to
identify the reasons behind the delay and take
appropriate steps to assist those States. We might also
ask whether the delay could be attributed to the process
being burdensome to Member States, thus leading to a
case of "reporting fatigue". This might then merit an
effort by the CTC to find new and creative ways of
handling the question of reporting by Member States.

We recognize that, in order for the Committee to
be able to function effectively, visits by the CTC to
Member States are essential. We note that the
Committee has adopted general guidelines for
conducting CTC visits to Member States. Through
these visits, it can bring to the attention of the Council
the shortcomings in the implementation by Member
States of resolution 1373 (2001), highlighting some of
the successes and failures, as well as providing
recommendations to improve the overall process.

Malaysia cannot but further emphasize the
importance of providing technical assistance to
Member States to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity. We welcome the fact that this remains one of
the fundamental commitments of the CTC. Raising
national capabilities is not just a matter of transferring
funding and know-how. It also requires permanently
changing the priorities of the international community
to ensure that Member States uphold their
responsibilities and meet their commitments. We
welcome the Committee's development of the
Directory of Counter-Terrorism Information and
Sources of Assistance, as well as the Assistance
Matrix. We like the idea of not just Member States but
also relevant organizations submitting information on
international best practices, codes and standards
relevant to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and on assistance and guidance in implementing
those best practices, codes and standards.

No region in the world is spared from the scourge
of terrorism. In preserving the peace and stability of
the South-East Asian region, there is a need for
solidarity and a united response to terrorism and
terrorists' activities among regional countries. Towards
fulfilling that need, Malaysia has made an effort to
establish the South-East Asia Regional Centre for
Counter-Terrorism as a centre for training and
capacity-building in the prevention of terrorist
activities, the management of terrorism-related
situations and the enhancement of public awareness
about countering the threat of terrorism. Since its
inception, the Centre has conducted and participated in
various workshops, seminars and courses on terrorism
to train and upgrade the capabilities of agencies and
participants, both those from Malaysia and other
interested parties. Malaysia is very appreciative of the
support from all the countries of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations, as well as positive
responses from other countries, including the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain,
Canada, Italy, Australia, Japan, New Zealand and the
Republic of Korea, and from the European
Commission. Malaysia also welcomes cooperation
from other interested countries in organizing relevant
training courses. The CTC may wish to examine the
possibility of cooperating with the Centre.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Malaysia's commitment to work with other States to
effectively contain and rout the threat of terrorism.
Malaysia believes that, given the apparent reach of
terrorist organizations and the threat they pose to the
collective peace, security, stability and economic well-
being of all nations, only a concerted and unified effort
will enable the international community to succeed in
this important undertaking.

Malaysia reiterates its commitment to
comprehensively fight terrorism at the domestic,
regional and international levels, in cooperation with
all countries, in accordance with the norms and
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

