Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing today's meeting to urgently discuss the
volatile situation in the Middle East. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his presentation.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned as
the situation in Israel and the Gaza Strip plunges
dangerously into greater turmoil. Fierce air strikes
and continued rocket barrages are gravely affecting
a number of civilians on both sides. The launch of a
ground operation by Israel is alarming, as it represents
a serious escalation of the situation. We condemn the
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel.
The increased range of the rockets being deployed by
Hamas and Islamic Jihad is particularly troubling, as
it could extend the clashes to an even more dangerous
level.

At the same time, we are concerned by the mounting
civilian casualties in Gaza as a result of Israeli air
strikes and shelling. We fear that such a large number
of casualties will only increase ifthe ongoing hostilities
continue. The humanitarian situation is also dire, and
the daily updates of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on Gaza make for harrowing
reading, as they describe over 600,000 people at risk of
losing access to water, traumatized children in need of
psychosocial support, mass displacements and a severe
lack of food and medicine. We commend the ongoing
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and thank
Special Coordinator Robert Serry for having negotiated
a five-hour humanitarian pause between the two sides.

The Republic of Korea urges all Israelis and
Palestinians to exercise maximum restraint before
the situation spins even further out of control. We
encourage the regional mediators to redouble their
efforts to bring. While we are dismayed that the earlier
Egyptian-proposed ceasefire did not hold, we hope
that new modalities can be agreed upon that can bring
relief to those in the crossfire. We reiterate our call
for an immediate ceasefire, as articulated by the press
statement issued by the Council on 12 July (SC/11472).
We strongly support the Secretary-General's efforts to
de-escalate the situation, including through his trip to
the Middle East tomorrow.

While working for a durable ceasefire in Gaza and
a lessening of tensions in the West Bank, we must keep
in mind that the only long-term answer is a negotiated
settlement, with the two-State solution as its essence.
As such, the Republic of Korea appeals to both sides to
return to the negotiating table as soon as possible.

