Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also commend you for having convened this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. As in every open debate on the subject,
Argentina reiterates that the Security Council must
remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict through the promotion of full respect
for international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
as well as by combating impunity.

Argentina appreciates the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/376) and its recommendations.
Unfortunately, the report is lucid in stating that the
state of the protection of civilians remains abysmal.
It is therefore imperative to recall that the parties to
an armed conflict are bound by the basic norm of
international humanitarian law, which provides that
civilians must be protected from the effects of conflict.
That obligation, contained in common article 3 of the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949, is also applicable
in the context of armed conflicts that are not of an
international character, that is, to non-State combatants.

Argentina not only agrees with the report of the
Secretary-General but also particularly thanks the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Director, Mr. Philip Spoerri, because, as well as being
present, they both made statements this morning. We
appreciate the presence of the highest authorities,
which clearly demonstrates that full compliance
with international humanitarian law is still a basic
challenge for all States. The principles of distinction
and proportionality are crucial. We must also recall
the basic norm that non-compliance by one party to a
conflict does notjustify non-compliance by the other.

With regard to the promotion of compliance, it
is important that Member States remain committed
to ensuring awareness of the obligations imposed
by international humanitarian law. In Argentina,
international humanitarian law has been included as
one of the most important aspects of international law
in the curricula of law schools and in the training of
the armed and security forces. In addition, Argentina
participates in the joint initiative "Reclaiming the
protection of civilians under international humanitarian
law", one of whose undertakings is a series of seminars
to promote compliance with international humanitarian
law through practical recommendations. The delegation
of Norway will certainly mention that initiative, which
Argentina supports.

United Nations work is crucial to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, to preventing the emergence
of situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, and to putting an end to
such situations when they arise. My country shares the
Secretary-General's observations with regard to the
distinction between the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the responsibility to protect. However,
to prevent violations of humanitarian law in armed
conflict and the four crimes under the responsibility to
protect from being committed, prevention is key. In that
regard, we highlight the importance of full respect for
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

Regarding action by the Security Council,
my delegation wishes to underline the need for
peacekeeping operations to comply with international
humanitarian law, as well as the need to continue to
include protection activities in the mandates of United
Nations missions in the field. Those mandates have to
be clear, and such missions must be provided with the
necessary resources in a timely and effective manner.

As regards the integration of components, it is
important to provide the necessary structure and staff
in order to be able to protect women and children from
all kinds of violence, in particular sexual and gender-
based violence.

In that respect, I should like to note that Argentina,
in cooperation with the ICRC, has developed courses
on humanitarian law for the armed forces, with an
emphasis on those that form part of the Argentine
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I note also that the Commission on the Application
of International Humanitarian Law has drawn up a
manual on international law in armed conflicts, which
contains a compilation of the norms of international
humanitarian law for the conduct of armed forces in
the context of operations. That will be effective only
if it leads to the outcome that countries are seeking
to achieve when they contribute to peacekeeping
operations. We would like here, in drawing attention
to the work of all peacekeepers, to commend Argentine
peacekeepers - men and women - about whom there
has never been a single complaint of violation of human
rights or international humanitarian law.

As regards humanitarian assistance, the parties to a
conflict must make every effort to ensure effective and
timely access of such assistance, including shipments
and materials, which enjoys special protection under
international humanitarian law. Medical personnel and
vehicles, as well as hospitals, must also benefit from
such protection.

Fact-finding is another aspect that Argentina deems
crucial. Impartial mechanisms are key to determining the
facts regarding violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. In addition to ad hoc fact-
finding commissions, including those established by
the Human Rights Council, we would like to highlight
the role of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission, established under Protocol I to the 1949
Geneva Conventions. Argentina welcomes the fact
that, in conformity with the provisions of resolution
1894 (2009), the Security Council has recognized once
again, in the draft presidential statement to be adopted
later, the possibility of resorting to that Commission.

Lastly, the suffering of victims of armed conflict
often continues beyond the end of hostilities, as
they continue to be victims when they return to
their communities. In that context, in addition to
the challenges presented by post-conflict situations,
we wish to refer to the role of justice. The Council
established two international tribunals - the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda - and,
at present, the international community is witnessing
the consolidation of an international justice system for
the most heinous crimes, including war crimes, that is
no longer based on ad hoc tribunals but is permanent:
the International Criminal Court (ICC), established
by the Rome Statute in 1998. We would like to stress
the need for cooperation by all States with the ICC, in
particular regarding arrest warrants.

The Council should establish, as soon as possible,
a mechanism to follow up closely on its referrals to
the ICC. Argentina welcomes the fact that the draft
presidential statement to be adopted later makes
reference to both to the need for cooperation with the
international tribunals and to the commitment of the
Security Council to follow up on its decisions in that
regard; this is something that has long been hoped for
in the context of referrals to the ICC.

Argentina reiterates that, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of
the Council, attacks of any kind against civilians or
other protected persons in situations of armed conflict,
as well as the recruitment of child soldiers, all forms
of violence against woman and interference with the
delivery of humanitarian aid, constitute clear violations
of international law.

I would therefore end by urging the fullest
compliance with the obligations emanating from the
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907; the four 1949
Geneva Conventions, which are universally accepted,
and their Protocols of 1977; international human rights
law; refugee law and the decisions of the Council.
Standards must become reality.

