Mr. Winid (Poland): I thank Uruguay for
convening today's important debate. Poland aligns
itself with the statement just delivered by observer of
the the European Union, but I would like to add some
remarks in my national capacity.

First, the issue ofprotection ofcivilians is now more
important than ever. We still see millions of civilians
suffering as a result of deadly military attacks, civilians
sheltering in United Nations bases and recurring
attacks on humanitarian workers. The Security Council
has a fundamental role to play in this regard, given
its primary responsibility for international peace and
security.

Poland welcomes the fact that the protection of
civilians is addressed in the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446)
and the subsequent report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the Panel's recommendations
(S/2015/682). With nine United Nations peacekeeping
operations currently operating under explicit civilian
protection mandates, we encourage the Secretariat to
work further on the development of relevant policies,
guidance and training.

The Secretary-General's reportbefore us (S/2015/453)
accurately indicates key challenges with regard to the
protection of civilians, namely, limited humanitarian
access, attacks on humanitarian and health-care
workers and facilities, and the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. We agree that the development of
policy standards to curb or limit the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas could strengthen the
protection of civilians.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations should be
equipped with more advanced tools to address both
the root causes of crises and their most visible
consequences. There is a crucial need to improve early
warning and rapid-reaction capacities. It is our duty to
explore new capabilities and adopt new technologies.
We also need to further work on developing a clearer
understanding of the meaning of the kind of protection
of civilians that is needed in peacekeeping operations.
The universal value of human life should be cherished
beyond any doubt. While caring about the lives of
those who should be protected, we cannot forget about
those who are given the task to protect. The challenges
that peacekeepers face are often not sufficiently
appreciated. They protect civilians in very harsh and
difficult conditions, with often insufficient resources.
Thirdly, United Nations peace operations should
play a critical role in assisting host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect.
The implementation of the Human Rights Up Front
initiative should make a positive contribution in this
regard. Human rights monitoring and advocacy, the
development of the rule of law, strengthening the
standards of good governance and political engagement
should be central to United Nations protection efforts.

We should never forget about the most vulnerable,
women and children, who require our undivided
attention. The number of those most affected by armed
conflicts is, unfortunately, not decreasing. We underline
that national authorities remain primarily responsible
for protecting their citizens.

Last but not least, let me stress that Poland
remains committed to promoting the implementation
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law worldwide. Respect for these laws
is essential to helping the victims. However, the
politicization of aid and the polarization of States
around humanitarian issues remain a huge challenge. In
that regard, we are grateful to the Secretary General for
convening the World Humanitarian Summit and to the
Government of Turkey, which will host that meeting in
Istanbul in May. The Summit will be a rare opportunity
to bring all stakeholders together and reshape the
global humanitarian system for the years to come. It
has been almost 25 years since the last time the world
came together to discuss humanitarian aid.

