I have the pleasure of delivering this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). Let me first express our appreciation to Mr. Frangois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for his comprehensive and informative briefing on the situation in Central Africa and on the activities of the Office. We commend the work carried out by UNOCA in promoting peace in the region through its good offices, mediation and preventive diplomacy, as well as its efforts in supporting election processes in several countries and capacity-building activities in several fields. The situation in Central Africa has witnessed significant positive progress. However, the situation remains volatile and the region continues to face a number of political, economic, social, humanitarian and security challenges, whichunfortunately have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this regard, we commend the efforts of the countries of the region aimed at mitigating the impact of the pandemic, especially on the most vulnerable populations, and we share their concerns with respect to the need for a more coordinated, solidarity-based response in addressing the economic and social impacts of the pandemic, both at the regional and international levels. We took note with satisfaction of the positive response of one armed group in Cameroon to the appeal of both the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for an immediate global ceasefire in the wake of COVID-19, and we look forward to seeing similar steps taken that will further enhance peace and security in the region and reflect the shared aspiration of the African continent to achieving the noble objective of silencing the guns. We welcome the positive dynamics in Central Africa and the continued progress towards improving relations among its States, especially Angola, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We specifically commend the efforts of the Republic of Angola in fighting corruption and in implementing institutional reforms. The A3+I also praises the Government of Cameroon for taking its first steps towards implementing the recommendations of the Major National Dialogue, in particular by granting special status to the North-West and South-West regions of the country. However, we express our concern at the continuation of violence in the Far North, North-West and South-West regions, and we call on all parties to refrain from acts of violence and to, instead, turn to dialogue as the sole means of resolving their disputes. We take note of the holding of legislative and municipal elections in Cameroon, but we deplore the incidents of violence that marked those elections and appeal to the authorities of Cameroon to further work towards maintaining peace and security. In this respect, we call on all armed actors to refrain from attacks against civilians and to respect international humanitarian law and human rights law. While we share the Secretary-General's concern about the tense situation in Chad, especially with regard to intercommunal violence, we are nevertheless looking forward to the holding of the legislative and presidential elections in this country. We are also looking forward to the next presidential elections in Republic of the Congo, which are scheduled for March 2021. With regard to the situation in the Pool region, we welcome the easing of tensions thanks to the efforts led by the Peacebuilding Fund, and we take this opportunity to encourage all stakeholders to implement the comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme as a prerequisite for a long-lasting peace in the region. We encourage the steps being taken by the Government of Equatorial Guinea towards political rapprochement, which have led, inter alia, to the release of a number of detainees from opposition parties, and we welcome the recent dynamics that characterized the bilateral relations between Equatorial Guinea and Gabon in efforts aimed at resolving their border dispute through the International Court of Justice. We also salute the confidence-building measures taken by Sao Tome and Principe in the framework of its ongoing efforts toward strengthening dialogue among all political stakeholders. While we acknowledge the positive dynamics in the political situation across Central Africa, we remain concerned with the security situation prevailing in the region, in particular the continued attacks perpetrated by Boko Haram, the high number of civilian fatalities resulting from these attacks and the high risk of conflict- related sexual violence. We are even more concerned at the unresponsiveness of extremist groups to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, and we strongly deplore the terrorist activities of the Lord's Resistance Army, which has undertaken several attacks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Maritime security is another source of concern. The Gulf of Guinea has become the centre of worldwide piracy and armed robbery by terrorist groups. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the commitment of the leaders of the region to the importance of sustained bilateral cooperation in dealing with this issue. We share the Secretary-General's concern about the effects of climate change and natural disasters on security and stability in the region. Climate-change effects have triggered displacements hampering the ongoing efforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. In this regard, we support the efforts of the relevant bodies of the United Nations aimed at systematically integrating climate-change and natural- resource management aspects into conflict prevention, mediation, peacebuilding and development processes in the region. The subregion continues to face humanitarian, socioeconomic and human rights challenges that have exacerbated the humanitarian and human rights crises and triggered displacements and large waves of refugees. We appreciate Cameroon's efforts aimed at hosting thousands of refugees and asylum seekers from the region. However, we express our concern at the ongoing crisis in the Lake Chad basin that has led to the displacement of thousands of people in Chad, the Niger and Nigeria. We emphasize the importance of cooperation between the Governments of the region and such regional, subregional and international organizations as the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Central African Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and other relevant actors. We stress the importance of the ongoing coordination between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and welcome the political coordination meetings between these two United Nations bureaux aimed at supporting synergies across mandated activities, particularly in the field of maritime security and the fight against terrorism and organized crime. In conclusion, the A3+1 reiterate their continued support for the efforts and activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his able team in the fulfilment of the Office's mandate as they aim to further enhance peace, security and sustainable development in the Central African region.
