Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Please
allow me to congratulate Malaysia on having organized
this public debate. Resolution 2225 (2015), just adopted
today by the Security Council, is a key contribution
to strengthening the agenda on children and armed
conflicts, which, as is well known, is of particular
importance to Luxembourg. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the representative
of UNICEF, for their statements and briefings. We have
also listened with great attention to the testimony of
Ms. Eunice Apio, who shared her experience on the
ground based on her work with Ugandan child Victims
of the Lord's Resistance Army.

Luxembourg also fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409) reflects
the unprecedented challenges encountered in
2014 - recruitment, murders, sexual violence and
abductions - the daily fate of tens of thousands of
children during conflicts. We all remember the military
offensive last year in the Gaza Strip, which cost the lives
of 557 Palestinian children trapped by the hostilities,
as well as 4 Israeli children. Those violations are
abundantly documented in the current annual report.
We condemn in the strongest terms all violations
committed against all children. A child affected by
conflict is a victim, no matter the nationality. Also, the
perpetrators of those Violations, no matter who they
are, must be held responsible for their actions.

Education is also threatened more and more in
armed conflicts, whether during attacks against schools
or in the context of their use for military purposes. In
either case the lives of children are directly threatened.
Such actions deprive future generations of education,
with the harmful consequences that that causes for the
country's recovery. In Syria almost 900 schools were
partially or entirely destroyed by the end of 2014. Last
year, 60 attacks against schools were documented, and
two thirds of those attacks were perpetrated by Syrian
governmental forces. The regime does not hesitate to
bomb its own population in public areas, including
using barrel bombs, which indiscriminately sow death
in their wake, as in the recent attacks committed in the
province of Aleppo. In the regions occupied by Daesh,
schools, meant to be places ofintellectual emancipation,
are transformed into places for indoctrination or simply
closed.

We call on all States to take specific measures
to dissuade parties in conflict from using schools for
military purposes, in accordance with resolution 2143
(2014) and today's resolution 2225 (2015). Last month
in Oslo, Luxembourg, together with 36 other countries,
endorsed the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict
by endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration. We hope
that other Member States will also be able to endorse
those guidelines.

We welcome the progress achieved through the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, aimed at preventing
the recruitment and use of children by national
security forces in times of conflict. We encourage all
actors concerned to redouble their efforts to ensure
the success of that initiative. At the same time, it is
urgent to develop specific strategies to deal with the
issue of non-State armed groups, which make up the
great majority of the parties listed in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's annual report on the subject.
The scale of abuses committed by extremist groups
such as Daesh and Boko Haram demands a determined
response from the international community.

In that context, we welcome the fact that resolution
2225 (2015) adds child abductions as a new trigger for
the inclusion of parties responsible for such crimes
in the annexes to the annual report. That is a key
contribution to the existing normative framework and
will draw attention to a Violation that has at times been
wrongly considered simply a consequence of child
recruitment or sexual violence. The addition of that new
trigger should encourage us to mobilize even more in
support of the signing and implementation of new plans
of action so as to end all violations against children.

I should like to stress the importance that my
delegation places on programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. For children scarred
by war, reintegration must be the beginning of a new
chapter in their lives. It is crucial that post-conflict
plans, programmes and strategies for rebuilding and
reconstruction prioritize issues dealing with children
affected by the conflict. That also requires the
availability of the necessary resources.

There should be no impunity for those who commit
the worst atrocities against children. They must know
that they will be held accountable, including before the
International Criminal Court. Our sense of justice is at
stake. The protection of children is at stake.

