Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General of Political
Affairs, Mr. Danilo Tiirk, for his briefing, which has
given us detailed and useful information for our
understanding of the activities of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) since 6
August 2003. My delegation welcomes the progress
made in the peace process, particularly in drafting a
Constitution that will establish the rule of law and
justice, the disposal of weapons that have been
stockpiled or held by individuals, and the destruction
of weapons.

This is a process that, my delegation believes,
must take place as soon as possible and in an
unconditional manner. This will certainly strengthen
trust among the parties and will make it possible to
speed up the settlement process and therefore restore
stability and provide conditions for sustainable
development that will benefit all.

At this stage, the success of this process clearly
depends basically on the will and the commitment of
the parties. More than ever, these parties need the
international community's support, particularly of the
United Nations. That is why my delegation supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Political Office by six
months - a political presence that will help the parties
complete the current process in the best possible
conditions.

As many delegations have said before me, I wish
to state that the mandate of the Office should be
somewhat reviewed in the light of the information that
Mr. Danilo Tiirk has just given us. I should furthermore
like to encourage donors to continue providing
manifold assistance to help consolidate peace in
Bougainville. We wish to congratulate the countries of
the region for their contribution in this area.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the head of the
United Nations Political Office, Mr. Noel Sinclair, and
all of the United Nations staff in Bougainville for the
high quality of their work.

