Mr. Serry: Since our last meeting (see S/PV.6448), the Middle East region has been
witnessing dramatic political transformations, but
stagnation in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. It is
true that the shifting regional dynamics have added
uncertainty to the environment of an already difficult
Middle East peace process. However, progress towards
a negotiated solution that addresses all core issues
would make a critical contribution to stabilizing the
region. When Quartet principals met in Munich on
5 February, they affirmed that Israeli-Palestinian and
comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace were imperative to
avoid outcomes detrimental to the region.

Let me convey to Council members the
Secretary-General's profound concern at the continued
impasse in the political process. I must, in all
frankness, report low confidence and trust among the
parties and in international efforts to help them
overcome their differences. The parties are unlikely to
overcome the deficit of trust without a credible and
effective international intervention in the peace
process.

In our view, it is becoming increasingly clear that
a more concrete and substantive basis would have to be
laid out for the parties to engage. The Quartet must
play its full role in this regard. When the Quartet met
in Munich on 5 February, it reiterated its commitment
to the two-State solution and a conclusion of the talks
by September 2011. It also reaffirmed that the outcome
of negotiations should end the conflict and occupation
that began in 1967. The Quartet agreed a way forward
towards a further Quartet principals' meeting. Envoys
2

are working to meet separately with the parties, as well
as with representatives of the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee. In its discussions with the parties, the
Quartet will give serious consideration to their views
on how to bring about resumed negotiations on all core
issues, including borders and security. The longer the
impasse in talks persists, the greater is our concern that
tensions on the ground will unravel modest
achievements and stand in the way of a negotiated
solution.

Actions that risk prejudging the outcome of
negotiations are particularly unhelpful. In this context,
Israel is continuing to build some 2,000 units begun in
the West Bank after the moratorium expired on
26 September - a regrettable development, as noted
by the Quartet. We call on Israel to heed the calls of the
international community, the provisions of
international law and the Road Map by freezing all
settlement activity, including natural growth, and
dismantling outposts. I note that, notwithstanding the
recent results in the Security Council, all members of
the Council strongly oppose continued settlement
activity.

This extends to East Jerusalem, where a number
of settlements were announced for expansion in past
weeks, including 56 new units in Ramot and 13 units in
the heart of the Palestinian neighbourhood of Sheikh
Jarrah. We urge the parties to refrain from provocative
actions at this sensitive time.

Israeli authorities demolished 66 Palestinian-
owned structures in Area C and East Jerusalem,
displacing over 100 people and otherwise affecting
another 220, particularly impacting the livelihoods of
vulnerable herding communities, while construction of
adjacent settlements continued.

Adversity on the ground has not stopped the
Palestinian Authority from forging ahead with its State-
building agenda. With significant achievements
realized over the past years and further reforms under
way, it is my clear view that the strong institutions now
established represent the basis of a State-in-waiting.
The further realization of progress is fundamentally
constrained by the Israeli measures of occupation that
deny territorial contiguity and inhibit freedom of
movement. The continued divisions among the
Palestinians are also a serious concern in that regard.

Palestinian security forces continued to make
strides in the maintenance of law and order in the West
11-24239

Bank. Economic activity is on the rise and we note
positively Israel's removal of some further obstacles to
support this trend: easier access to Nablus via the
Huwwara checkpoint; increased tourist access to
Bethlehem; and more predictable access for meat and
dairy products into East Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank.

On 4 February, Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
agreed with Quartet Representative Blair on a package
of measures designed to help improve Palestinian
livelihoods and support economic growth in both the
West Bank and in Gaza. It is imperative that these steps
be facilitated and implemented in full. More and
speedier easing measures by the Government of Israel
are urgently needed to shore up the State-building
effort. The confidence built over the past years should
enable Israel to further roll back elements of
occupation.

My visit to Hebron on 25 January impressed on
me the importance of enabling the Palestinian
Authority to develop in Area C. I visited the densely
populated neighbourhood of Qaizun in Area A,
overlooking empty space in Area C next to Israeli
settlements. The Governor and the Mayor of Hebron
underlined the importance and urgency of using at least
some of that area to accommodate Hebron's natural
growth by expanding its residential and industrial area
there. Such circumstances can be found in many more
Palestinian urban centres. I urge Israel to address these
pressing Palestinian needs.

The Government of Israel's commitment to allow
Palestinian security forces to deploy into seven towns
in Area B, as part of the package agreed with Quartet
Representative Blair, is a step forward. However, as
Prime Minister Fayyad impressed upon me repeatedly,
the presence and operations of Israel's security forces
within Palestinian population centres that are meant to
be under Palestinian security control is a major
concern. In the past month alone, there were
434 incursions, which resulted in one Palestinian
killed, 96 injured and 379 arrested.

We also remain concerned at violent incidents at
checkpoints, which injured one Arab Israeli and two
Palestinians during the reporting period. On
20 January, an alleged Islamic Jihad militant opened
fire against an Israeli position near Jenin, and was
consequently shot and killed by Israeli soldiers.
11-24239
Demonstrations continued against the barrier,
which deviates from the Green Line in contravention of
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice, resulting in seven Palestinians being injured
and numerous arrests. Allow me to stress that the right
of peaceful and non-violent protest must be upheld.

Israeli forces arrested two settlers on 30 January
in connection with one of two incidents where two
Palestinians were shot and killed by settlers. Settlers
also injured nine Palestinians. Settler impunity remains
a concern. A report released by the Israeli human rights
group Yesh Din indicates that, since 2005, less than
10 per cent of alleged attacks by settlers against
Palestinians in the West Bank have resulted in an
indictment.

During the reporting period, a number of steps
were taken by the Palestinian Authority aimed at
responding to expectations for political reform. On
8 February, the Government of Prime Minister Fayyad
called for local elections to be held on 9 July. President
Abbas declared on 17 February that presidential and
legislative elections should also be held as soon as
possible in both the West Bank and Gaza. Hamas has
so far rejected the calls for elections absent full
reconciliation.

Prime Minister Fayyad submitted the resignation
of his Government on 14 February, and was
immediately tasked by President Abbas with forming a
new Government. I note the important suggestion of
Prime Minister Fayyad to form a Government of
national unity based on the principle of non-violence,
as a first step to advance reconciliation.

Several hundred demonstrators took to the streets
of Ramallah last week demanding that their leaders end
their differences and reunite. On 21 February, a
network of 81 Palestinian non-profit organizations
from the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip
publicly called for rival Palestinian factions to end
their disagreement. I urge all Palestinian factions to
show responsibility and heed the legitimate calls of the
Palestinian people for reunification.

It is critical that the donor community continue to
support the Palestinian Authority and buttress the
reform agenda, even if the Palestinian Authority has
been able to halve its dependence on budgetary
assistance between 2008 and 2011. Thus far in
February, the Palestinian Authority has received over
$80 million in support for recurrent expenditures. A
3
new international donors' conference for the
Palestinian State will be held in Paris in June. This will
be preceded by a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee on 13 April.

I was in Gaza last week, on 16 February, and it
remains a high priority in all my engagement to seek to
improve the situation in Gaza on the basis of respect
for calm and a significant improvement in
socio-economic conditions, which have deteriorated so
badly in recent years in the aftermath of the Hamas
takeover and the Israeli-imposed blockade.

I regret to report to the Council that the reporting
period was marked by an increase in violence, with an
escalation of rocket attacks emanating from Gaza and
Israeli air raids and repeated confrontations in the
border area with Israel. Nineteen mortar shells and
15 rockets were fired indiscriminately from Gaza
towards Israeli civilian areas. As recently as yesterday,
three Grad rockets were fired at the city of Be'er
Sheva, damaging a house. On 31 January, three Grad
rockets were fired, narrowly missing a wedding
celebration in Netivot. Also on 23 February, a 10- year-
old girl was killed in the southern Gaza Strip when an
explosive device went off while being prepared by
militants. We condemn rocket attacks and once again
call for their immediate cessation. We are urging the de
facto authorities to intensify their efforts to maintain
calm.

Israeli forces responded overnight to the recent
rocket attack with air raids against Hamas facilities in
the Strip. On 23 February, Israeli forces also used tank
fire against militants who were allegedly detonating an
explosive device near the border fence and firing
mortars. The operation injured 11 Palestinians,
including militants from Islamic Jihad, killing one.
During the night of 17 February, three Palestinians
were shot and killed by Israeli security forces near the
border fence in Gaza as they were allegedly planting
explosive devices, while the de facto authorities
contend that they were fishermen.

During the reporting period, Israel conducted
10 further incursions and four air strikes into Gaza, in
which two Palestinian militants and 27 Palestinian
civilians were injured. We call on Israel to exercise
maximum restraint and to ensure the protection of
civilians. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law.
We remain concerned at the depressed economic
situation in Gaza and the continuing impact of Israeli
closure measures. At the same time, I note positively
the Israeli approval of 14 additional United Nations
infrastructure projects in Gaza, including seven United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools. That
brings to 20 the total number of approved UNRWA
schools. The total amount of approved projects now
stands at $155.4 million. It is important that
implementation now proceed smoothly, which will
require the streamlined entry of materials and adequate
capacity at the crossings.

Import levels are more significant than before
Israel's policy adjustment in June 2010, but are far
from meeting pre-2007 levels. The needs in Gaza
remain vast. We hope that both import and export
levels can be scaled up within the framework of the
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).

The United Nations is also in discussions with the
Government of Israel on a process, led by the
Palestinian Authority with United Nations monitoring,
for the commercial import of construction materials for
the private sector.

United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay visited the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel during the reporting period and expressed
her concern at the violations of human rights. Among
other issues, she spoke out against settlement activity
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, and the
associated regime of obstacles to movement, given
their devastating impact on human rights, peace and
development. On 10 February, the High Commissioner
also met with victims of the rocket attacks in Sderot
and urged the militants in Gaza to stop committing war
crimes by firing those rockets.

Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit has been detained by
Hamas for over 1,700 days. We reiterate our appeal for
his release and for humanitarian access to be granted
without delay. We continue to express concern about
the several thousand Palestinians in Israeli prisons.

Beginning on 30 January, the Rafah crossing was
closed to all traffic, including humanitarian cases. We
welcome the gradual reopening of the crossing since
18 February.
Let me turn now to regional events. With regard
to developments in Egypt, where a transition is under
way that must serve the interests of the Egyptian
people, we take positive note of reaffirmed
commitments by Israeli and Egyptian authorities to
regional stability and peace. We note with appreciation
that Israel is allowing 300 Palestinians living in Libya
to enter the West Bank as a humanitarian gesture.

We regret the lack of progress towards peace
between Israel and Syria. We are concerned about a
new campaign to encourage additional Israeli
settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan, the goal of
which is to recruit 140 new families during 2011. In
the interest of regional stability and to realize the Arab
Peace Initiative, the conflict between Israel and Syria
should be resolved on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

In Lebanon, the collapse of the Government on
12 January led to an increase in the level of political
tension in the country, culminating in a series of
demonstrations in support of caretaker Prime Minister
Hariri on 24 and 25 January, mostly in the northern city
of Tripoli and in some areas of Beirut. The
demonstrations ended as Prime Minister Hariri called
for calm. The Secretary-General welcomed the
statement issued by Prime Minister Hariri and called
on all parties to maintain calm and avoid any acts of
violence.

On 25 January, following two days of
constitutionally mandated consultations with all
parliamentary groups, President Sleiman requested
Mr. Najib Mikati to form a new Government. Mr.
Mikati's consultations are continuing. On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I would like to convey his hope that
the new Government will meet the aspirations of all
Lebanese people and his call on that Government to
abide by all of the international obligations that
Lebanon has undertaken.

On 14 February, a political rally was held in
Beirut to commemorate the sixth anniversary of the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and 22 others. The Secretary-General issued a
11-24239
statement on that occasion in which he reaffirmed the
commitment of the United Nations to the efforts of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

On 22 February, the Lebanese caretaker Minister
of Labour signed an administrative decree regulating
the implementation of the labour law amendments that
were approved by Parliament in August 2010. That is
an important and positive step that will contribute to
improving the living conditions of Palestinian refugees
in Lebanon.

While progress is being made in the
reconstruction of the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp,
funding remains a major concern. The United Nations
urges the international community to renew its
financial support to the reconstruction of Nahr al-Bared
so that progress can be sustained.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained
quiet and stable. Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace
have continued to occur on an almost-daily basis.

In my December briefing (see S/PV.6448), I
indicated that I believed that the credibility of the
international community, including the Quartet's,
would be at stake in 2011. It is now all the more urgent
and crucial that it respond to this test. To that end, the
Quartet intends to engage the parties in serious talks,
including on substance, and to support them in finding
ways back to the negotiating table. I also believe that
there should be a readiness to offer more concrete
suggestions for those negotiations, if that is what it will
take to enable decisive progress towards peace. I hope
that the leaders will join in that effort by acting
responsibly and in keeping with their peoples'
aspirations for stability and peace. That, in my view, is
the right lesson to draw from the changes that are
taking place in the region.

