Mr. Hinds: I thank Council members for their
questions, praise and recognition of the work that
we are doing in some of these tough peacekeeping
environments.

First, with respect to institutional frameworks and
mandates, as discussed, we need clear, credible and
achievable mandates that are matched by sufficient
resources, whether it be in terms of logistics, mandates
or guidance so that we can implement the mandates.
We would also like to see a greater role for the
Security Council in engendering the political will
that is necessary and the commitment that needs to
be undertaken by host States in relation to working
in partnership in achieving the mandates and at times
providing some tough love to make sure that the hosts
actually do come on board and are part of the political
process and making sure that a mission and its mandate
can actually be achieved. We need to ensure that the
tasks are prioritized, well understood and based on the
necessary building blocks for peace and security and
stability in each of the countries concerned. As the
Council can see today, they do differ.

As far as what United Nations policing brings to
these mandates, a better understanding of resolution
2185 (2014) would ensure that the resolution is put
to its greatest effect when the Council is devising
new mandates. It would also assist us in thinking
creatively about what policing brings to the continuum
of peacemaking, peacebuilding and peacemaking/
peacebuilding processes and in ensuring that we are
more accountable for the delivery on our mandates.
A better understanding of resolution 2185 (2014)
would also ensure that the police advisers who are
part of permanent missions are fully utilized. In the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), we
have more than 20 police advisers from more than
90 police-contributing countries. The Council needs
to look into tapping into that resource as part of its
deliberations and discussions because they truly
understand what the police bring into peacekeeping
operations.
On the second issue of gender and resources, I
will just touch on the basics. Mine is actually one of
the missions that has an all-female formed police
unit, from India. We are very lucky to have it and
grateful for it. I think it provides and demonstrates
and showcases the opportunities that are presented
for women in peacekeeping and peacemaking roles. It
really demonstrates equality. They stand equally beside
men and women of other formed police units, those of
our force and those of our civilian counterparts. They
really do have an impact, particularly for the women and
children in the areas of the protection of the civilians
whom they serve. There is a much more nurturing and
caring bond between them and the communities where
they serve.

I think our current representation in missions, as
mentioned, mirrors our national and domestic policing
institutions globally. I have to say with some regret that
I have only 20 per cent female officers as my individual
police officers and slightly fewer in my formed police
units, but we have created an environment in the Mission
and a leadership culture that provides opportunities
based on fairness and equity to allow everyone
regardless of gender to reach their full potential. But
in this Mission it is also an opportunity to stretch and
grow our female officers, to give them opportunities
that they may not have been gotten in their own
countries, build their capacity and further enhance the
skills, knowledge and expertise that they bring to the
Mission while maximizing and optimizing what their
contribution. We are very fortunate that we have our
men and our women, but we are especially lucky to
have the women, as they are incredible role models, not
only within the communities where we serve, but also
with their national counterparts, showing that women
do have a significant role to play in communities and in
security services.

Lastly, I would touch upon some of the questions
specific to Liberia and its readiness during transition.
As the Council knows, the Government of Liberia has
a security transition plan. the Council having urged it
to adopt one in resolution 2190 (2014). There has been
steady progress in this area. However, focus on process
has been greater than on implementation. Through the
Mission, through the broad range of United Nations
partners on the ground and most importantly through
the international community we are stepping up urgency
with respect to the ways in which we can provide support
and help the Government to achieve the benchmarks
and the timelines that have been put in place for their
transition and for their peace consolidation plan.
The Liberia National Police (LNP) has had
the primary responsibility for in-country policing,
regardless of the United Nations Mission's presence.
Our role has been to develop, build capacity and
reform, as well as to support them operationally and
intervene in situations that have got beyond their
control. Encouragingly, we have been seeing less and
less of that being required. What do they need? They
need to be capacitated. They need the necessary tools,
resources and equipment to do their jobs. That is an
area where Member States can look to support the
Government of Liberia, since some of what is needed
is currently beyond its capacity and resource abilities,
given the fact that the country is also recovering from
Ebola, which had a significant impact.

There is a saying: "It is time to go." That has
been absorbed by the LNP. We are starting to see in
it a national pride and ownership in relation to the
transition, and an attitude that is looking to move the
process forward. We will continue to work with the
LNP to build the trust and confidence in communities
that will be an important part of the country's security
and stability. The future of Liberia is in Liberian hands.
We are working to support that and to contribute the
timely effort needed to ensure that it is ready for the
transition of security in eight months' time. We look
forward to having the support of the Security Council
and Member States in achieving that aim alongside the
Mission.

