Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
reiterating our congratulations to you and your

delegation, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month, as well as our
appreciation to Ambassador Rice and the United States
delegation for their work in leading the Council last
month.

The deterioration of the situation between the
Sudan and South Sudan in recent weeks and months
has been a serious cause of concern. The situation
assumed grave proportions with the occupation of
Heglig. It was therefore urgent for the international
community to play its role in preventing further
escalation and to encourage both countries to revert to
the path of dialogue and peace. It is right for the
Council to act in support of the efforts led by the
African Union (AU), and we are glad at the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2046 (2012) today.

Pakistan voted in favour of the resolution as an
expression of support for the efforts of the African
Union towards resolving all outstanding and
contentious issues between the Sudan and South
Sudan, as well as to respond to the call for support
from the African Union Peace and Security Council, in
line with its communique of 24 April. We have always
supported and will continue to support the efforts of
the AU. Our principled support is based upon the
recognition of the centrality of the role of the AU in
resolving issues pertaining to Africa.

Our words are matched by our actions. Pakistan's
deep and historical commitment to peace and security
in Africa is evident from our continuing role in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts on the continent
and in peacekeeping missions. We believe that the
Security Council should play a constructive role in
addressing the situation between the Sudan and South
Sudan, and stand united behind the AU towards
achieving peace and stability in the region.

The overall objective remains the peaceful
settlement of the situation. The Council should be
cautious about the threat or use of sanctions. However,
we regret that, despite the clear message of the AU
Peace and Security Council, some Council members
chose to take a course that runs the risk of creating
fissures in the Council. We regret that several
proposals that were clearly in line with the
communique of the African Union Peace and Security
Council were not accommodated in the draft
resolution, and that the communique was selectively
read and applied.
The Council needs to be transparent and
consistent, both in terms of its support for the actions of
the AU with regard to situations on the African continent
and in its response to calls for support in specific
situations. The tendency to selectively respond to the
AU based upon narrow political calculus and
expediency will undermine not only the work of the AU

but also the goal of peace and security on the continent.

We reiterate our support for the AU and the
excellent work being done by the AU High-level
Implementation Panel under the leadership of President
Mbeki. We hope that today's resolution will advance
the goals of peace and stability in both the Sudan and
South Sudan. We call on both friendly countries to
assume their responsibilities, fulfil their commitments
and help us help them to find a peaceful resolution of
all issues in the spirit of good-neighbourliness, mutual
respect, non-interference and full respect for their
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

