Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Council's presidency this month and
thanking you for having convened this important
debate on the daunting impact of terrorism on
international security. We hope that this debate will
help revitalize and strengthen international solidarity to
combat this threat under the auspices of the United
Nations.

There is no need to stress the fact that terrorism
remains one of the most serious threats and challenges
that the world community is facing today. We strongly
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Undoubtedly, the collective fight against this menace
continues to remain a high priority on the agenda of the
international community, with the United Nations at
the forefront and playing a central role in that regard.
The elimination of terrorism will be possible only
through collective and coordinated international efforts
led by the United Nations.

The recent brutal terrorist attacks in Mumbai,
which we once again strongly condemn, served as a
reminder to all that terrorists are relentless in their
vicious efforts and in resorting to their heinous
criminal and terrorist acts to inflict pain and suffering
on various peoples and to strain relations among
nations. Also, the latest atrocious terrorist attacks in
Pakistan have been equally condemned and indicate
that terrorism knows no boundaries and that terrorists
strike whenever and wherever they can and as their
vicious aims so require.

We have all acknowledged and emphasized the
important contribution that the United Nations counter-
terrorism mechanisms can and should make to our
collective efforts to fight terrorism. Based upon that
belief, my Government has committed itself to
cooperate with those mechanisms and in that context
has so far presented five national reports to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Apart from the numerous measures taken by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran in line
with the implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
terrorism, which are described in the said reports, Iran
has adopted and has put into force the anti-money-
laundering act that was subject to thorough
deliberations prior to its adoption by the Parliament.
We have also augmented and intensified practical
arrangements to ensure, among other things, the safety
and security of our borders with neighbouring
countries. Iran's costly fight against the drug
traffickers who originate in Afghanistan is another
aspect of our serious contribution to the fight against
terrorism and its feeding grounds.

Iran has also taken serious steps in implementing
resolution 1267 (1999) and other Council resolutions
on Al-Qaida and the Taliban. As one of the first victims
of the Taliban's terrorism and as a nation that has
endured the bitter results of the terrorism perpetrated
by terrorist groups such as Jundullah, that is said to be
affiliated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban, Iran has
strong interest and unwavering determination in the
fight against terrorism and in contributing to the United
Nations efforts in that important fight.

Our nation is still experiencing profound sorrow
and grief after having learned that 15 of its brave and
beloved soldiers who were abducted by the Jundullah
terrorist group have been slaughtered by the said
terrorist group in a heinous and brutal way a few days
ago. The perpetrators of that terrorist act must be
brought to justice and the cooperation of the
international community is essential in that regard.

To yield the expected results, the fight against
terrorism should be genuine, non-political, non-
selective and resolute. Associating any nation, religion
or culture with terrorism is a wrong - and in many
cases politically motivated - move that risks further
shattering the international consensus in fighting the
threat. Regrettably, there have been certain
unwarranted and unacceptable efforts on the part of a
few Powers aimed at hijacking the fight against
terrorism and using it as a means to pursue their own
political agendas. They have been unjustifiably using
the term "terrorism" to tarnish the image of nations
that may pursue a political outlook different from those
of the said few Powers.

That trend, if not checked and reversed, will lead
to a decline in international support for the fight
against terrorism and result in destroying the
international consensus which is indispensable for that
fight. There should be no doubt that terrorism is a
threat that comes from no specific religion or culture,
but threatens and targets all countries, religions and
cultures.

Applying double standards in fighting terrorism
and terrorist groups is yet another matter of grave
concern which negatively affects the international
community's collective campaign against terrorism. On
the one hand, we witness that the legitimate struggle of
peoples under occupation for self-determination and
national liberation - a right enshrined in international
law and the Charter - is sometimes unfairly and
falsely equated with terrorism. On the other, the
massacre of people remaining under occupation, such
as the criminal and terrorist acts of the Israeli regime

against the people under its brutal occupation, goes
unpunished or is even supported by certain Powers.
Some terrorist groups such as the Mujahedin-e-Khalq
(MKO) terrorist cult, that only live to kill innocent
people and are clear examples of terrorism, are
tolerated, sheltered or even supported by the same
Powers.

In the course of the past three decades, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subjected to different
acts of terrorism by terrorist groups such as the MKO
terrorist cult. That terrorist and criminal group has long
been stationed in Iraq and has planned, financed,
supervised and perpetrated terrorist operations within
and outside Iran against the Iranian nation and peoples
of other countries. Their acts of terrorism have thus far
resulted in the killing of many Iranian civilians and
officials and have damaged private and Government
properties.

That notorious, callous and wicked terrorist cult
was long supported and sheltered by the regime of
Saddam Hussein. It fought against our nation alongside
the previous Iraqi regime and worked as one of the
main killing machines of Saddam Hussein against the
Iraqi people, particularly Kurds and others. Currently,
the few remaining members of that terrorist cult
continue to maintain their military capabilities as well
as their terrorist nature, structure, aims and malicious
founding principles and are still involved in various
forms of terrorism and criminal activities.

Despite its heinous terrorist and cultish nature
and in spite of all its brutal terrorist activities, many
members of that terrorist cult, which was designated a
terrorist entity by the United States and the European
Union (EU), continue to be sheltered in the United
States and Europe, plotting their malicious terrorist
plans against our nation. Undoubtedly, double
standards and selectivity in fighting terrorism as well
as political moves such as the recent decision by
certain European courts about the previous EU
decisions on this terrorist cult are unacceptable and
unwarranted.
Such behaviour is in contravention of Security
Council resolutions on terrorism and will only give rise
to an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust in the
international fight against terrorism at a time when
solidarity among nations to fight that scourge is more
imperative than ever. We are of the strong view that
there should not be any distinction between the diverse
forms of terrorism and terrorist groups. Indeed,
terrorism should be fought with no discrimination or
exception.

Before concluding, I wish to stress that my
delegation rejects the distortions and allegations made
against my country by the representative of the Israeli
regime in the Council today. No amount of distortion,
allegations or smear campaigns will be able to cloud
the obvious fact that the Zionist regime continues to
display the most single immediate threat to regional
and global security through its war crimes and State
terrorism against the innocent Palestinians and others
in the region.

