The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Belgium, Egypt,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
the Sudan, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; Mr.
Baali (Algeria), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Adam
(Belgium), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Al-Douri
(Iraq), Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan), Mr.
Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Hughes
(New Zealand), Mr. Khalid (Pakistan), Mr. Al-
Sulaiti (Qatar), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan),
Mr. Schori (Sweden), Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates)
and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 15 March
2001 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2001/225, and which reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Thursday, 15 March 2001, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 14 March
2001 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in a letter dated 13 March 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/2001/2l6.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2001/209,
which contains the text of a letter dated 9 March 2001
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Members of the Council have received
photocopies of a letter date 12 March 2001 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as a document of the Council
under the symbol S/200l/227.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


