Mrs. Albright (United States of America):
Hezbollah attacks into northern Israel have once again
compelled the Israeli Government to take steps it deems
necessary to protect its people from direct threats
emanating from Lebanese territory. This tragic situation
has resulted in losses of life and property, suffering, and
dislocations of innocent civilians on both sides of the
border. My Government extends its condolences and
sympathy to those innocent civilians. We deeply regret
the loss of any civilian life. The people of northern Israel
and southern Lebanon have for too long been the victims
of terrorists who take sanctuary in southern Lebanon.

Yet those terrorists continue to wreak havoc.
Hezbollah leaders are repeating their threats to attack
Israeli and United States targets across the globe.

Despite the extraordinary transformations that have
occurred in the Middle East over these past few years, the
leaders of Hezbollah have not changed. Still they cling to
their policies of violence and their philosophy of hate.
Still they lack the courage to contemplate peace, because
peace would make them irrelevant. Still they continue
their war on the future, and people throughout the region
are harmed.
Hezbollah's violence damages not only Israel and
the prospects for a Middle East peace; it undermines the
safety of people in Lebanon and the legitimacy of the
Lebanese State. Those who allow Hezbollah's militia to
act with impunity in Lebanon must bear responsibility for

 

the consequences. These consequences include not only
abuses to the State of Lebanon from within, but actions of
self-defence by Israel in response to Hezbollah violence.
Hezbollah will not and must not succeed in its destabilizing
aims. The United States is now engaged in an intensive
diplomatic effort to restore calm and establish a more stable
situation in the area which would enhance the security and
well-being of the civilian population of both southern
Lebanon and northern Israel. This would enable us to return
to the paramount task of assisting the parties in settling
their conflict through direct negotiations.

People throughout the region have invested their hopes
and dreams in the peace process. We are committed to
using our influence to help ensure the right of nations to
live within secure, internationally recognized borders. We
also remain committed to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity, and national unity of Lebanon.

There is much work to be done to reach a peaceful
settlement. We must not let the passions of the moment
distract us from that task. As President Clinton has said,

"The division today in the Middle East is not between
Arab and Jew. It is between those who are reaching
for a better tomorrow and those who have retreated
into the pointless, bloody hostility of yesterday. We
must be clear; those reaching for the future will
prevail."

All history tells us that extremists and terrorists will
persist in efforts to slow or derail the process towards peace
in the Middle East. All history tells us that we must defeat
those efforts, and encourage the parties to continue to talk
directly to each other about their differences, and about the
ways and means of a permanent peace. Direct contact,
across the bargaining table, not the battlefield, is the only
path by which true security for people throughout the
region may be obtained.

