Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of Egypt supports the draft
resolution before us today extending the mandate of the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) for a final period of nine months, until 31
August 1998. In appreciation of that role, Egypt has
supported, throughout its membership in the Council for
the last two years, the resolutions under which the
mandate of UNPREDEP was extended in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

With resolution 795 (1992) of 11 December 1992,
the Security Council laid the basis for the first preventive
peacekeeping operation under United Nations auspices by
authorizing the deployment of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. This contributed effectively to
preventing the spread to that country of the military
conflict in the region at that time.

The change of the name of that Force from
UNPROFOR to UNPREDEP, in Security Council
resolution 983 (1995) of 31 March 1995, reflected more
clearly the successful preventive role that has been played
by the United Nations peacekeeping force in that
Republic. The decision to be taken by the Council today
to extend the mandate of the Force for a final period five
years after its initial deployment takes into account the
positive developments in the region. At the same time it
also highlights to a large extent time limits and other
practical constraints on the United Nations role in
shouldering of the full responsibility for such operations.
Security Council 3839th meeting
Fifty-second year 4 December 1997

Undoubtedly, the experience of UN PREDEP deserves
close study and analysis by the Security Council and by the
Member States of the United Nations, as well as by the
Secretariat, so that the successful elements of the operation
can be employed in the future to effectively support the
United Nations role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In this context, it is probable that the most important
of these elements, which must be highlighted, is the
consent, the welcome and, indeed, the initiative made by
the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia for the deployment of the Force on its territory.
This was reflected later in the Government's full
cooperation with the Force, which had the greatest impact
in facilitating the successful discharge of its mandate.

It is our hope that the desired study by the Security
Council of this preventive experience will lead to concrete
conclusions that will help support the Council's credibility
as regards its resolutions for the deployment of
peacekeeping forces for preventive purposes in various
regions and continents of the world.

As for the situation in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, we deem it important for the international
community to build on the stability and the more secure
environment in the Republic provided by the presence of
UNPREDEP. We look forward to the recommendations of
the Secretary-General concerning the alternatives for the
future international presence there.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Henryk Sokalski, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his efforts and to the Force
Commander and the personnel of the Force for their
contributions and their successful discharge of their duties.

