Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
problem of children in armed conflict is of increasing
concern to the Security Council in the exercise of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is also a crucial
question for the countries of West Africa, which, for
more than a decade, have been torn by conflicts in
which children have been both the victims and the
perpetrators. The touching testimony of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh this morning is revealing in this regard.
Mali, one of the initiators of the World Summit
for Children - which led to the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, whose Optional
Protocol focuses great attention on the question under
consideration - welcomes the holding of today's
debate, and we are grateful to you, Madam President,
for having taken the initiative on this.

We also extend our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his very useful and detailed report and his
very important statement this morning.

We must not fail to congratulate and thank Mr.
Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for his intelligent and sustained action and, on this
occasion, for his, as usual, lucid and detailed briefing.

Of course, I would also like to underscore the
important work accomplished by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) for children affected by
conflict. I thank Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive
Director, for her highly useful contribution to our
debate this morning.

We have carefully considered the report under
consideration, on which I would like at the present time
to make a few comments. First, Mali welcomes this
second report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict, above all because it contains important
measures, whose objective is to ensure the protection
of children during and after armed conflict. We also
welcome it because it reviews the measures that have
been taken to follow up on past recommendations of
the Secretary-General and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Likewise, we are delighted at the
forthcoming entry into force of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, of which
Mali is completing the formalities of ratification.
Along the same lines, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 22 of
his report, which are aimed at ensuring respect for the
obligations and commitments undertaken for the
protection of children in armed conflict.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the
increasingly active role of the Security Council on the
question of children and armed conflict. My delegation
is delighted in this respect with the efforts of the
Secretary-General to make available to the Security
Council first-hand information on children affected by
conflicts, especially in specific countries. I have in
mind in particular Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola and Afghanistan. In
this regard, my delegation is pleased at Mr. Otunnu's
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
followed by his briefing to the Security Council and its
adoption of a resolution calling for greater attention to
be given to the protection of children in that country
and to strengthening the child-protection component of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

My third comment relates to the need to adopt a
regional approach to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflict. In fact, it is essential to take
measures to put an end to the transboundary activities
that are harmful to children in times of armed conflict,
such as the transboundary recruitment and kidnapping
of children, the sale of or trafficking in children,
attacks on refugee or displaced-persons camps and
installations, the contraband in precious minerals, the
illicit traffic in small arms and other criminal activities.

In this regard, Mali took an active part in the
adoption, in April 2000, of the Accra Declaration and
Plan of Action on War-Affected Children in West
Africa. Likewise, Mali made a useful contribution to
the training of officers of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for the protection of
children in armed conflict, to the meeting in Libreville
in February 2001 on the economic exploitation of
children and to the Arab-African forum in Rabat, from
24-26 October 2001, on the sexual exploitation of
children. Along the same lines, we must welcome the
holding in Cairo, in May 2001, under the auspices of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), of the Pan
African Forum on the Future of Children in Africa, at
which a Declaration and Plan of Action were adopted
that envisage suitable measures for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. It is also
reassuring to welcome the adoption by the members of
ECOWAS, in April 2001, of an agreement to establish
a Child-Protection Unit, which will ensure the
integration of child-protection mechanisms into all
relevant ECOWAS institutions and also the
implementation of the Accra Declaration and Plan of
Action.

These various initiatives are accomplishments
that must be consolidated, inter alia, through sufficient
financial aid from the United Nations and the donor
community to regional organizations, such as
ECOWAS, that have shown their determination to
ensure the protection of children during and after
armed conflict but that do not have the means to do so.

Concluding as I began, I would like to reiterate
Mali's steadfast commitment to children, especially
those that are affected by armed conflict. It is our hope
that the special session of the General Assembly on
children, to be held in May 2002, will give Member
States, the United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society a useful opportunity to
follow the example of the Security Council, through its
resolution 1314 (2000) and the resolution to be adopted
at this meeting, by taking decisive measures to ensure
the protection of children.

