Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy for his briefing and for all the work that he and
his team do on the ground. I learn with personal regret
of his intention to move on, much as I understand
the reasons, and I will come back to that, ifI may.
However, the Council and the entire United Nations
owe him a tremendous debt because he has persisted
with one of the most difficult portfolios that, I think,
any representative of the Secretary-General can have
in any conflict, and he has done so for four long years.
We thank him very much for that. As I said, I will come
back to that later. The war itself has gone on for even
longer than his tenure. I think that he is the third Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and the war
has continued for seven very long, very gruesome and
very awful years for the Syrian people.

I will start with Idlib, which represents a terribly
important moment because 3 million civilians remain
at risk there. We salute the work that the Turkish
Government has done, working with the Russians to
get the current situation in Idlib under control. If I may
cite the Emergency Relief Coordinator, we hope that
that is a reprieve and not a stay of execution. However,
I think that everyone on the Council remains fearful
that the Idlib agreement will not hold. My first point is
therefore that the Council should do everything that it
can to support the Special Envoy and Turkey in having
the Idlib agreement be preserved,

Secondly, as the French Ambassador said, the
humanitarian situation still remains very difficult and
very challenging. There has been progress in certain
areas, but it is not the case that aid is reaching all those
who are truly in need. We therefore also call on everyone
on the Council to redouble efforts to support the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others in
getting aid through. We call on the Russian and Syrian
Governments to ensure that the aid is delivered on the
basis of impartiality and need.

As the Special Envoy said, Idlib represents not
only the potential salvation of 3 million civilians but
also a window of opportunity for the peace process.
My United States and French colleagues set out very
clearly how that could be taken forward. I just want to
add the United Kingdom's voice to what they said. The
Special Envoy described exactly how the constitutional
committee should be constituted, how it might work
and the sort of matters that it could look at. Under
resolution 2254 (2015), that was supposed to have been
set up within six months.

Frankly, on our side, it defies belief that the Syrian
Government cannot work with what the Special Envoy
has set out. I agree with the United States representative

that the fact that the Syrian Government cannot work
with the constitutional committee as set out either calls
into question Russian good faith in brokering that deal
in Sochi in the first place or shows that the Russian
Government does not have power and influence in
Syria. I think that both those things are quite dangerous
for the potential of the Syrian political process and
that we should spend some time thinking through the
consequences of there being no progress at all on the
constitutional committee.

Even at this stage, we would appeal to the Syrian
authorities to make every conceivable effort to work
with the United Nations to bring the constitutional
committee into being along the lines that the Special
Envoy set out. We completely agree with him and the
Secretary-General that the United Nations cannot be
involved in this Charade and that the constitutional
committee must be a genuinely credible and
representative process. As the French Ambassador said,
it is not the only part of the political process. Working
with the United Nations on a broader political process
is not a threat to Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity
or unity. All the experience of the Council over very
many decades - but, in recent times, from the Balkans
to Africa and the Middle East - shows that where there
is conflict that is as divisive, as awful and as damaging
as the Syrian conflict has been for the past seven years,
there needs to be a representative political process ifthe
country is to be stable and coherent and, above all, for it
to reintegrate back into the international community. I
assume that the Syrian people really want those things.

We therefore take the opportunity today to call
on the Syrian authorities to put aside self-interest
and to engage with United Nations and the broader
political process. We call on them to ensure sustained
humanitarian access, as I said earlier, but we also
call on them to put an end to policies and practices
that create obstacles to displaced people and refugees
returning home and rebuilding their lives. We call
on them to start progress towards creating a safe and
neutral environment, in which all Syria's communities,
regardless of religion or ethnicity, can thrive and be
fairly represented.

Moving on to the Special Envoy's visit to
Damascus. I hope that he goes with the Council's full
support in delivering the Secretary-General's clear
and direct message to the Syrian authorities. We thank
him for the offer to come back to the Council and to
brief us further. As others have said, it is of such vital
importance that we seize this opportunity. The Special
Envoy will always be welcome in the Council at any
time, but I hope that he will err on the side of keeping
the Council updated as to how his talks are going.

The Special Envoy mentioned the Brussels
conference. I again want to be very clear: the sort of
reintegration of Syria into the international community
and the coherence and stability that need to flow from
a genuinely representative political process will need
money for reconstruction, including from the West.
That is also a lesson of all conflicts that we have dealt
with collectively over the past few decades. I take this
opportunity to reiterate - as I am sure the Brussels
event will - that we will not provide reconstruction
assistance for Syria absent a credible political process
leading to a settlement that is genuinely in the interests
of all Syria's communities. To do otherwise would
be to see the awful seven years that have bedevilled
Syria repeated time and again until we are all locked
in the most vicious of spirals. Syria needs to overcome
the factors that, seven years ago, led in the first place
to the conflict with which we are now all struggling.
That cannot be done by ignoring help from the United
Nations or by it turning its back on the international
community. I hope that the Syrian representative will
be able to transmit those messages to his authorities in
advance of the Special Envoy's visit to Damascus.

I will save a fuller tribute to the work of the Special
Envoy for when we get his final thoughts and advice on
what follows in the future after November. I welcome
the fact that he has said that he will be honest, direct
and clear. We look forward to that.

We hope that he will give us unvarnished advice
on what to do next. We hope that the outcome of that
will be a way in which the United Nations can assist
the people of Syria in coming to a political settlement,
but we must also contemplate other scenarios, unless
we see movement from the Syrian authorities. It is a
defining moment. I hope that the Council will be able
to support him fully, and I look forward to hearing his
future account.

I would like to close by expressing our deepest
thanks on behalf of the British Government for
everything that he has done in working for the United
Nations on this most difficult of dossiers.

