Ms. Marinaki: I am speaking on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would first like to thank Chad for organizing
this thematic debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime, which comes at such a critical and challenging
time. In that context, let me stress that the European
Union works in a coherent and comprehensive way
to tackle both terrorism and transnational organized
crime, and that we work very closely with the United
Nations and its agencies. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Tete
Antonio, speaking on behalf of the African Union, for
their informative and thorough statements.

I would like to provide the Council with some
information on the European Union's main efforts to
address issues of security, counter-terrorism and cross-
border crime, all of them interlinked in a way that
reinforces their negative impact on countries and their
development and causes instability in many regions
worldwide. The crisis in Mali is an example of the
links between organized criminal gangs and terrorists.
The Sahel region's security and development have
been hampered by terrorism, violent extremism and
transnational organized crime. There is also a new trend
in terrorism that attempts to control territories and act
like a State, as is the case with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko Haram. We can cite
many other examples of connections between organized
crime and terrorism, starting with Al-Shabaab's taxing
of piracy and charcoal-trading proceeds in Somalia
and the illegal trafficking in oil and cultural goods that
constitutes the main funding resource for ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front. It is also widely believed that money
derived from poaching and wildlife trafficking is used
to fund terrorist purposes.

The European Union supports the implementation
of United Nations sanctions regimes, in particular that
under resolution 2170 (2014), aimed at cutting offISIL's
revenues. The recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force are also important in that context. In the
area of kidnapping for ransom, we welcome the work
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF), in
particular the Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices
on Preventing and Denying the Benefits of Kidnapping

for Ransom by Terrorists and the final conclusions of
the Group of Eight summit at Lough Erne in 2013. In
June, based on resolution 2133 (2014), the European
Union adopted conclusions on kidnapping for ransom.

The European Union and its member States are
parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, which are milestones
in international cooperation on tackling organized
crime, particularly money-laundering, the smuggling
of migrants and the trafficking of human beings and
firearms. We welcome the citing of both Conventions
in specific cross-border organized crime cases, since
fighting corruption effectively is vital to ensuring good
governance and people's trust in their Governments
and institutions.

The European Union is fully committed to
implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
We support all countries in their efforts to implement
those instruments. It is also very important that we not
neglect other security threats, especially in Africa, and
we therefore welcome today's adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), which highlights the importance of
addressing terrorism and organized crime.

I would like to reaffirm the European Union's
commitment to promoting security and development,
particularly in Africa. As part of the implementation
of our strategy for the development and security of the
Sahel, we support countries in that region, especially
Mali, the Niger and Mauritania, in their counter-
terrorism efforts. We also support the countries of
West Africa in their efforts to tackle drug-related
transnational cross-border crime. In the Horn of
Africa, the European Union is a key supporter of the
African Union Mission in Somalia and is implementing
a comprehensive counter-terrorism and security
package that includes measures on law enforcement
and countering violent extremism, the financing of
terrorism and piracy. We work closely with other
actors, particularly the GCTF, which complements
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts. In that
framework, the European Union is a co-Chair, with
Turkey, of the GCTF's Horn of Africa Working Group,
which promotes coordination between the international
community and countries in the region. The European
Union also funds a joint project, implemented since
March, of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on rule-of-law-compliance investigations
and prosecutions in the Maghreb region. We also
support many countries around the world in the areas
of conflict prevention and resolution, good governance,
the rule of law, the promotion of human rights and
education, since they form part of the European Union's
development policies.

Regarding the enhancement of peace and security,
a critical opportunity now exists for the international
community to consider ways to support the post-2015
development agenda. Concrete progress in the areas
of security, justice, human rights and the rule of law
is crucial to achieving sustainable development. Joint
security and development efforts, especially those
aimed at countering violent extremism and preventing
conflict, need to be enhanced. It is our common
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law and respect
for international law, particularly human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law, are essential components of the
fight against terrorism and organized crime. At the
same time, we must continue to coordinate our shared
efforts with the United Nations by addressing both the
intersection of cross-border crime with terrorism and its
impact on conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that the European
Union is firmly committed to the call made today by
Under-Secretary-General Feltman that we not only
counter but also prevent terrorism.

