Ms. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Valentin Inzko,
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his report (S/2018/416, annex).

We commend the positive political and economic
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the
previous review period, in particular the adoption of
special tax laws and the approval on 9 February of
the second disbursement of funds under the Extended
Fund Facility. We also welcome the trilateral meeting
held in March between the Presidencies of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. We highlight the
approval of the State budget for 2018 and the foreign
policy strategy for the next five years, as well as the
progress made in the fight against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. Those efforts demonstrate
the commitment of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continuing to undertake the reforms
needed to promote the country's stability and contribute
to the initiatives aimed at achieving the development
and stability they desire. We therefore encourage them
to focus on those aspects and to intensify their efforts
to implement the 5+2 agenda as a prerequisite for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

Despite the progress that has been made, challenges
remain in the political environment. The elections will
take place in October and we believe it is important that
political leaders take consensual action on electoral
changes so that the elections can be properly conducted.
In that connection, we call on Council members to
work together in an inclusive environment, respecting

the Dayton Agreement, which continues to be the legal
basis and benchmark for stability and the peaceful
settlement of differences between the parties. Those
challenges could ultimately destabilize the country
and threaten the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore urge all political
leaders to put the interests of their people before their
ethnic political interests.

Bolivia would like to reiterate its commitment to
the full respect of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we stress that in order to preserve those elements,
its Constitution and the decisions of the judiciary with
regard to the rule of law must be respected. We also
call on political leaders and all parties to refrain from
using nationalist rhetoric that foments divisions in the
country. We hope that Operation Althea and the Office
of the High Representative will continue to cooperate
closely and will play a constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina within
the framework of their mandate.

Lastly, we stress that we encourage the entire
population of Bosnia and Herzegovina to live together
in harmony, overcoming the divisions of the past and
putting shared development first. In that regard, we urge
the international community to address the concerns
of all stakeholders with an impartial and equitable
approach, in the interests of lasting stability.

