Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): We are pleased
to see you presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council, Sir, and we commend your initiative in
organizing this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Kazakhstan firmly supports United Nations
peacekeeping and the Organization's efforts to
reinforce its peacekeeping capacity. This year
Kazakhstan has fully paid its outstanding contributions
to the peacekeeping operations budget and intends to
regularly meet its financial obligations in the future.

The establishment of a comprehensive
mechanism designed to prevent destructive conflicts
and their spread throughout the world remains a key
objective and a challenge in peacekeeping. Since the
release of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809),
considerable progress has been made in this area, but
much more must be done in order to improve United
Nations peacekeeping capacities. This need is
highlighted by the very nature of numerous conflicts
and the growing demand for United Nations
peacekeeping, especially in Africa.

Kazakhstan fully supports efforts to reinforce the
Organization's capacity to conduct peacekeeping
operations in precarious security environments,
including by the provision by Member States of direct
and over-the-horizon rapid response capability.

We need to develop close cooperation among the
Security Council, Member States and regional
arrangements in the search for ways and means to
ensure an effective response to emerging complex
conflict situations when measures to keep peace and
promote development often have to be taken
simultaneously.

Issues of the security and safety of peacekeepers
are growing in importance. The Organization is faced
with increased direct threats to civilian staff of United
Nations missions. In that context, Kazakhstan supports
the steps by the Secretariat and its Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to increase security and
ensure better planning of peacekeeping operations by
consolidating the efforts of various United Nations
bodies, funds and programmes.

We welcome the measures that are being taken to
further expand the mandate of the United Nations
Standby Arrangements System.

Last October the Republic of Kazakhstan signed
a memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations concerning its contribution to the United
Nations system of preparatory activities. We also
would like to participate more actively in the United
Nations system of procurement for peacekeeping
missions.

Efforts to advance coordination between the
United Nations and Member States in the conduct of
multidimensional peacekeeping exercises and to
promote integrated training of peacekeepers by
Member States are commendable and should be
supported. As indicated in the Secretary-General's
report on the work of the Organization (A/58/1), peace
agreements by themselves mark only the first step in
bringing lasting peace and prosperity to war-torn
societies. For such States, creating or rebuilding civil
society is a crucial long-term commitment and it is
essential to establishing and consolidating democracy.

In that context, we believe in the importance of
the Organization implementing a local security concept
encompassing a broad range of issues, starting with
human rights and eradication of poverty and ending
with development promotion and democratization.
Recent experience has underscored the fact that
peacekeeping operations lead to progress not only in
the political field, but also in social and economic
areas.

It is gratifying to note that the understanding of
the role of women in the establishment and
maintenance of peace has increased significantly in
recent years. We must continue to enhance the capacity
of all actors to work in harmony in order to achieve our
main goal of a world free of conflict.

We believe that in conflict-prone regions the
international community should much more vigorously
promote policies to strengthen security, and primarily
human security, because minimum security standards
are a prerequisite for development.

In concluding my short remarks, I would like to
stress that the Republic of Kazakhstan remains firmly
committed to its peacekeeping obligations and will
continue to take steps to enhance the United Nations
peacekeeping capacity.

