Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this annual and always very useful meeting. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev, who is
a remarkable polyglot, the Police Commissioners here
today and Ms. Reitano for their briefings, which enable
us to better understand the challenges facing United
Nations police forces on the ground. Like my colleagues
before me, I would also like to pay a warm tribute to
the men and women police officers and gendarmes,
who are sometimes deployed in very difficult security
conditions, for their critical work and contribution to
peacekeeping and the protection of civilians.

The new challenges to peacekeeping efforts also
raise questions about the role and activities of the United
Nations Police in peacekeeping. In that regard, I want
to fully endorse the statements by the representatives of
the Netherlands and Sweden, particularly with regard
to the role of the police in enforcing the rule of law
and the importance of a gender approach tailored to the
protection of women.

The Action for Peacekeeping reform initiative
launched by the Secretary-General, which France
firmly supports, must also be implemented in United
Nations policing. To that end, I would like to draw
the Security Council's attention to three areas. The
first is improving police performance in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Police
officers must be given the means to take action at every
stage of peacebuilding. Collective, proactive, long-term
action is needed in order to establish the indicators for
evaluating police action and improving its effectiveness
in combating acts of violence or transnational crime.
Training issues are key, of course. The contributing
countries have to train police contingents, but they
must also train the police services in the countries
hosting United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
people must be given the policing services they need,
a condition essential to successful transitions and to
ensuring peacekeeping operations' orderly departure.

The second area is encouraging the representation
of women in police forces. I particularly have in mind
ensuring increased numbers of women in contingents
and police personnel, which is happening but needs
further progress. The Secretary-General's goals are
ambitious but attainable. Police forces must ensure
respect for human rights and equal treatment before the
law for all. They must also be able to communicate with
the populations they protect. Strengthening linguistic
capacities suited to deployment areas is crucial in
that regard.

The third area I want to emphasize is the importance
of placing the United Nations Police in a framework
that matches the importance of their role. The police
presence is there at every stage of peace operations,
from prevention to consolidation. The police must
therefore have the right skills, whether for planning,
force generation, crisis management or leadership.
Against that backdrop, we have high expectations of
the Secretary-General's report on the police, which we
called for last year through the adoption of resolution
2382 (2017). Now seems a perfect time to embrace the
reforms that the Secretary-General has called for. We
must set the United Nations Police ambitious targets.
France intends to be a willing and constructive partner
in that project.

You have encouraged us to be interactive,
Mr. President, and I therefore have some questions
for the Police Commissioners. My first is for Police
Commissioner Therriault. The police component clearly
plays a central role in the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti. With less than a year to go before a transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence, what
lessons can he draw from the Organization's efforts to
strengthen the Haitian National Police, and what kind
of impact will that have on the Haitian judicial system?

I also have a question for Police Commissioner
Abdounasir on the French-speaking world. We know
it is important for Police Commissioners to be able to
communicate effectively with the people on the ground
and with host countries' national forces. Do the various
relevant missions have enough French-speaking
police personnel?

Finally, I have a question for Police Commissioner
Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa. She spoke of the great efforts and
progress made by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan in combating sexual violence in conflicts. What
does she still need in order to make better progress in
that regard?

