Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the important
briefings by Special Representative Leila Zerrougui
and Special Envoy Said Djinnit. I would like to very
briefly join the Permanent Representative of Sweden in
expressing thanks to the leader of the Security Council
mission, the Permanent Representative of France, and
to the co-leaders, the Permanent Representatives of
Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea, as well as the members
of the Council secretariat, for their outstanding conduct
of the mission.

We would like to start by emphasizing the
importance of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
holding on 23 December free, transparent, inclusive
and credible elections, allowing for the establishment
of a new Government that will be called on to address
the serious challenges that the country faces. In that
regard, we wish to acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by the Government, in particular the firm commitment
that the Head of State himself, President Kabila
Kabange, expressed to us last week, for the success of
the December elections. We also highlight the work
of the Independent National Electoral Commission in
complying with the electoral calendar. We reiterate
the importance of the international community's
support in that process, while respecting the principle
of sovereignty.

As has been mentioned, the members of the
Security Council had an opportunity to get close to
the situation and interact with Congolese authorities
and civil society, to whom we are grateful for their
generous hospitality.

We take due note of the concerns voiced by the
opposition with regard to the use of voting machines.
We are confident that it will be possible to reach an
understanding. We also hope that there will be adequate
training on their use so that the Congolese people can
express their will without major setbacks. Beyond the
technical and logistical discussions on the process, we
consider it essential that a healthy debate and exchange
of ideas and proposals among the candidates be
generated so that Congolese citizens are well informed
when choosing their future leaders.

We also express our concern about the arbitrary
arrests of members of the opposition and representatives
of civil society, which are contrary to the democratic
climate in which elections must be conducted. In that
regard, we underline the need to fully implement
the confidence-building measures set forth in the
31 December 2016 political agreement.

We also stress the important supporting role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union and subregional organizations, as
well as that of neighbouring countries, in ensuring that
the electoral process can become a turning point in the
building of sustainable peace in the country.

With regard to the security situation, we deplore
the continuing attacks by armed groups against the
civilian population in the east of the country and the
inter-ethnic violence in the South Kivu region, as
well as the theft of weapons from the armed forces by
militias. We consider it essential that the armed forces,
MONUSCO and the Intervention Brigade continue to
work together to more effectively protect the civilian
population, especially from Allied Democratic Forces
attacks in the North Kivu region.

We would also like to underline the organization
of workshops to determine the humanitarian needs
in the country, conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We believe that
initiative will foster cooperation between Congolese
authorities and humanitarian agencies at the national
and sub-national levels.

We also welcome MONUSCO's quite committed and

steadfast work in the area ofhuman rights, in particular
in the implementation of the road map to secure the
release of children recruited by armed groups, and we
stress the need to bring those responsible to justice.
Along the same lines, we welcome the community
violence-reduction projects implemented in the east of
the country, which have given ex-combatants access
to jobs and reduced the risk of young people being
recruited by militias.

Finally, we express our deep concern about the
new outbreak of the Ebola virus, and regret that it has
cost the lives of 120 people and threatens almost 200
other affected people, at the very least. We highlight
and support the work of the World Health Organization
and the United Nations to tackle the situation in
coordination with the Government. However, we
note with alarm that the virus is spreading in areas
affected by constant attacks by armed groups. That
obviously hampers prevention efforts for a timely and
comprehensive response to the threat posed by the
virus. The MONUSCO staff and the health personnel
deployed to those areas deserve our admiration
and support.

