Mr. De Mul: I will be as brief as I can. The
question was asked about what is being done in terms
of accessing those displaced by military intervention. It
depends: if those displaced by military intervention
come to camps where they can be attended to, then
they will be attended to. But that is not always the case.
In certain cases, those people fall through the cracks
and are not attended to at all. Again, this refers to the
matter of access, which we will talk about with regard
to another question.

As to the composition of the displaced, it is very
true that often it is skewed, in that we see many
children and women, while men between the ages of,
say, 16 and 40 years may not be there. I think that what
is happening with young males in the case of Angola is
no different from what is happening in other countries
where there is conflict: young males are probably
engaged in fighting or otherwise involved in conflict.

I will turn now to the question of our
assessment- the assessment of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - of what the
Government of Angola is putting into the humanitarian
effort. I would say that this is the assessment not of
OCHA alone, but also of the non-governmental
organizations and the donor community.
The assessment is very simple: too little, too late.
I think we can be very grateful for the fact that the
Angolan Government agrees with this assessment. The
proof of this is that a very serious meeting took place
last week in which the Government decided to review
the situation and came to the same conclusion: too
little, too late. Something had to be done, and a whole
series of measures was agreed upon and adopted, to be
implemented forthwith by the Government.

With regard to the question of whether the
military effort has increased or decreased over the past
six months, we have the impression that it is
increasing. There is more military activity and hence
more displacement.

The issue of humanitarian corridors is a
complicated one. Corridors are normally easier in
situations where there is a kind of stabilized conflict:
where two parties hold certain territories in a more
stable fashion, you can negotiate corridors. It is a
nightmare to do it, but it is possible. The Angolan
situation is much more fluid. So I suppose that when
we talk about access, we have to look at it in a broader
context. If there is a possibility of using corridors, let
us try it. However, I think it is much more an issue of
the parties, and particularly the Government, accepting
the idea that all Angolan citizens are the responsibility
of the Angolan Government, and that measures should
be taken to try to attend to their needs. In the case of
the Angolan situation, it is much easier to negotiate
and discuss this with the authorities than with UNITA,
with which we have no contact. So access is something
we have to continue to discuss with the Angolan
authorities.

As for the question on demining, the Angolan
Government took an important decision to create an
inter-sectoral demining commission, which is now
reviving the whole issue of mine action in the country.
The commission will be the entity that will set policy
and priorities and outsource the activities to non-
governmental organizations and other bodies.

There was a question concerning allegations of
forced movement of people and the humanitarian
consequences. I think it is correct to say that there have
been allegations of forced movement of people. It is
always difficult to define exactly what that means, and
to prove that people are being forced to move is not
very easy. The bottom line is, for whatever reasons
people move, the consequences should somehow be
attended to. In the first place, I think the consequences
should be dealt with by the national authorities,
particularly the provincial authorities, hopefully
supported by the non-governmental organizations and
the United Nations system.

With regard to the question on what the Security
Council can do, I think that has already been answered
by Mr. Oshima.

The question about what we can do to approach
UNITA to facilitate the work of the United Nations
agencies is a difficult one. We will have to discuss it
with Mr. Gambari, because we cannot get in direct
touch with UNITA.

How is the Government tackling new
displacements? That is a question for the Government,
so I will leave it to them.

There was an interesting question about the Kuito
airport. Kuito has become something of an
international issue: for almost two years, repairs have
been somewhat under way but never moving at a
normal pace. Many people have tried to find out what
is really happening, because the information we have is
that funding has been made available to repair the
airport. You open one door, you are sent to another
door and you go around in circles - there is no
answer. Our assessment thus far is that this could well
be a case where we have a combination of lack of
interest, a capacity problem and possibly, some
think - I am going to use a word that perhaps is not
often used in this Chamber - probably also a case of
corruption. We all hope that the Government will
address the issue and make sure that this is resolved
soon.

As for Cameroon's question about special
programmes for children: there are far too few.
Notably, there are very few programmes that deal with
street children issues. This must be rectified. Overall,
the problems are so overwhelming that it is very
difficult to get into details and create specific projects
for children.

The representative of Mexico asked a question as
to the role of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) vis-a-vis the
situation of internally displaced persons. UNHCR is
gradually withdrawing its activities in relation to
internally displaced persons, who are increasingly the
responsibility of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. UNHCR will remain in Angola
and will continue to help the United Nations agencies
and the international community work on issues related
to the protection of internally displaced persons.
