Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (Spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by expressing our delegation's gratitude
for South Africa's exemplary leadership of the work of
the Security Council as President of the Council for the
month of October. We take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of Mrs. Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of the Republic of South
Africa. We welcome also the Secretary of State of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany.

We align ourselves the statement made by the
representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

Since the previous quarterly open debate on the
Middle East, including the situation in Palestine (see S/PV.8583), far from taking measures to immediately
and completely put an end to the illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory, Israel has with impunity
continued to expand settlements in occupied areas and
has threatened to annex the Palestinian territories of
the Jordan Valley in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
These fresh actions are serious and troubling.
Cuba condemns the Israeli occupation ofPalestinian
territory and all illegal and colonization policies,
practices and measures, including the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, punitive demolitions, seizures of Palestinian
structures by the Israeli authorities, the forced
displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and the increased violence
and use of indiscriminate and disproportionate force
against Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law.

We call once again upon the Security Council
to demand an immediate end to the occupation of
Palestinian territory and to Israel's aggressive and
colonization policies, in accordance with the resolutions
adopted on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, particularity resolution 2334
(2016). It is unacceptable that the Security Council has
not even condemned the escalation of violence or the
tragic events in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.
The repeated obstruction of the United States, which is
complicit with Israel's occupation and aggression, is a
discredit to this body.

The international community cannot remain
silent. International peace and security must be
safeguarded, and we must ensure compliance by Israel
with international law, including humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and with all the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Council,
particularly the aforementioned resolution 2334 (2016).

We reiterate our unconditional support for a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that will make it possible for
the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-
determination and live in an independent, sovereign
State, within pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and that guarantees the right of return
of refugees.

We reject the unilateral action by the United States
Government in recognizing Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel and establishing its diplomatic representation
in that city, without regard to its historical status.
We condemn the cutting off of financial support to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as all unilateral
measures aimed at undermining the two-State solution,
which is the only viable and realistic solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal
of the century drawn up by the current United States
Government, which does not envision the creation
of a State of Palestine and ignores the two-State
solution, which has received the historical support of
the United Nations, NAM, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
international stakeholders.

We call for respect for multilateralism and an
end to the use of double standards and to interference
in domestic affairs, foreign aggression, illicit arms
trafficking and the sponsorship of terrorist groups in
the region.

We reiterate our strong condemnation of the
decision by the United States Government to recognize
the occupied Syrian Golan as Israeli territory, which is a
grave and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United

Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular 497 (1981).

We will continue to support the demands of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to recover
the Golan Heights, and again call for Israel's total and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and
all occupied Arab territories.

We express our firm rejection of the application
of new, arbitrary and unjust unilateral coercive
economic measures announced by the Government of
the United States against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme, the increase in the number of unilateral
sanctions and the military threat against the Islamic
Republic of Iran have all led to greater instability in the
Middle East.

We condemn the attacks on two oil facilities in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

We call for restraint and moderation so as to
prevent instability and conflict in the Middle East. We
demand that this organ fulfil its responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

