Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have listened attentively to my colleagues,
and now I would like to ask them to listen to me and
be patient. It has been some time since we discussed
Ukraine and I am therefore doubly grateful to the Polish
presidency for taking this initiative. I would also like to
thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mueller and Mr. Apakan for
their briefings.

Immediately after my statement we will hear the
following: in February 2014, a revolution ofhonour took
place in Ukraine. Let me point out, parenthetically, that
one synonym for "revolution" is "coup d'etat". Does
that mean that in Kyiv they do in fact admit that what
happened in Ukraine was a coup and a power grab? The
statement will go on to say that Russia could not be
reconciled to this and launched a war on Ukraine. Its
troops are in Donbas. It has occupied Crimea. For all
intents and purposes Russia is waging a third world war
using hybrid methods. This is a battle of civilizations.
A world of serfdom has challenged a world of freedom.
Ukraine is on the front lines of this struggle between
Muscovite barbarity and the civilized world. I could go
on listing these pathetic propositions, but I will leave
Mr. Klimkin the opportunity to expand on them.

The problem is that we are dealing with sellers
of air. But to give it its due, the Kyiv propaganda
machine has succeeded in painting a picture of an
unfortunate, freedom-loving, peace-loving Ukraine,
desperately fighting a perfidious, hating and hated
Mordor. However, it has not done it on its own. It has
been helped by its patrons in the West - who are all
sitting here in this Chamber to my left and right. It is
true, however, that they have recently begun to realize
that there is something wrong with this picture, which
is a painfully surreal one. Ukraine has declared that it
is in a state of war with Russia, although who in the
circumstances is the aggressor is not clear, considering
that we are at war with no one. And yet no war footing
has been declared, our embassies are functioning, a
no-visa regime is in effect and millions of citizens of
both countries mingle across our borders. They visit
relatives, take trips to Russia for work, vacation in so-
called occupied Crimea, conduct trade, do business
and do not in any way experience hostility either from
the so-called aggressor or the people who are its so-
called victims.

The so-called revolution of honour - or rather
coup - came about in order to overthrow the hated and
corrupt Yanukovych regime. So where are we now? Are
Ukrainians better off today? Kyiv's Western patrons
are well aware of the horrifying level of corruption in
Ukraine and the country's dire economic condition. But
there is a panacea for that. Just blame Russia for all of
Ukraine's ills, which is what is happening and usually in
caricatured form. To take one example, before the UEFA
Champions League final in Kyiv, a group of Ukrainian
fans beat up some English supporters. Regrettably, that
happens. There followed an explanation distinguished
by its simplicity. It was a provocation by the Russian
Federal Security Service, and the fans were Russians.
Whatever happens in Ukraine, the universal theory is
that it all leads to Russia.

My dear friends here are in deep, self-imposed
isolation where information about what is going on in
Ukraine is concerned. They consume the shibboleths
and cliche's dished up by the Western media and the
doctrines of their Ukrainian clients. Have many of
them done in-depth analyses of the social and political
situation and the moral and psychological climate
in Ukraine? Do they know the buckets of swill and
loathing the Kyiv authorities shower on Russia, the
lies they permit themselves and the malice they spew?
But it is not just them. Does anyone here have an idea
of the nonsense and fables that some Ukrainian media
outlets disseminate about the situation in Crimea,
the construction of the Crimean Bridge, the situation
in Donbas, about Russia's motives and so-called
intentions? No, they have no idea. But we certainly do.

Those media outlets that are willing to make up
their own minds and hold undesirable world views,
even ifthey are not pro-Russian or hostile, but simply in
opposition, are steamrollered and shut down. On what
pretext? Right. Because they are agents of the Kremlin.
Independent and opposition journalists are killed and
the crimes go uninvestigated. Literally just today the
journalist and Russian citizen Arkady Babchenko was
killed in Kyiv. It happened only a few hours ago. We
can assume that the Ukrainian authorities will blame
Russia for it, as they have done before more than once.
Other journalists are fleeing the country to avoid
persecution, and if they do not, they are arrested,
like Kirill Vyshinsky, a Ukrainian citizen and head
of RIA Novosti Ukraine. What was he accused of?
High treason.

The level of schizophrenia in Ukraine is off the
charts. Let me point out that schizophrenia is not
an insult. It is a psychiatric condition in which the
personality is split in two. Thanks to the efforts of
its current leaders, Ukraine is living in two parallel
universes, its fictional state of so-called hybrid war
with Russia and the real world, where there is no
Russian invasion. And it is essential to be able to strictly
control the information space in order to ensure that
reality cannot contradict or cross paths with the virtual
world that the Ukrainian authorities have created.
This schizophrenia now extends to their ideology. The
authorities in Kyiv are creating a pantheon of new
Ukrainian heroes, warriors for its independence. For
lack of any others, they have exalted Stepan Bandera
and Roman Shukhevych, leaders of the Organization of
Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN), which cooperated with
the Nazis. No matter that as far as half the population of
Ukraine is concerned they are not heroes but criminals
and collaborators. The important thing is to have
heroes who are anti-Russian. Our Polish presidency of
the Council knows perfectly well what sort of people
Bandera and Shukhevych were. Poles have their own
scores to settle with these men. And they know the kind
of organization OUN is - one that annihilated Jews,
Poles and Russians during the war. Except that today
they did not say anything about that. It is strictly for
Poland's internal consumption. Talking about that kind
of thing in this Chamber is simply inappropriate.

A state of lawlessness exists right now in Ukraine
that would not be tolerated in any law-abiding State.
But there it can be. And one can close one's eyes to
it. The authorities in Kyiv are conducting an assault
on basic human rights and freedoms, suppressing
dissidents, using police-State methods, indulging the
rise of extremist and neo-Nazist attitudes and working
for the forced Ukrainization of the country.

In September 2017 a law on education came into
effect aimed at eradicating the entire Russian-language
education system, in contravention of Ukraine's
obligations under the Minsk agreements. The law
granting the right to use Russian at the regional level
was repealed, ignoring the Venice Commission's
recommendations on making adjustments to ensure the
rights of national minorities. Kyiv's measures constitute
linguistic cleansing, although it is a real stretch to call
Russian a minority language in Ukraine. All ofthis goes
against Ukraine's own Constitution and its international
legal obligations, both universal and regional. I would
like to point out that the language issue has been one of
the most basic motives of events in Ukraine. But Kyiv
is not about to learn from its mistakes.

The uncontrolled growth of nationalist and
chauvinist sentiment in Ukraine is very worrying.
Bandera's birthday is being observed with torchlight
parades on a virtually State-wide scale. The victims
of the nationalists' attacks include representatives of
the media, television station offices and their owners'
homes. On 9 May radicals attempted to burn down
the INTER TV offices for broadcasting a concert in
honour of Victory Day. Nationalist attacks continue
on Ukrainian Orthodox churches and journalists. Here
at United Nations Headquarters, on 9 May, after a
seminar conducted by the Ukrainian Mission, which
it attempted to pass off as an official Committee on
Information event, Ukrainian participants in the so-
called anti-terrorist operation, including so-called
snipers, tried to physically threaten a Russian diplomat.
An official representative of the Ukrainian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs brought in the snipers, presented them
as friends and later tried to depict the whole thing as
Russian slander, lies and propaganda.

To this day there has been no investigation of the
tragedy that took place in Odessa on 2 May 2014, when
radicals burned more than 50 people alive in the House
of Trade Unions. But today the leader of OUN speaks
of it with pride. That is just a taste of the examples
I could give. The whole thing is really much sadder.
That is why the residents of Crimea decided that they
no longer wished to live under such conditions and left
this Ukraine. The inhabitants of Donbas have been less
lucky. A different scenario unrolled there. And yet they
did not ask for much. They wanted to have autonomy
within a united Ukraine, to speak their native language
and honour their own heroes rather than those imposed
on them by Kyiv. What is absurd about that? Why is it
possible somewhere in Belgium, where Walloons and
Flemings live peacefully together, but not in Ukraine?
God forbid that Belgium should endure such a scenario.
I wish it all the best and continued peace andjoy.

Has no one ever wondered why there have never
been any protests in Donbas, large or small, against the
local authorities, which Kyiv has labelled terrorists?
And that is despite the fact that the people's life there is
not at all easy, thanks to the Kyiv authorities, who have
shown their generous concern and hypocrisy vis-a-vis
their own population by imposing a trade and economic
blockade on them. For some reason we hear nothing

about human rights violations in those areas or any
demands for a speedy return to Kyiv's control. Maybe
the answer is simply that those people do not want to
live in that kind of Ukraine either. The Council either
does not know whom it is dealing with or is deliberately
turning a blind eye, because, unfortunately, some of
its members have no need whatever of a settlement
of the conflict in Ukraine. All they want is a hotbed
of instability on Russia's borders and the satisfaction
of schadenfreude at the tensions between two brother
countries and peoples. But they are wrong if they
imagine that this will last forever.

Many speakers today have rightly talked about the
fact that the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, as affirmed in resolution
2202 (2015), represents the only possible foundation
for a settlement. The phrase "Russia must fulfil the
Minsk agreements" is now commonplace. But are
many of those present in this Chamber familiar with
the provisions of the Minsk agreements? Have they
read them at all? Do they know by whom, how and in
what sequence they should be implemented? If I may, I
would like to remind them. There are 13 paragraphs in
the package of measures.

Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 concern the comprehensive
ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons. Kyiv has not
managed to achieve a durable ceasefire for three years
and has ignored the truces declared by the Trilateral
Contact Group. The Ukrainian forces' equipment is
regularly missing from its storage areas and is used
for shelling civilian targets in Donbas. Incidentally, I
would like to tell my British colleague that the workers
from the Donetsk filtration station, like the filtration
station itself, were shelled from the Ukrainian side, not
the militias'. According to data from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe's Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, since the beginning of
this year five civilians have been killed and 33 injured
in militia-controlled areas, whereas there has been one
civilian injury on Government-controlled territories.

Kyiv has undermined and continues to sabotage
the implementation of the framework agreement of
21 September 2016 on the disengagement of forces and
hardware, despite the fact that the militias have regularly
affirmed their willingness to abide by it. Ukrainian
forces have regularly seized residential areas in the
so-called grey zone, where such action is prohibited.
The demining process has been obstructed and military
preparations are fully under way. The Ukrainians are
now conducting a military operation in Donbas with
the so-called United Forces. Today, for some reason,
exercises involving aviation support were conducted
over Donbas. And a number of countries, instead of
demanding that Kyiv fulfil its obligations, have begun
supplying it with more arms. What kind of contribution
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements is that?

Paragraph 4 concerns the dialogue on the modalities
of local elections. Kyiv has no intention of getting into
any kind of dialogue, ignoring the signatures of the
Donetsk and Luhansk representatives on the Minsk
agreements. Listening to Ukrainian politicians, one
would think there are no people there at all, only
terrorists. And yet there are 4 million Ukrainian
citizens living in Donbas.

Paragraphs 5 and 6 concern pardons, amnesties
and the release and exchange of all prisoners. In
violation of the agreements, Kyiv has refused to enact
through the Verkhovna Rada bills for amnesties for
militias, although a similar procedure for participants
in the Maidan riots in the winter of 2013 and 2014 was
implemented. The militias have consistently declared
their willingness to exchange prisoners on an all-for-
all basis in accordance with the Minsk agreements, but
Kyiv has persistently objected.

Paragraph 7 concerns safe humanitarian access.
The problems that have accumulated in that regard, as
Ms. Mueller mentioned, must be resolved within the
framework of the regular meetings of the Trilateral
Contact Group in Minsk. The main problem is Kyiv's
unwillingness to hold a dialogue with the representatives
of Donetsk and Luhansk. The result, essentially, is that
today the residents of those regions can rely only on
supplies from Russia, which is something else that we
have been criticized for.

Paragraph 8 concerns the restoration of
socioeconomic ties. Kyiv has imposed a full economic,
transport and food blockade of Donbas, which is
evidently how the Kyiv authorities are trying to ensure
that the ordinary residents of south-eastern Ukraine
return to their fold.

Paragraph 9 concerns the reinstatement of full

control of the border. This is the point at which Kyiv

and Washington start reading the package of measures.

It states in black and white that this must take place

"starting on day one after the local elections... provided

that paragraph 11 has been implemented". That concerns

"carrying out constitutional reform", which has so far
not happened.

Only after that does paragraph 10 provide for the
disarmament and withdrawal of illegal armed groups,
by which Kyiv means militias and those mythical
Russian troops, whose presence it asserts using various
fakes. Let me once again disappoint some of those
here today - there are no Russian troops in Donbas.
Incidentally, the representative of the United States
took a highly original approach today, lecturing us
about Russia's violations of international law through
its invasion of other countries. Those were the words of
the representative of the United States, a country with
a long and renowned history of invasions of sovereign
States, including in very recent times.

The constitutional reform envisaged by paragraph
11 was supposed to be completed by the end of 2015.
Its key elements call for decentralization and enacting
legislation granting Donetsk and Luhansk special
status. The Minsk provisions include residents' right
to linguistic self-determination, broad self-governance
and support for cross-border cooperation with
Russia. Not only has none of this been implemented,
it has essentially been erased by the law on the so-
called reintegration of Donbas, which came into
effect on 24 February and does not even mention the
Minsk agreements.

Paragraph 12 concerns the holding of local elections
in coordination with representatives of Luhansk and
Donetsk. Needless to say, since Kyiv has rejected any
dialogue, it is not being implemented either.

Paragraph 13 concerns the establishment ofworking
groups on the implementation of relevant aspects of the
Minsk agreements. Who should comply with the Minsk
agreements, in the Council's opinion? Which of these
paragraphs has to do with Moscow's obligations?

The Ukrainian leadership has stubbornly avoided
meeting its obligations under the Minsk agreements
on the political front. It has not ensured the adoption
of permanent legislation on the special order for local
self-government in Donbas and is sabotaging the
implementation of the Steinmeier formula for its special
status. The reason for Kyiv's sabotage of the Minsk
agreements is simple. It does not want a settlement.
Nor does it need Donbas. Why would it want several
million anti-Government citizens on the eve of the 2019
presidential elections? The bankrupt Kiev authorities'
ratings are at rock bottom. If they truly want a
settlement, they have to negotiate with Donbas. That
means that they will have to admit that this is an internal
Ukrainian conflict and a fratricidal war. That is the
naked truth. And that would be domestic and foreign
policy suicide. Kiev does not possess the political will
to implement the Minsk agreements and cannot afford
to destroy the convenient paradigm it has created of
Russian aggression and Russian-supported terrorists,
which is so handy for hiding behind and getting support
from the West. Because of that, we will continue to see
Kyiv politicians enact their imitations of heated activity,
theatrical performances and bombastic statements.

In 2015, the Security Council attempted to provide
Ukraine with genuine international assistance to
Ukraine. Resolution 2202 (2015) enshrined the Minsk
package of measures as the international legal basis for
a settlement that today still remains the only effective
mechanism for a political way out of the situation. No
one should be under the illusion that any decision can
be viable without taking the will of the population of
Donbas into account. It was to support the agreements
between Kyiv, Donetsk and Luhansk that we proposed
considering the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation. Unfortunately, instead of that we are seeing
attempts to create some kind of alternative settlement
format under United Nations auspices to replace the
efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
and the Normandy format and turn the Minsk package
of measures on its head.

Nevertheless, the support that we have heard
today for the Minsk agreements, which need only to
be read correctly and implemented consistently, gives
us hope that we will eventually succeed in achieving
a settlement in this conflict-torn country, where those
who suffer the most are ordinary Ukrainian citizens.
Russia has a greater interest in seeing that succeed than
anyone. That is why we would like to propose that the
Council adopt a very short presidential statement. I will
read it now, if I may.

"The Security Council reaffirms
unconditionally its resolution 2202 (2015),
which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, adopted
and signed in Minsk on 12 February 2015.

"The Security Council calls for ensuring the
full, comprehensive and sequential implementation
of the package of measures, including a
comprehensive ceasefire, as provided for therein.

"The Security Council calls strongly for
refraining from any steps or rhetoric that contradict
the letter and spirit of resolution 2202 (2015)."

We hope that the Council will unanimously reaffirm
its commitment to a peaceful settlement in Ukraine on
the basis of the Minsk agreements.

I cannot avoid discussing a very important and
sensitive issue. Many speakers today have mentioned
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 over
eastern Ukraine in July 2014. We were very saddened by
the incident and, like everyone else, have been hoping
for an independent and impartial investigation. We did
not intend to bring up the subject today, since it has
no direct relation to the political settlement in Ukraine.
But as long as the Joint Investigation Team has rushed
through the latest portion of its comments, evidently to
be in time for today's meeting, and some delegations in
this Chamber, in their ignorance, have launched a new
wave of anti-Russian sentiment, we have this to say.

Our attitude to the tragedy of four years ago has not
changed in any way. Naturally we are outraged by this
dreadful incident, mourn the victims and sympathize
with their loved ones. We insist on the conduct of a
credible investigation. The true perpetrators of the
tragedy must be determined on the basis of reliable
evidence and brought to justice. I would like to remind
the Council that immediately following the tragedy,
Russia spearheaded the adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), which demanded an international investigation
and defined very clear criteria for it. Since the disaster,
we have regularly provided the Dutch with all possible
assistance and have unfailingly called for ensuring the
investigation's transparency. The Office of Russia's
Prosecutor General has always responded promptly and
fully to appeals for the provision of legal assistance.
We have declassified and passed on to the investigation
the design data for the BUK missile system, and have
provided the results of experiments conducted for this
type of missile by Almaz-Antey, its manufacturer.

We also did what no one else has done. In October
2016, we passed on primary radar data, which is
critically important to the investigation, since it cannot
be forged. In particular, it completely excludes the
possibility that the missile that hit the Boeing 777 came
from militia-controlled territory, as the investigation
insists. And yet the data was not even included in the
results and I am asking why. How are we to understand
the refusal of the Netherlands to give an assessment of

the key circumstances of the tragedy, such as the fact
that the Ukrainian authorities did not close the airspace
over the zone of conflict to civil aviation or why nothing
is said about Kyiv's radar data or information from the
Ukrainian air traffic controllers?

I would like to remind the Council that so far the
United States has not provided any satellite images,
whose existence it announced immediately after
the disaster. Instead of taking due account of the
concrete, undeniable facts, the Joint Investigation
Team is manipulating social network data whose
authenticity cannot be verified. Moreover, even before
the completion of the investigation, the Team launched
a chain reaction of accusations about Russia in the
spirit of Britain's "highly likely" phrase. The European
investigators have continued to discredit themselves
by making accusations before the investigation is
complete. All of this testifies to an unwillingness to
seriously engage in the investigation and confirms the
ideological and political motives behind the search
for the perpetrators. Instead of that, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands informed us about
the flat-out demand by the Netherlands and Australia
that Russia to acknowledge its guilt. I will refrain from
commenting on the letter's content, and especially its
tone, because I do not want to offend Holland's Foreign
Minister. But I would like to once again remind the
Council, in case anyone has forgotten, that nobody is
permitted to use ultimatums when speaking to Russia.

We reaffirm our readiness to extend all possible
assistance to a truly transparent and independent
investigation. We cannot accept the groundless
conclusions of the Joint Investigation Team. Considering
the dirty tricks that some States are employing
nowadays, we can trust only investigations in which
Russia is a full participant.

