Mr. Fabiancic (spoke in Spanish): As a member
of the team of the Latin American and Caribbean
regional directors of United Nations agency system, on
behalf of Director Rebeca Grynspan and the team, I am
grateful for the opportunity to speak in the Security
Council on the question concerning Haiti.

The recent high-level Security Council visit to
Haiti and that by the Secretary-General with former
United States President Bill Clinton have raised great
expectations in both Haiti and the international
community. They have also been largely responsible
for establishing an environment conducive to
reaffirming and revitalizing the international
community's unshakable commitment to Haiti's
success. Those visits have highlighted the good work
done by Haiti's authorities and people, with the support
of the international community, to put the country on
the path towards recovery and development after
having faced a series of crises and unprecedented
natural disasters in 2008.

The Government of Prime Minister Michelle
Pierre-Louis was able to maintain macroeconomic
stability. With the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), agencies
of the United Nations system, international financial
institutions and non-governmental organizations
(NGO), she was able to provide a strong response to
the food crisis and the chaos produced by the
hurricanes that assailed the country. Nevertheless, Haiti
continues to face enormous challenges. Governance is
weak. Recovery from the loss and damage caused by
natural disasters has been slow. Food supplies do not
meet demand.

This is an opportune moment for Haiti, as
consensus has been developed as to what must be done
in the coming years. The poverty reduction strategy
paper has helped to identify the major national
priorities, initiatives and efforts needed to put Haiti on
the path towards sustainable development and on track
to reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
In that regard, fully in line with the poverty reduction
strategy, late last year, the Government of Haiti and the
United Nations agency system agreed on the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework for Haiti
for the period 2009 to 2011.

At present, the Government is energetically
leading efforts to identify priority programmes and
efforts to be presented in Washington on 14 April
during the high-level donor conference. That event will
be an opportunity not only to renew commitments and
increase economic support for Haiti, but also to
continue to strengthen the country's stability,
especially through a renewed partnership between the
Government of Haiti and the international community
and, above all, among Haitians themselves. We are
certain that, at the conference, the Government of Haiti
will present a clear, agreed vision for the future.

The need for a robust, focused economic strategy
has been sufficiently analysed by Professor Paul
Collier and other distinguished colleagues. The
agencies of the United Nations system endorse the

approaches set out in the report. But there will be no
economic development without a reduction in the
vulnerability of the poor population, and I want
therefore to stress the importance of promoting an
inclusive and equitable social agenda. We believe that
economic and social agendas must be mutually
reinforcing: an economic programme or agenda
intended to create sustainable jobs is an absolute
necessity and would without question have a great
impact in terms of reducing poverty. Its impact will be
greater if it is simultaneously complemented by a
social agenda that could help the most vulnerable and
needy, paying particular attention to the situation of
children and women. If well coordinated and
integrated, the two agendas could significantly help
buttress social peace and stability. Achievements in the
social sphere is key to providing the time that the
economic programme needs to put down roots and
grow, thus creating the conditions for significant
investment to return to Haiti.

We believe that it is essential and urgent to
provide incentives for the creation of jobs, especially
jobs for women and young people; promote
agricultural activities that require many workers, that
restore the productive capacity of the land and that
respect the environment; and improve the low quality
of and limited access to basic services.

Because of time constraints, I shall not list all the
achievements and contributions to Haitian development
made by the agencies of the United Nations system.
Nor shall I provide details of the significant
improvements made in coordination among agencies
and between the agencies and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH); the
recent high-level Security Council mission was able to
observe this for itself. The agencies of the United
Nations system have the experience, the knowledge
and the commitment to support and work with the
Government of Haiti in attaining its national priorities.
The system's activities are carried out within the
framework of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, which I mentioned earlier. We
are concerned at the wide gap between the financing
needed to carry them out and what is currently
available. I wish to note that only 26 per cent of the
necessary funds are available.

After the natural disasters of 2008, the
Government of Haiti and the United Nations system,
including the World Bank, adopted a somewhat new
approach to assessing damage and losses and to
identify what needs to be done to put most of the
affected communities back on their feet. The
conclusions of the assessment are very clear and will
be useful when it is time to rebuild. They also confirm
the critical and urgent need to tackle Haiti's extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters. If we fail to do this,
we run the risk of permanently losing much of the
development investment that is being made.

Let me also mention fully operational rule of law
is essential to guarantee robust economic and social
programmes. That is the main region why, through the
Development Assistance Framework, the agencies of
the United Nations system have made a commitment to
redouble their efforts to strengthen and modernize
Haitian institutions throughout the country and to
promote democratic dialogue.

While we are heartened by the progress that can
be seen in Haiti today, the situation is precarious, and
ensuring the sustainability of what has been achieved
poses a major challenge. We cannot forget the brutal
daily reality lived by thousands of Haitians. The
agencies of the United Nations system have long
provided cooperation in Haiti and hope to continue to
be an esteemed, trustworthy and efficient partner.

The Regional Directors for Latin American and
the Caribbean are firmly committed to successfully
implementing the programmes of the agencies of the
United Nations system, in support of national priorities
and in accordance with our mandates, in close
cooperation with MINUSTAH, in order to move
forward on the economic and social agenda and
improve democratic governance in Haiti.

