Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): Let me start by
welcoming you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council. I thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Before I turn to the situation in the region, allow me
to express my delegation's sincere condolences to all
those affected by last week's terrorist attack in France.
Sunday's unprecedented massive rally in Paris in
response to the massacre serves as a powerful reminder
to the world that tolerance, freedom of expression,
and respect for diversity are at the very core of our
humanity.

As once again underlined in the Security Council's
statement on the terrorist attack in Tripoli on 10 January,
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. There is no, and there can never be, any
justification for such acts, wherever and whenever and
by whomsoever committed.

In Iraq, determined efforts have helped to halt the
deadly advances of Daesh. To sustain those efforts, we
also need to redouble our efforts in exposing Daesh and
other terrorist groups for what they are, in all of their
brutality, as sheer monsters and merciless killers who
have no faith, no religion, no humanity. We must also
step up the whole range of counter-terrorism measures
and enhance international cooperation to that effect.

Furthermore, profound and sustainable changes
within the country are paramount, with a legitimate
and inclusive Government providing security for, and
engaging with, all of Iraq's citizens. In that respect,
we welcome the steps taken by Prime Minister Al
Abadi. The 2 December oil deal between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and the Iraqi Government is
a positive development that provides hope that the
Iraqi Government is on the right track in pursuing
its commitment to national reconciliation and
inclusiveness. Those steps need to be matched by similar
outreach to the Sunni community. International and
regional partners need to provide support to the Iraqi
Government for capacity-building and reconstruction,
so as to give Prime Minister Al Abadi the space to
deliver his reform programme.

At the beginning of 2015, Syria remains the
greatest humanitarian tragedy of the modern world.
Human suffering in Syria has reached levels beyond
imagination. More than 12 million Syrians are in urgent
need of humanitarian aid, among them 5.6 million
children. Horrendous atrocities and crimes against
humanity have been recorded in detail in the reports of
the Independent Commission of Inquiry, the "Caesar"
report (S/2014/244, annex) and elsewhere.

Doctors, medical staff and humanitarian aid
workers have been attacked and killed for their selfless
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
The Government of Syria, which has the primary
responsibility to protect, for four years has continued
to perpetrate crimes against its own people. We fully
support Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts
to find ways to reverse this horrific spiral of violence
and move towards an inclusive political solution.
We also urge all the parties, in particular the Syrian
regime, to fully implement resolutions 2139 (2013) and
2191 (2014).

Impunity in Syria has lasted for much too long.
The Council must step up the pressure in the face of
continued non-compliance. The perpetrators of mass
atrocities and crimes against humanity, whoever
they are, must be brought to account. Justice and
accountability are essential for the resolution of the
crisis in Syria.

There is a tremendous lack of trust, interest and
support by both sides for the efforts aimed at solving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that extremely
unstable and explosive context, the status quo is
unacceptable. All unilateral actions, inter alia joining
international organizations and the halt of the transfer
of tax revenues, are obstacles to the resumption of
negotiations. The Israeli Government transfers of tax
revenues to the Palestinian Authority should be timely
and transparent, as required under the Paris Protocol.

The Palestinian leadership should use its
international status constructively. Furthermore,
continuous settlement expansion, settler violence, house
demolitions, inflammatory statements by Hamas, and
incitement must stop immediately in order to preserve
the viability of a two-State solution.

In Gaza, life remains a human tragedy. Lithuania
reiterates the importance of a fundamental change of
the political, security and economic situation in the
Gaza Strip, including the end of the closure. We urge the
parties to fully implement the temporary mechanism
for the monitoring and verification of reconstruction
materials negotiated by the United Nations, Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, as an important step towards
the necessary urgent opening of all crossing points.

We would like to stress the importance of a change
in Israeli policy to allow Gaza to trade normally and on
a permanent basis.

The assumption of full Government functions
by the Palestinian Authority is critical for a lasting
improvement of the situation in Gaza. In order to
advance the reconstruction of Gaza, it is paramount
that the international community honour its financial
commitments.

The unsustainable situation in the West Bank,
Gaza and East Jerusalem and the deteriorating regional
context underline the urgency ofa comprehensive peace
agreement. We call on all the parties and all the major
stakeholders, including the United States, the Quartet,
the League of Arab State, regional actors, the Security
Council, the EU and others, to take the necessary
steps to that end. The participation of both Palestinian
President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
at the solidarity rally in Paris demonstrates that
Palestinians and Israelis stand for the same universal
values - peace, tolerance and mutual respect. Let us
hope that those shared values will bring Israelis and
Palestinians back to the negotiating table, the sooner
the better.

