Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Seventy- five years ago, the peoples of the world reached consensus on a noble objective - saving humankind from the scourge of war. To that end, they adopted a number of values, principles and codes of conduct aimed at maintaining peace and promoting the values of tolerance and cooperation among all countries and peoples. My delegation agrees with what was said by the Secretary-General, namely, that peace is humankind's most precious value and that the Charter of the United Nations is the foundation of international relations, which must be based on mutual respect, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, good-neighbourliness and cooperation towards common interests as well as the mutual sharing of benefits among countries. From this rostrum, we call on all Member States to commit to the purposes and principles of the Charter, which are at the core of peace. Disregarding those purposes and principles, their non-implementation or their selective implementation would lead to chaos and instability and would threaten international peace and security. We also stress respect for all the Articles of the Charter, in particular those set out in Chapter VI, which establish peace diplomacy, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of force and coercive sanctions. That would save lives and reduce losses. Given the tensions and conflicts facing the world, we see an increasing responsibility to be shouldered by the United Nations. It is therefore important to underline the need for a more balanced and more cooperative relationship between the Security Council and the General Assembly. In order for Security Council resolutions to be more credible, they should be in line with the provisions of the Charter, in particular the principle of respect for the national sovereignty of States. In conclusion, I would like to note that in the Sultanate of Oman we value the importance of the Organization and this Council. We highly value its work and that of its Secretaries-General. We hope for concerted international efforts in the upcoming period so as to reach international consensus in order to put an end to many conflicts around the world, in particular the Palestinian question, since its settlement is long overdue and it has an impact on the peace and security of the Middle East region and the world. We also emphasize the need to provide further assistance to our brothers in Yemen so that differences can be resolved and humanitarian assistance can be increased in order to alleviate the human suffering of the Yemeni people.
