Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): With
regard to the Syrian crisis, the efforts of my country
have been focused on one priority, namely, putting
an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. We are
committed to that approach and support any approach
that prioritizes the Syrian people, regardless of the
interests that can be seen at play and which are the
real cause of the suffering in that country. We have
voted in favour of all resolutions put to vote in the
Security Council that were aimed at providing access to
humanitarian aid, regardless of the party that put those
resolutions to vote.

With our partners Spain and New Zealand, we
undertook an initiative to put an end to the hostiities
and to ensure that humanitarian aid was delivered. We
never hesitated to use our experience or diplomatic
strength to attempt to resolve the crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic. That is why, and this is in parallel with
our consistent position, we voted in favour of resolution
2336 (2016), which calls for an end to the hostiities. We
must act quickly to remedy the high level of violence
and to launch the diplomatic process. We know that this
will not lead to a complete cessation of the violence
and the hostilities but, at the very least, it is a step in
the right direction, and one on which we can continue
to build.

Initiatives aimed at resolving the Syrian crisis have
multiplied over the last few years. As with any other
initiative, there are no complete or ideal initiatives.
We need real intentions that will result in a final
settlement. Regardless of the nature of those approaches
and initiatives, all of us must look at the previous
frameworks agreed upon at the international level and
base our actions on them as we we move forward.

We backed today's resolution, including the
references to resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), which are
the foundations for any settlement. Furthermore, we
wish to reiterate that the current challenges, which
will continue for a long time, require a comprehensive
political approach based on those frameworks. It is
true that we see a military approach being taken on the
ground, but that can never be the solution. For that reason
we call upon all Syrian parties to act in a responsible
way, especially with respect to their communities and
their people. During this transition phase, dialogue
should be initiated between the Government and the
opposition as rapidly as possible in order to find a
Syrian solution without any foreign intervention. That
solution should protect the territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and result in the realization of
the aspirations ofthe Syrian people, far from the reality
of violence and extremism.
