Ms. Del Ponte: It is a great honour for me, too, to
address once again the Council to present new
developments at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the key challenges
that the Office of the Prosecutor faces in the
implementation of the completion strategy.

On 21 May 2004, President Theodor Meron
transmitted to the Council an assessment of the
progress made by the Tribunal in the implementation
of its mandate and of its completion strategy. As one of
the organs of the Tribunal, the Office of the Prosecutor
contributed and reported its continued efforts to fully
and in a timely manner implement the completion
strategy that we defined in 2002 and that was
subsequently approved by the Council, notably in
resolution 1503 (2003).

The Tribunal's completion strategy relies on three
major dates, the first concerning the conclusion of all
new investigations by the end of this year, 2004. This
date thus entirely relies on the activities and efforts of
the Prosecutor and her Office. I am therefore pleased to
report that this first major milestone will be reached as
planned. By the end of this year, the investigation of
our outstanding targets will be complete and the last of
our new indictments will be presented. In furtherance
of my commitment to completing these investigations,
we have spared no effort in streamlining the
investigations and focusing them on only the most
senior leaders responsible for the worst and gravest
crimes.

Since my written assessment, two indictments
were confirmed. One of them will be presented in a
sealed form to the relevant authorities very soon. The
other indicts a Croatian general for crimes committed
in 1993 against Serb civilians in the so-called Medak
pocket. It is our intention to request that this case be
referred to Croatia.

Not all of our inquiries resulted in indictments.
We continually reviewed the strength of the evidence
in each case. In January 2004, I decided that the
investigations concerning seven targets would be
suspended, not indicted before the Tribunal, and
eventually referred to domestic local prosecutors in the
former Yugoslavia. Investigations concerning two more
high-level suspects were discontinued after their
deaths. Furthermore, we decided not to continue the
investigations concerning two other targets, due to
insufficient evidence. As a consequence, we are
completing six remaining investigations involving a
maximum of 11 targets. On this basis, a maximum of
six new indictments could be prepared before the end
of 2004 for submission, first to the Bureau for review
of the seniority of the suspects, and then to the judges
for confirmation. These indictments could result in a
maximum of four new trials only, given the possibility
of joining some of the indictments.

With this major achievement - the completion
of all new investigations in sight - we are now in a
better position to plan the rest of our activities. The
Tribunal knows exactly how many cases will have to
be tried. We remain at the disposal of the President and
the judges to schedule the remaining trials. The next
completion dates foreseen by the strategy to achieve
the Tribunal's mandate are 2008 and 2010. All trials
should be completed by 2008 and all appeals should be
reviewed by 2010. The Office of the Prosecutor
remains strongly committed to meeting those two
objectives. However, unlike the conduct of
investigations - over which the Prosecutor has a large
measure of control - the main responsibility for the
scheduling, administration and conduct of trials and
appeals extends well beyond the Prosecutor. Although
my Office will continue to take all possible measures
to further streamline our trial and appeals activities -
notably by strictly limiting the number of charges and
prosecution witnesses - we must stress that we do not
control a number of factors, such as the timely arrest of
fugitives, the appearance of witnesses and the
emergence of crucial evidence, as we rely on States to
obtain these.

As far as the Office of the Prosecutor is
concerned, a number of measures have already been
taken to improve the efficiency of the prosecution in
the preparation and presentation of cases. They include
significant procedural and technological
improvements, and have been detailed in the written
assessment submitted to the Council. Great savings of
court time have been achieved by guilty pleas, obtained
through the active involvement of my Office. We
remain open to exploring with the defence the
possibility of accused persons pleading guilty to all or
some of the charges against them. However, ultimately
the Office of the Prosecutor can only comply with the
Chambers' instructions on scheduling cases, and
obviously has no control over the swift conduct of the
defence case or the writing of judgements.
Nevertheless, we are actively collaborating with the
President, the Chambers and the Registry to update the
trial calendars for the coming years.

The completion strategy is twofold. First, the
International Tribunal must try those bearing the
gravest responsibility for the crimes, including the
high-profile fugitives, and thus complete its activities
in a swift and efficient, yet fair and impartial, manner.
Secondly, the domestic jurisdictions of the territories of
the former Yugoslavia must be reformed and equipped
to complete the work of the International Tribunal and
take over the remaining cases.

The written assessment submitted to the Council
highlights three types of cases identified to be
transferred to domestic courts. The first category
concerns ICTY indicted cases that could be transferred
pursuant to rule 11 bis of the rules of procedure. In
strict adherence to the guidelines provided by
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), 12 cases,
concerning 22 accused, have been identified for
possible transfer to domestic jurisdictions, subject to
the judges' approval. All those concerned held low-
and mid-level positions in their respective hierarchies,
and were predominantly indicted in the early days of
the Tribunal.

The transfer of mid- and low-level cases to
domestic jurisdictions would free court resources for
senior accused leaders. Efforts have yet to be invested
in the establishment of domestic jurisdictions capable
of trying war criminals. The support of the
international community, including regional
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, is of paramount
importance in this process.

For the time being, following the guidelines set
by the Security Council, I do not actively consider the
possibility of transferring any high-level cases.
However, the Council must be aware that, even if the
Chambers consider positively all 12 requests to which I
referred earlier, this may not be enough to meet the
2008 deadline. We will continue to do our utmost to
meet this target date.

The Council should also take into account that
the completion strategy may be resented by the
Victims, mainly because their trust in domestic courts
is very limited. Following my recent Visit to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, I received letters from victims'
associations expressing their grave concern and even
disagreement in connection with the completion
strategy. They asked me to pass along those letters to
the members of the Council, which I would like to do.

Allow me to focus now on the three key
challenges that must be met to ensure that the ICTY
mandate is properly and successfully achieved. These
challenges are the arrest of fugitives; our finances; and
issues of States' cooperation.
The first key challenge is the failure of the
relevant authorities, in particular in the Republika
Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Serbia and
Montenegro, to arrest or obtain the surrender -
voluntarily or through coercive measures - of those
20 indicted who are still at large. That figure does not
include two accused whose indictments and arrest
warrants are sealed.

The failure to obtain the arrest of fugitives has a
number of consequences for the completion strategy. It
prevents the Tribunal from joining cases that could be
tried together. It therefore obliges us to conduct
separate trials on the same crime base, which leads to
substantial losses of court time. For instance, had
Radovan Karadzic been arrested early this year, it
would have been possible to join his trial with the trial
of Krajisnik, another former senior member of the
Bosnian Serb leadership currently being tried. In that
particular case, we most likely lost the equivalent of
one courtroom for well over a year. Our ability to
envisage other joinders is limited not only by the
difficulties faced in ensuring timely surrender, but also
by the size of the courtrooms, which would make it
difficult to conduct trials with more than six or seven
accused.

The failure to arrest or surrender fugitives
seriously affects the strategic planning of the
prosecution. Indeed, we face the dilemma of choosing
either to focus on the accused already in the custody of
the Tribunal or to plan for the trial of such senior
accused as Karadzic, Mladic, Gotovina and others who
may unfortunately remain at large. An unintended
consequence of the completion strategy is that fugitives
and their protective networks are trying to buy time
until 2008 in the hope of evading justice, as they
believe that the deadline for them to be tried in The
Hague will soon expire. In this context, a statement
that the ICTY will remain open as long as necessary to
ensure that the fugitives mentioned in Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) are tried
would serve the interest ofjustice.

A second problem for the completion strategy is
the dire budgetary and financial situation of the
Tribunal in general and of my Office in particular. We
have been badly hit by the deferred consideration of
the 2005 budget for the investigative support for trials
and appeals.

Consequently, we have been unable since the
beginning of this year to extend the contracts of the
staff who will provide investigative support to trials
and appeals beyond 31 December 2004. Moreover, the
cash-flow crisis that emerged this spring, leading to a
temporary freeze on new recruitment imposed by the
Secretariat, prevents us from recruiting, and even from
replacing, essential personnel who leave the Tribunal.
And, as other international judicial institutions are
expanding, notably in The Hague, the ICTY is losing
staff at an alarming rate. The combined effect of those
factors has had a considerable impact on morale,
making it, in turn, even more difficult to retain
experienced staff.

These financial restrictions directly affect the
completion strategy, as the scarcity of investigative
resources will inevitably slow down the preparation
and conduct of trials. Because that untenable situation
is directly influencing the completion of our mandate,
we urge the Council to support us in our efforts to
solve this very serious problem.

The third main challenge encountered by the
ICTY remains the issue of the full cooperation of all
States. The cooperation of the States of the former
Yugoslavia is not only a legal obligation; it is also of
Vital importance for a successful completion strategy.
Beyond the arrest of indicted criminals, States have the
obligation to grant access to witnesses and documents.
The written assessment on the status of cooperation
provided by the countries of the former Yugoslavia
remains up to date.

The Croatian authorities are, at this point in time,
fully cooperating with my Office. That cooperation
must continue, and I expect Croatia to locate and
transfer Gotovina to The Hague as soon as possible -
hopefully, prior to my next appearance before the
Council.

Since December, the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro have provided almost no cooperation, and
that country has become a safe haven for fugitives. At
least 15 accused who are at large, including Ratko
Mladic, spend most of their time there. According to
information recently obtained, fugitives who were
believed to reside in Republika Srpska have moved
across the border. Now I am even reluctant to pass on
any information concerning the fugitives to the Serbian
authorities, because the last time I gave precise
information regarding a high-level fugitive charged
with the Srebrenica genocide, I was told by the Serbian
authorities that, due to the political circumstances, it
was not opportune to arrest him. I have learned that he
has since disappeared.

There has been no progress either in other areas
in which the cooperation of Serbia and Montenegro is
being sought. A few waivers allowing witnesses to
testify before the ICTY were granted in the past month,
but they concern mainly defence witnesses, and not
prosecution witnesses. Well over 50 requests for
waivers are still outstanding. Several statements were
made by high-level officials to the effect that that
cooperation would restart after the presidential
election, which took place on 13 and 27 June. We will
therefore be able to assess very soon whether these
authorities are serious or simply buying time. In the
absence of a significant number of transfers of
fugitives in the weeks to come, I will have to conclude
that Serbia and Montenegro continues to be unwilling
to abide by its international legal obligations.

The support of the international community as a
whole and of all States Members of the United Nations
remains crucial in securing the cooperation of the
States of the former Yugoslavia. Also, certain
international institutions, such as the Stabilization
Force (SFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina, have an
important role to play in the arrest and transfer of
fugitives. The last time a fugitive was arrested in
Bosnia and Herzegovina by SFOR was in July 2002. I
hope that the new arrangements regarding the future of
international forces in that country will be more
effective in the search for, and arrest of, indicted
criminals.

As Prosecutor, my only recourse, in the case of a
State's failure to comply with its obligations, is to
report it to the President of the ICTY, who, in turn, can
bring it to the attention of the Security Council. On 4
May 2004, a report concerning the consistent failure by
Serbia and Montenegro to comply with its legal
obligations was forwarded by President Meron to the
Council. We urge the Council to act and to put an end
to this pattern of non-cooperation. If this situation is
allowed to continue, it will endanger the completion
strategy as well as the legacy of the Tribunal.

The message of the Victims of the worst crimes
known to humankind remains constant, regardless of
their community of origin. Their concern is to see that
justice is done, not simply because they wish to see the
criminals punished, but also because they understand
that the achievement of stability and peace in their
countries depends on the judicial process. As we
approach the 10-year commemoration of both the
Srebrenica genocide and the signing of the Dayton
Agreement, we simultaneously approach another
anniversary: Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic have
been at large for almost 10 years. How long will it be
tolerated that these leaders are escaping justice? How
long will it be tolerated that they are making a mockery
of both justice and the repeated commitment of the
Security Council to have them arrested and tried?

Please allow me to stress once again how
important the Council's support is for the success of
the Tribunal. The factors that have a real influence on
the completion strategy of the ICTY are threefold: the
financial needs of the Tribunal, the timely arrest of the
fugitives, and the support needed to establish credible
domestic jurisdictions. All three are beyond the
Tribunal's control, but they can and must be addressed
by the international community.

When it established the Tribunal in 1993, the
Council proved its commitment to justice and the rule
of law. In resolution 808 (1993), it stressed its
determination to put an end to the widespread crimes
occurring within the territory of the former Yugoslavia,
including reports of mass killings and the practice of
ethnic cleansing, and to bring to justice the persons
most responsible for those crimes. Eleven years later,
thanks to all the efforts made by the international
community to halt those crimes and redress them
judicially, these objectives have almost been achieved.
It is perhaps ironic that, just when the ICTY is gaining
momentum and reaching cruising speed, so much time
is being spent discussing its end. But the completion of
the mandate is now within reach, and we can see the
final years ahead of us. This period should not become
simply an "end-game", with an abrupt closing,
regardless of whether or not the top leaders are
apprehended and tried before the ICTY. That would
negate all the efforts that have been devoted to the
process and all the results already obtained.

I join President Meron in urging the members of
the Council to continue their support for the Tribunal
and to ensure that it is given the means necessary to
fulfil its promise and its full potential.

I thank you for your attention and for your
continued support.

