Mr. Da Silva: I am thankful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAQ) on Yemen for the period
under review. I will address two specific situations.
The first is hunger and the second involves our work in
the field with agricultural and livestock issues.

With regard to hunger, as was already mentioned,
17 million people are estimated to be severely food
insecure in Yemen, according to an assessment in
March, an increase of 20 per cent over the previous
assessment in June of last year. We believe that the
number has greatly increased since the most recent
assessment, in March. The Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification systems categorizes the level of
food insecurity into five phases, with phase 5 being
famine. Ofthe 17 million who fall into phases 3 and 4,
7 million - about 40 per cent - are in phase 4, very
close to famine. We have also reported that people are
already dying of hunger in many of the areas of Abyan,
Taiz, Shabwa and Haj jah governorates, which represent
three quarters of the 7 million that are bordering on
famine. The prospects are not good because, unless
they receive food aid immediately or cash, those people
will experience famine-like conditions - phase 5.
Secondly, I would like to give a broad overview of
what is happening in the field. We are seeing ongoing
conflict in many important food-producing areas, which
makes the movement of food supplies to local markets
even more difficult, leading to scarcity and spiralling
prices. Crop production last year fell by approximately
40 per cent of what was produced in those areas before
the conflict. Because of poor rains, we expect that the
harvest will be even lower this year. The prospect for
this summer season's production is still very low, owing
to the combination of the poor rains and the reduced
access to farmlands - as farmers can simply not access
their lands. In addition, water scarcity is currently
one of the main challenges in Yemen. Moreover, the
lack of proper sanitation is leading to an increased
risk of disease, not only among human beings but also
herds. FAQ is particularly worried about the collapse
in veterinary services, which in turn is increasing the
number of high-impact diseases in the area - ovine
rinderpest, brucellosis, goat pox and foot-and-mouth
disease, to mention but a few that are transmissible
to human beings. Unless we take steps to address the
conflict now, we will never truly eradicate hunger
in Yemen.

By way of conclusion, we would like to highlight
two main points. First, we all have limited funding and,
worse, limited assets. We simply cannot act where we
are most needed. Secondly, if we do not address the
capacity of those in rural areas, who, more or less,
account for 70 per cent of the country's population,
there will be no prospects for a better future. If we do
not have a good season this year because of the lack
of rain, we will have even worse results in the future.
Let me conclude by saying that we save lives by saving
livelihoods. It is very important to protect livelihoods
in areas where people live if we want to prevent the
situation from becoming worse in the near future.

