Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
grateful for your indulgence, Mr. President, and I
apologize to you and to members of the Council for
being late for the meeting and for darting in and out.
But it is in a good cause, because the work of the
Security Council is under scrutiny next door in the
Trusteeship Council. You started the session off
yourself, Mr. President, and I think it would be wise if
members of the Council were represented there.
Ambassador Valdivieso is bravely holding the fort
against a number of predictable comments on the work
of the Council.

But it is quite a constructive discussion, and may
I say also that it is a very interactive discussion, which
is perhaps a lesson also for the Council in its open
meetings.

It is very good to see Foreign Minister Okitundu
with us today, and I particularly appreciate it that he
has taken the trouble to join us as we continue to
consider this extremely important topic of trying to
find peace in his country.

My delegation, too, is very grateful for the
briefings which Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
and Special Representative Otunnu gave us this
morning.

Sweden will make a statement on behalf of the
European Union which will encompass United
Kingdom policy here. I want to make just three or four
specific comments about where we are now.

I think that we are all agreed, having been on the
mission last month, that the primary responsibility for
finding peace in the Great Lakes region rests with the
leaders of those countries themselves. The Security
Council will play a determined role, but it has to play
an ancillary role in this whole process.

We very much welcome the progress that has
been made in recent months, but much, much more is
needed. I am sure that all interventions during the
course of today's meeting will make this point very
strongly. The role of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) can only be developed behind the progress
which the parties make.

I echo those particularly who have focused on the
Front de liberation du Congo and the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie this morning, as I have
heard the two previous speakers do. I think that the
news in that direction is poor. MONUC is trying to
correct the situation, but they are not following the
timetable. More than that, they have not got the
message that, if they wish, as factions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to play a role in the
future political life of that troubled country, they will
not be able to do so without international support and
they will not get international support unless they are
wholeheartedly behind the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement. The points which Ambassador
Ward and others have made in that respect are
extremely important.

The parties now need to produce information and
serious plans for the withdrawal of forces and for
moving forward in disarmament and demobilization.
We very much welcome the whole range of the
Secretary-General's report on these issues and
particularly his proposal for an integrated civilian-
military planning section to coordinate support for the
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration process. The more we think about it, the
more it is vital that this process get going now and that
it encompass the forces that are still roaming round and
doing damage in the eastern part of the Congo.
Otherwise, failure in that respect will unravel the other
parts of the reciprocal agreements that have been
entered into under the Lusaka Agreement. We have not
had a response that is satisfactory from all members of
the Political Committee in this respect and it must be
chased up.

We need also to be conscious of the links with the
conflict in Burundi, including, again, in planning for
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement,
reintegration and repatriation, and I am sure we will all
be making that point this morning.

We are very pleased that Sir Ketumile Masire is
making progress now on the inter-Congolese dialogue.
We have to recognize that the interplay between the
dialogue and the peace implementation process is
going to be a vital one. We have to recognize also the
interplay between the political process and the
opportunities for economic regeneration. It is vital for
the Congo that both these volets be taken forward as
quickly as possible.

The humanitarian situation is still dire and we
have to recognize that progress in military withdrawal
and in disengagement opens up a wider set of
challenges in terms of both political and civilian
administration in the Congo and in terms of
humanitarian relief. It is right to look for a wider role
for MONUC in that respect. We look forward to
receiving more detailed plans from the Secretariat
across this whole range, but we will look very carefully
at precisely what is being proposed. We would like to
see details and costings. The potential for further action
in the range of activity described in the Secretary-
General's report is very wide and the Council will have
to make some very careful judgements between what is
needed and what is affordable in that respect. Again,
this is very much related to progress being made by the
parties.
We warmly thank Special Representative Otunnu
for his report to us this morning. We welcome the
measures he has proposed to put an end to the use of
child soldiers and we welcome the fact that the parties
have accepted these proposals. That is good progress
and we are very pleased that he has been able to make
this visit. We would like the Council to be involved in
monitoring the implementation of what he is proposing,
but we give him our warm support. As he said, there is
also a Wider need to ensure that children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have a real
alternative - the alternative of a normal life. It is right
that this should be addressed within the inter-
Congolese dialogue, as well as by the action of the
United Nations.

1, too, pay a warm tribute to what Special
Representative Morjane has achieved in his tenure in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to what all
the members of MONUC and the forces involved in the
Congo are achieving at this moment.

