Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (201 1), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from

17 November 2017 to 17 January 2018, during which
time the Committee dealt with various aspects of the
sanctions regime via the written silence procedure.

The Committee approved two requests for exemption
to the arms embargo, both of them submitted under
paragraph 9(c) of resolution 1970 (2011) by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
Committee also receivedtwo post-deliverynotifications,
one from UNSMIL and the other from the Netherlands,
for previously exempted items. The Committee further
received an update from UNSMIL on issues faced
during and after the transfer of exempted items. The
post-delivery notification from the Netherlands also
contained such information. The Committee responded
to a letter from Turkey that voluntarily provided
information on the donation of certain items that fell
within the scope of the exception to the arms embargo
contained in paragraph 10 of resolution 2095 (2013).

Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
responded to two requests for guidance, one received
from Algeria and the other from a United Nations
Department, on the scope and implementation of
this measure.

With respect to the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil and
refined petroleum products, from Libya, the Council
will recall that two vessels - the Capricorn and the
Lynn S - are currently included in the Committee's
sanctions list. During the period under review, the
Committee received a letter from the Syrian Arab
Republic informing it that the Capricorn had unloaded
diesel oil in the tanks of the Syrian Company for Oil
Transportation and that the Syrian Government had
since informed all concerned authorities not to receive
this vessel again. The reply from the Committee is still
under consideration. On 27 November 2017, based on
information received from its Panel of Experts, the
Committee updated the list entry of the Capricorn,
indicating that the flag State, previously Tanzania, was
now unknown.

As regards the Lynn S, based on information
received from Libya and from the Panel of Experts, the
Committee has written letters to the reported States of
destination, seeking their clarifications on the matter.

On 16 January 2018, the Committee received
the interim report of the Panel of Experts pursuant
to paragraph 14 of resolution 2362 (2017). The
Committee is scheduled to discuss the report and its
recommendations on 9 February.

