The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The adoption of these two resolutions, which the
United Kingdom welcomes, is a further demonstration of
the international community's willingness to support
efforts by those in the Balkan region to settle their
differences peacefully. Those efforts must succeed if a
lasting and durable peace is to be established.

Over the last four years this Council has sought to
facilitate the emergence of such a peace. It has from the
start worked to promote respect for Croatian sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to promote reconciliation
between the different communities in that country, as well
as between Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The fact that the Basic Agreement exists at
all is a testimony to this Council's efforts, and we salute
the dedication and patience of the negotiators who helped
to bring it about. It is on the basis of that Agreement, and
in the light of the commitment of all concerned to its

 

early and peaceful implementation, that this Council has
decided to send United Nations peace-keepers to Eastern
Slavonia. We now need to work for the earliest possible
deployment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) in order to allow the development of
mutual confidence between the communities and the full
implementation of the Agreement. The British Government
expresses its appreciation to those countries which have
already confirmed their willingness to make troops available
for this operation, and we hope that other Member States
will follow suit.

The British Government also supports the decision to
continue the presence of United Nations observers on the
Prevlaka peninsula to monitor its demilitarization. Their
presence has helped contain and reduce tension and open
the way for Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to settle their differences peacefully. We look
to the Croatian and Yugoslav Governments to redouble
their efforts towards that end.

It is a simple truth, but one which bears restating,
that if United Nations peace-keepers are to be able to
carry out effectively and in safety the mandates we have
just given them, they must be able to count on the
parties' full cooperation. There can be no justification
whatsoever for any resort to military means, whether to
accelerate or to frustrate implementation of the
commitments they have made. This Council will monitor
the progress of implementation of the Basic Agreement
closely, not least in the light of past failures by those
concerned to live up to their undertakings. Successful
implementation will be key to opening the way for
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to play a
fuller part in the European family of nations.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
