Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
its implementation, the temporary oil-for-food programme
has played a considerable role in easing the humanitarian
difficulties in Iraq. Meanwhile, it is undeniable that the
programme also has shortcomings and should continue to
be supplemented or adjusted in a timely fashion in the
light of prevailing realities.

 

We believe that the question of whether the oil-for-
food programme should be extended for one week or six
months depends above all on the humanitarian needs of the
civilian population in Iraq. It also depends on how the
programme might be more smoothly implemented. Further
considerations should also be subject to this fundamental
goal. Even though various parties may have differing
political positions regarding the question of Iraq, the
programme for meeting the basic humanitarian needs of
Iraqi civilians should in no way be used as a tool for
exerting political pressure.

The resolution just adopted by the Council, which
provides for a one-week extension, obviously is not
intended to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
civilians. Nor does it help improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the programme. It is mainly intended to
force the Council to adopt, as soon as possible, a new
omnibus resolution on Iraq. Some members went so far as
to indicate that they were supporting this resolution in order
to exert pressure on the five permanent members to
conclude their consultations on the omnibus resolution
within a week. We are very surprised by this.
The Security Council deadlock on Iraq has lasted for
almost a year without resolution and with long delays.
China is also extremely dissatisfied and disappointed at this.
However, to attribute this situation indiscriminately to the
slow progress in the consultations among the five
permanent members is inappropriate. The unilateral military
strike against Iraq last December was the main reason the
United Nations arms-verification programme in Iraq was
suspended. This is a fact beyond dispute.

How can we break the deadlock as soon as possible?
There is a Chinese saying to the effect that he who tied the
knot should be the one to undo it. Those countries that
launched the military strike should now show flexibility.

Like other members, China very much hopes to see an
early completion of consultations among the permanent five
and the adoption by the Council of a new resolution on Iraq
as soon as possible. China has made and will continue to
make positive efforts to this end. We should adopt a
responsible attitude and try to elaborate a programme that
will truly solve the problem. We cannot accept next week
as the deadline for consultations of the permanent five or
for the Council's discussions.

For these reasons, we believe that the resolution
extending the oil-for-food programme for one week does
not help to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq or
advance the consultations among the permanent five on
the omnibus text on Iraq. From the outset, we have
appealed to the parties to seek common ground, while
reserving differences and avoiding confrontation, in
devising a roll-over programme that best meets the needs
of civilians in Iraq. Regrettably, China's hope and appeals
have not received their due attention and response.

That is why China was compelled to abstain in the
voting on the resolution.

