Mr. Van den Berg (Netherlands): I congratulate
the Security Council on a timely and a successful
mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea and I thank it for its
comprehensive report. During the mission, many issues
were raised and discussed with a variety of actors
across the spectrum in both countries and we support
the observations and recommendations made in the
report.

The Netherlands also supports and associates
itself fully with the statement made by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.
We feel that today's meeting of the Council is
important because the peace process in Ethiopia and
Eritrea is nearing a critical moment with the
forthcoming decision ofthe Boundary Commission. We
welcome the fact that the parties have consistently
made clear that they will accept the decision of the
Boundary Commission as final and binding.

We feel that the formal presentation of the
decision of the Boundary Commission should be
accompanied by a setting and manner that justify the
importance of the decision. After all, with the
delimitation of the boundary, it is for the parties to turn
away from the past and to look towards the future. We
therefore sincerely hope that this milestone event will
take place in such a way that Ethiopians, Eritreans and,
in fact, the whole world can witness this crucial
moment and that it will provide leaders of both
countries with a unique opportunity to restate their
solemn commitment to the peace process. The
international community can then respond by
expressing its full support for both countries.

During its membership of the Council, the
Netherlands paid a great deal of attention to the issue
of exit strategies for peacekeeping operations. Exit
should be based on the successful fulfilment of a
mission's mandate and therefore be linked to a clear
objective. In the case of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), that objective is clear.
The Algiers Agreements link the termination of
UNMEE with the completion of the demarcation of the
border.

Ultimately, it is the implementation that will
conclude the peace process. It is essential that the start
of demarcation begin immediately after the delivery of
the decision. Implementing the decision of the
Boundary Commission is, however, an extensive
logistical and managerial process that cannot simply be
left to the Commission. It is therefore essential that the
United Nations support this process from the
beginning. Here, we see an important role for UNMEE
in providing the required logistical and managerial
support for the demarcation and in establishing the
necessary conditions, such as through demining
operations along the border. Attention should be paid
to possible transboundary movement of populations
and internally displaced persons, the transfer of
authority over territory and many other issues. We feel
that all of this should be thoroughly discussed as soon
as possible and decided upon by all parties concerned.
The outcome of these discussions should be reflected
in an adjusted mandate for UNMEE. It is also
important that we have realistic budgetary estimates
available on the costs of the demarcation process.

Finally, I would like to assure you, Sir, that your
recommendation to, inter alia, the friends of Eritrea and
Ethiopia in paragraph 36 (a) of the report of the
Council's mission that they continue to intensify their
contacts with the authorities of both countries will not
be left unheard. As the Chairman of the Group of
Friends of Eritrea and Ethiopia, I can assure the
Council that the Group of Friends will strive to keep
the dialogue going in order to do our part in achieving
the ultimate goal of the peace process: full and
normalized relations between both countries.

