I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his very comprehensive briefing and for highlighting the current challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping. Today's meeting is a rare opportunity to reflect on peacekeeping as a whole. To narrow it down, I will be focusing on peacekeeping reform, performance and accountability, as well as the women and peace and security. Estonia welcomes the Secretary-General's guidance in reforming the Organization. With regard to improving peacekeeping, his Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative has proved to be an important framework for our collective efforts. It has successfully guided the adoption of several peacekeeping-related resolutions in the Security Council, such as resolution 2538 (2020), on the role of women in peacekeeping, and resolution 2518 (2020), on the safety of peacekeepers. It has led to the establishment of several key mechanisms by the Secretariat, such as the planning and performance assessment system. It was further operationalized by the successful adoption of this year's report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/74/19) in its new format. Estonia is proud to have been among the first to endorse the A4P Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and we will continue to encourage all parties to implement its commitments. Turning to performance, one cannot overlook the impact of the coronavirus disease on peacekeeping. The responsibilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions have multiplied, as have the risks that they face. The ongoing pandemic is testing the performance of peacekeeping missions and their ability to deliver on their mandates, to promote conflict resolution and to protect civilian populations, in particular women and children. To that end, Estonia will continue to emphasize the crucial importance of implementing policies and mechanisms aimed at verifying and enhancing the performance of peace operations, with a particular focus on the protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights. We expect the strengthening of the comprehensive performance assessment system and predeployment visits to continue. The peacekeeping performance and accountability framework should be finalized very soon. In Mali, for example, we have stressed the need for increasingly mobile, flexible and robust troop postures and stronger early warning systems. These, however, rely on ensuring that the troops whom we deploy have adequate training and equipment, but also the capabilities necessary to fulfil their mandate. Strong mission performance is vital to the success of peacekeeping. Speaking of improving performance, Estonia aims to achieve gender parity in our troop contributions by the end of this year. Evidence shows that a better gender balance leads to better peacekeeping and more effective engagement with local communities. In that regard, we will continue to underline the importance of implementing the women and peace and security agenda and its priorities, in particular promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes. We will also continue to stress the importance of increasing the effectiveness of peacekeeping by better engagement with communities, in particular with the help of community liaison and human rights officers. I would like to conclude by expressing gratitude and strong support to all United Nations peacekeepers - women and men - whose dedication and sacrifice bring hope to millions of people and help countries to navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace.
