Ms. Novosseloff (spoke in French): First of all,
allow me to sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council today, as it has
been the subject of my research in international relations
for more than 20 years. The Council has invited me to
address the issue of triangular cooperation, which may
at first seem technical but is obviously not.

Triangular cooperation is at the crossroads of
the Security Council's work when it takes a decision;
creates a peacekeeping operation, calls for a number
of reforms from the Secretariat, assesses the work of
peacekeepers on the ground or when it considers a
mission drawdown or closure. At each of those stages,
the Security Council must engage in some form of
dialogue with the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries. And that dialogue, I
believe, must be strengthened. It should even be a basic
principle in an Organization where those who mandate,
pay and contribute personnel are not the same.

Resolution 1353 (2001), of 13 June 2001, lays the
foundation for triangular cooperation by adopting
a declaration of principles and proposing a number
of options for organizing such cooperation. It also
tasked the then recently established Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to work
in that area. In resolution 1353 (2001), the Council
underlined that its consultations with the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should enhance
its ability to make appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities. At the heart
of that resolution is the debate on the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in terms of adequate
capacity and support, adequate human and financial
resources, support for the training of various personnel,
information development and analysis to assist with
regular planning - all of which are at the core of the
debate the Council has had over the past year concerning
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Since the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001),
all reference documents calling for the improved
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations - from
the Capstone Doctrine to the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446) to the New Horizon initiative - have
mentioned the need to strengthen triangular cooperation.
Various initiatives have been taken but none of them
has resulted in a regular and systematic process to
institutionalize the practice, establish a framework,
as called for in the HIPPO report, or begin interactive
consultations that would have a real impact on the
implementation of mandates. That framework must
now be specifically defined so that such interaction
becomes a regular practice of the Council and no longer
depends on the initiatives of one or the other. I would
like to make some concrete proposals to help achieve
that objective by striking a balance between the formal
and informal dimensions of those meetings, where each
actor - the Security Council, the contributors and the
Secretariat - can gain the confidence to talk about
issues of concern to them.

(spoke in English)

Triangular consultations should take the form of
regular private meetings among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the major contributors. They should
involve the primary troop- and police-contributors
specific to the mission under consideration, since they
are taking the main risks in the field. Ten troop- and
police-contributors could be considered a good number
to allow for a focused discussion. Some flexibility
would of course be required when adjusting the exact
number of attendees, but the meetings should not be
transformed into yet another forum where no one
is willing to talk openly and informally about the
real issues.

The meetings should be informal in order to
facilitate constructive dialogue. No readout of the
meetings should therefore be issued. The idea would
be that views and concerns expressed by troop- and
police-contributing countries would be taken into
account by the penholder and would therefore shape the
way a mandate is conceived. But that would not encroach
upon the decision-making prerogatives of the Council.
The consultations should be held before the renewal
of the mandate of a mission, before and after a major
strategic review has been conducted by the Secretariat
and when a major mission-related crisis occurs. They
could be held at the start of the process initiated by the
penholder to renew a mandate and immediately after
the advance copy of the Secretary-General's report is
sent and shared with the main contributors. Sufficient
time should be afforded to all stakeholders to come to
those meetings with appropriate feedback and input.

Those triangular consultations should be held at
the expert level and attended by political and military
experts, as such discussions are fundamentally political
and military. That does not mean that, at times, when
stakes are higher, those meetings could not be held at a
more senior level in order to enable effective decisions.
And, as already suggested by resolution 1353 (2001),
such meetings could be strengthened by holding a
parallel discussion of a purely military nature within
the informal setting of the Military Staff Committee,
to which key contributors not serving in the Council
could be invited.

To summarize, what is needed is to have one type
of triangular meeting that is informal in nature but
mentioned in the programme of work of the Council,
restricted in its format, called for by the penholder and
organized in coordination with the presidency of the
Council for that month.

As the Security Council decides on operations in
increasingly challenging and dangerous contexts and
pushes major contributors to take more and more risks in
a context of financial cuts, it is only legitimate that those
contributors demand a greater say in how the Security
Council shapes peacekeeping mandates and how the
missions are designed. In such a challenging context,
the United Nations can no longer postpone triangular
discussions and let the gap between the Council and
contributing countries widen and tensions increase.

The objective of triangular cooperation must be
to achieve a shared understanding of the challenges
and a shared responsibility to make those operations
more efficient, as well as better supported politically,
militarily and financially. Each endpoint of the
triangle has an important role to play in that common
endeavour through engagement that must be early,
meaningful and timely. As I wrote in 2015, triangular
cooperation is a reform that is free of charge and,
instead of costing money, increases the cost efficiency
of peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in French)

Against that backdrop, the idea is not to further
burden the agenda of the Security Council and add
yet another meeting whereby words would replace
taking action. The idea would be to systematize
what is currently informal and make such exchanges
into an obligatory and useful part of the negotiations
concerning a given mandate. To that end, such meetings
must also be taken seriously by all so that everyone
participates in a constructive spirit, with the relevant
information available for them to consider. That will of
course require a number of adjustments in terms of the
flow of information to and from the contingents on the
ground, their capitals and subsequently their Permanent
Missions in New York. That may also require the
establishment of strategic dialogues among capitals in
which issues related to peacekeeping operations must
be better addressed.

The challenge today is to reverse the trend and to
take advantage of the new momentum offered by today's
meeting to implement a mechanism for triangular
consultations that is in everyone's interest for three
crucial reasons.

First, meaningful triangular cooperation would
allow the Security Council to consider matters on
the ground from a closer perspective. It is obviously
not in the Council's interest to develop mandates that
ultimately would not be implemented on the ground,
or that contributors would implement only reluctantly.
That would only open the door to all types of
non-compliance, restrictions on the use of resources and
other forms of inaction that damage the reputation of
the Blue Helmets. The Council's negotiating processes
must be better informed by the realities on the ground,
and triangular cooperation must be a means to that end.

Secondly, such dialogue is also part and parcel
of the unity of the Council, which is vital to those
operations. The political battles pitched here and there
only weaken those operations. Conversely, better
mutual understanding increases the sense of sharing
the same goals.

Lastly, by providing improved information for
all concerned, such dialogue must help build a better
consensus on how to carry out peacekeeping operations
and better identify a realistic and achievable operational
framework for them. In brief, we must move beyond
words and develop an operational doctrine adapted to
the specificity of those operations as well as to their
changing environments.

In conclusion, while peacekeeping is a partnership,
triangular cooperation must be one of its preferred
tools. It would be even more robust if the burden of
peacekeeping were better shared. It will hardly solve
every problem, but it will, I am convinced, help
improve a collective and multilateral management
of the challenges that those operations entail. I
hope that today's debate will help set in motion the
flexible and informal institutionalization of such
triangular cooperation.

