Mr. Mbeki: Perhaps I should say first of all that I
was very pleased that the rest of the members of our
Panel were able to come to this meeting. Behind me
are sitting former Presidents Abubakar and Buyoya, the
other members of our Panel.

It would seem to me from the comments that have
been made by Council members here that we are
generally in agreement and of one mind about the
immediate challenges facing us with regard to all the
elements that relate to Sudan - Darfur, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and so on.
Thus, there is general agreement on the kind of focus
that is required. I think that it is a very good thing that
that sort of consensus has developed within the
Security Council. Certainly, from the point of view of
those of us who have to attend to the matter of Sudan
every day, I think that the comments that have been
made here by members of the Security Council indeed
reinforce the cooperation that is taking place among
ourselves on a daily basis in Sudan so that we can
advance on all of these matters.

The only other point that I would like to make in
that regard is that generally we are very optimistic
about this. I think the point has been made that one
thing that has happened as a result of the elections is
that the two principal players, particularly with regard
to the CPA the National Congress Party and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement - have emerged
strengthened from the elections. That has of course
communicated the message to them of the critical
importance of their cooperating properly so that all the
things that need to be done are done.

 

Therefore, all of us will continue to engage with
them to ensure that they do indeed live up to their
responsibilities, because, without that, we are not going
to achieve the solutions that we are looking for in
Sudan.

I think that the atmosphere is very encouraging in
the sense that there is a commitment to making sure
that these things happen despite all the problems and
all the challenges. I would like to believe that a strong
message from the Security Council to encourage both
parties to live up to their responsibility would indeed
help in making sure that we advance the entirety of the
agenda relating to resolution of the challenges in the
Sudan.

