Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing this open debate and to thank
it as well for the excellent concept note (S/2014/75, annex), setting out the terms of the discussion. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation and comprehensive report on the subject
(S/2013/341).

Building on the momentum generated by the
General Assembly High-level Meeting on the Rule of
Law at the Mational and International Levels held in
September 2012, which emphasized the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, today's debate offers us a renewed
opportunity to delve deeper into the topic, review the
progress that has been made so far and contemplate
future actions, so as to respond to the aspirations of
people striving to strengthen the rule oflaw andjustice.

Tunisia firmly believes that promoting the rule of
law is fundamental for the stability and prosperity of
any society. Our own experience demonstrates that
inclusive dialogue and adherence by all to the principle
of the primacy of law, as well as their common
commitment to preserve, strengthen and build solid
institutions, are crucial for the promotion of civil peace,
stability and development. We came to the conclusion,
during the recent positive developments in Tunisia
with the consensual adoption of the Constitution, on
27 January 2014, that the rule of law is better respected
when people are empowered to voice their rights. The
new Constitution enshrines pluralism, the separation
of powers, good governance and the independence of
the judiciary, which is a real breakthrough for Tunisia's
democratic transition process after three years of
revolution.

Tunisia believes that the rule of law is particularly
essential for the resolution of conflicts and the
achievement of lasting peace. Its establishment helps
to ensure sustainable and responsive governance in the
countries concerned, thus reinforcing their institutional
legitimacy and enabling them to gain the trust of the
local population. In addition, the rule of law is critical
for building confidence in the ability of courts to
deliver justice for all, including vulnerable groups.
Therefore, it has to be regarded as being at the core of
the engagement of the international community in the
context of conflict and post-conflict situations.

Tunisia, which recently adopted an organic law on
the organization of transitional justice that sets up a
comprehensive approach to dealing with past violations
of human rights also recognizes the value of measures
of transitional justice that take into account the
specific concerns of vulnerable groups in post-conflict
situations.

We welcome the crucial role of the United Nations
in the promotion of the rule of law, at both the national
and the international levels, and the assistance it
extends to Governments to reinforce norms, build
confidence in justice and security institutions, promote
gender equality and strengthen accountability, so that
impunity for those who commit genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, violations of international
humanitarian law or gross violations of human rights
will not be tolerated.

We believe that a coordinated, coherent and
comprehensive approach to rule-of-law assistance
within the overall United Nations system is the key to
further improving results. In that regard, we express
our sincere appreciation for the work carried out by the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired
by the Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the
Rule of Law Unit, as well as the establishment ofajoint
global focal point for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other
crisis situations, with the aim of providing coordinated
support to the field.

We also note with appreciation that the Security
Council has been playing an important role in
strengthening the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations, as illustrated by the increasing
integration of the issue into its resolutions. In the
same vein, it is our view that the dialogue of the
Council with the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission is important for further
promoting the coherence of the rule-of-law activities
on the ground.

Moreover, each conflict situation is unique and
has its own dynamics. Rule-of-law assistance should,
from the outset, be based on a thorough assessment
of national and regional contexts and be tailored
to the specific and evolving needs of the countries
concerned. It should comprise carefully prioritized,
sequenced and achievable interventions aimed at
backing the elaboration as well as the implementation
of national strategies in that regard. That would enable
garnering sufficient political and popular support for
the envisaged reform, accountability for results and
sustainability, and would endow such interventions
with greater legitimacy.

My delegation would also like to highlight the
need to exert further effort towards the development
of national capacities in all areas of rule-of-law reform
to enable national authorities to govern effectively
and ensure the sustainability of gains. The promotion
of the rule of law must also be a journey of continual
renewal and effort. It goes without saying that adequate
and predictable resources need to be allocated to both
ongoing preparedness for and the implementation of
rule-of-law activities.

Last but not least, there must be much more focus
on the inclusiviness of the rule of law and transitional
justice initiatives. All national actors, including civil
society, should be in a position to contribute effectively
in their design, implementation and evaluation to ensure
the legitimacy required for rule-of-law reforms and to
achieve results. Indeed, we consider it a fact that civil
society not only acts as one of the checks and balances,
it is also a vital partner in the quest for a positive
relationship between the Government and its citizens.

My delegation would like finally to stress that
Tunisia, with its vast experience in peacekeeping,
spanning more than 50 years, remains fully committed
to contributing to United Nations efforts to further
promote the rule of law and stands ready to put further
troops and expertise, particularly in the field ofjustice
and corrections, at the disposal of the United Nations.

