Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As is clear, the
United Kingdom voted in favour of the American draft
resolution (S/20l9/l86) and against the Russian one
(S/2019/l90). I think the fact that the Russian draft
resolution failed to obtain the required number of
votes whereas the American text was vetoed accurately
pinpoints the unease that many Members of the United
Nations feel about the situation in Venezuela and how
untenable it is for it to continue.

We were content to vote in favour of the United States
text because it addressed important issues in Venezuela
about which we too are concerned. It emphasized the
importance of establishing the necessary conditions
for a new and credible electoral process in Venezuela.
Despite the Russian polemic, the United States text did
not seek a permanent transfer of power to a different
leader. It called for free and fair elections, which we
also believe in. We believe that the Nicolas Maduro
presidency is illegitimate and that the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaido, is constitutionally
interim President of Venezuela until credible, free
and fair elections can be held. Those elections are a
condition on the part of transition to peace.

Secondly, the American draft resolution
acknowledged deep concern about violence and the use
of excessive force by the security forces in Venezuela
against unarmed, peaceful protesters, including those
actively engaged in getting humanitarian assistance
into the country to the benefit of ordinary citizens.
There is clear evidence that liberty and justice have
been systematically dismantled by Maduro's regime.

Finally, the text addressed the economic collapse
brought about by Maduro's corrupt policies, which led
to the humanitarian crisis that has so far forced more
than 3.5 million Venezuelans to leave their country
for other countries in the region. That has placed huge
strain on the social services of Venezuela's neighbours.
We would like to thank the United States, as penholder
of the draft resolution, for drafting a text that properly
recognizes the gravity of the situation in Venezuela.
There are limits as to how far a Government can inflict
damage and suffering on its own people.

Turning to the Russian text, the United Kingdom
was compelled to vote against the draft resolution
proposed by the Russian Federation today. We
fundamentally disagreed with its content because it
pretended that there were threats to use force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
Venezuela. There have been no threats to Venezuela's
political independence or territorial integrity.

Secondly, the Russian draft resolution focused on
alleged attempts to intervene in Venezuela's domestic
affairs. As we have seen, the crisis has spilled far
beyond Venezuela's borders, and the current situation
in Venezuela represents a clear threat to peace and
security in the region.

Thirdly, the text included a selective reading of the
Charter of the United Nations - one that we have heard
before. It presents a biased interpretation of the events
unfolding in Venezuela and its support for the Maduro
regime. A full reading of the United Nations Charter
would show that the Security Council should cooperate
to address the suffering of the Venezuelan people.

Finally, the text failed to explicitly recognize
two crucial aspects of the situation in Venezuela:
the humanitarian crisis - I should say the man-
made humanitarian crisis brought about by corrupt
economic policies - and the need for free, fair and
credible elections.

