Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in French): Russia voted in favour of the draft resolution
on extending the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Throughout the history of these forces, mandates
have always been voted on unanimously, and we did
not wish to break with that tradition or to create a
precedent of deviating from the principle of
unanimously voting on mandates for United Nations
missions.

We would like to note, however, that the decision
taken by the Security Council is not fully satisfactory
to us. We believe that the resolution is too politicized
and that it is geared not so much to enhancing the
nature of the United Nations operation in southern
Lebanon, but rather to bringing pressure to bear on
Beirut and obliging it to endeavour to resolve questions
that - because of objective reasons and because of the
overall situation in the Middle East - it simply cannot
resolve.

In an attempt to make the resolution less
politicized, we introduced a number of amendments to
try to make it more balanced when it was under
consideration at the expert level. During the recent
consultations on the draft resolution, we made a further
effort to try to introduce a small change that we felt
would have made it more balanced. Unfortunately, our
suggestions were not accepted.

The current mandate of UNIFIL is fully
acceptable to Russia. We see no reason to change it.
But when we discuss reviewing the mandate and
structure of UNIFIL, we believe that we should rely on
the experience of the Secretary-General and on his
understanding and reading of the situation in the
region. Of course, we would expect him to take
account of the views and opinions of the Lebanese
Government.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our view
that solving the problems in southern Lebanon will be
impossible unless there is a comprehensive Middle
East settlement covering all tracks. Without Syria and
Lebanon, it will not be possible to achieve a solid
peace in the region, based on the well-known Security
Council resolutions - 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003) - the Madrid principles, the land-for-
peace formula and the Arab peace initiative approved
in 2002 at the Beirut Summit of the League of Arab
States.

