Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey; and Iceland
and Liechtenstein, European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries belonging to the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.

I would first like to congratulate Colombia for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and to
thank China and Ambassador Wang for his excellent
service in the month of July. I would also like, in
particular, to thank you, Mr. President, for having come
from Bogota in order to preside over this open debate
of the Security Council and thus give us the
opportunity to express ourselves on a subject that is of
particular concern to us and on which Colombian
diplomacy and particularly Ambassador Reyes have
devoted so much energy - namely, the illicit trade in
small arms in all its aspects.

We can never repeat enough that there are more
than 500 million light weapons and small arms
currently in circulation around the world, and that in
armed conflicts 8 out of 10 victims are civilians, many
of them women and children. How can we ignore this
scourge that fuels conflicts and seriously destabilises
civil society? Public opinion expects us to take action.
None of our countries can resolve this problem alone.
That is why we need to act together.

At the start of the Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in July, the Belgian
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister declared,
on behalf of the European Union, that it was essential
to be able to achieve concrete results in a number of
what we consider to be priority areas: the
implementation of export controls and export
principles; the development of an international
instrument on marking and tracing, as well as on
brokering; specific actions concerning stockpile
management and the destruction of surpluses; and a
particular emphasis on disarmament, demobilisation
and the reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants.

The European Union was not able to obtain at the
Conference everything that it considered essential for
effectively controlling illicit trafficking in small arms,
in particular in areas having to do with export
principles applied in the framework of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as well
as of the European Code of Conduct for Arms Exports
and the European Union Joint Action on Small Arms
and light weapons. The final text nevertheless contains
important elements relating to marking, tracing, export
controls, stockpile management, DDR and assistance
for the world's most affected areas, mainly Africa.

Furthermore, we are very gratified by the
decisions to organize in 2006, at the latest, a review
conference to examine the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to hold biennial meetings to
evaluate the progress made at the regional, national and
global levels that will ensure a follow-up to the
Conference. In this context, I wish to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for his remarks this morning,
which clearly point the way for us. This follow-up is
vital for ensuring that joint action against this illicit
trafficking is effective in the long term.

Lastly, the follow-up opens the way for the
preparation of negotiations concerning marking,
tracing and brokering. This kind of initiative is of
particular importance to the European Union, which
has already begun important work along those lines.

The Programme of Action asserts that the illicit
trade in light weapons prolongs conflicts and involves
elements that touch on conflict prevention and
settlement, as well as on development. The
participating States have therefore decided to prevent,
control and suppress all aspects of the illicit trade in
light weapons, laying particular emphasis on regions of
the world where conflicts are ending and where there is
an urgent need to resolve serious problems posed by
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of light
weapons.

The Programme of Action also provides for the
application of DDR programmes comprising measures
for the collection and destruction of light weapons, in
particular in post-conflict situations, and for the
inclusion, whenever appropriate, of specific provisions
for such programmes in peace agreements. At the
regional level, there are also a number of measures
aimed at strengthening moratoriums on the transfer and
manufacture of light weapons and at support for DDR
programmes, especially in post-conflict situations.
Lastly, at the global level, the participating States have
undertaken to encourage, particularly in post-conflict
situations, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life.

In this regard, we have undertaken to encourage
the Council to study, on a case-by-case basis, the
possibility of including, if need be, relevant provisions
concerning disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets for
peacekeeping operations. The incorporation of these
measures into a comprehensive strategy is, in our view,
an effective and coherent way of supporting
peacekeeping efforts and, above all, of guaranteeing
their durability.

The European Union considers it essential that all
the efforts made to convene the Conference be
followed by concrete effects. The States that have to
contend with post-conflict situations must be helped
and supported by international decisions and measures
taken in compliance with the Programme of Action.

As we have already said, none of our countries
can resolve the problem of the illicit trade in light
weapons and small arms alone. The European Union
will therefore welcome with enthusiasm any initiative
that will make it possible to enhance the follow-up to
the Conference, as well as the implementation of the
measures already taken and of those that will enable all
the actors concerned to strengthen their capacity to
combat this trade in an effective and lasting way.

