Ms. Raz (Afghanistan): We thank you, Madam
President, and your colleagues for taking the initiative,
under the French presidency, to organize this important
meeting on countering the financing of terrorism.
Enhancing progress on preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism will limit and weaken terrorists
in continuing and expanding their reign of terror and
destruction worldwide. We welcome this meeting to
reinforce the collective efforts of the United Nations
and all Member States to create greater awareness of
ways to minimize the methods terrorists use to finance
their activities.

Afghanistan's approach to counter-terrorism is a
comprehensive one. As a prime victim of terrorism,
we fight various terrorist groups on the battlefield,
including terrorist fighters who come from outside
Afghanistan. We have also implemented measures to
strengthen our national legislation to meet the provisions
of various treaties, conventions and United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions, to
combat terrorist financing.

Preventing the financing of terrorism is an
important part of our national counter-terrorism
strategy. Our National Security Council is leading
inter-agency efforts to implement that strategy. We
have established a task force, made up of the Attorney
General's Office, the Ministry of Finance, the National
Directorate of Security and the Financial Transactions
and Reports Analysis Center. The mandate of the
task force is to ensure the implementation of legal
frameworks to prevent money-laundering and other
unregulated currency flows that help terrorists finance
their activities.

Progress in that area has led to our compliance
with international standards. That was recognized
by the Financial Action Task Force, which removed
Afghanistan from its compliance watch list. In the
broader context, our efforts are also in line with
commitments under the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.

We are also engaged in efforts to disrupt the links
between terrorism and organized crime. Afghanistan
has long been engaged in the fight against narcotics,
with a special focus on preventing the Taliban and
other affiliated groups from benefiting from the
proceeds of illicit drugs. Under our national counter-
narcotics strategy, we are taking action across multiple
fronts, such as eradication, public awareness and
alternative livelihoods.

Approximately 3,000 operations were conducted last
year alone, as a result ofwhich close to 3,500 individuals,
including foreign nationals, were apprehended and
prosecuted. Similarly, drug-processing laboratories
and storage facilities were destroyed through joint
military operations. Those operations have disrupted
the Taliban's ability to benefit from narcotics revenue.
In addition, we also confiscated more than 200 tons of
illicit drugs in the course of one year.

We have improved security at national airports and
border crossings to detect, deter and prevent trafficking,
which demonstrates our strong commitment to root
out the illicit drug economy and address the linkages
between terrorist financing and narcotics. Those
measures led to a decrease in drug production last year,
as also reflected in the most recent survey conducted by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

The problem of narcotics in Afghanistan must be
seen in the context of a complex situation. We must
recognize that only a robust and comprehensive effort,
with international and regional partners, geared at
addressing all components, including production,
trafficking and consumption, can achieve the shared
objective, which is to completely eliminate narcotics
production and trade. To ensure our success, we call
for a more cohesive and unified regional approach,
especially given that our immediate neighbours can
play an effective and very strong role in confronting the
nexus of transnational criminal activities. The inflow of
resources that finance and support terrorist activities,
such as the trafficking in weapons and chemical
precursors, arrive from outside Afghanistan, which is
why we need a comprehensive regional approach to
combat that menace.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, were established with a
purpose. However, experience has shown that sanctions
measures, including the freezing ofassets ofindividuals
on the consolidated lists, are often lax and not enforced
properly. We believe that the effective implementation
of those measures would bring pressure to bear on the
terrorist groups and limit their activities. New listings
for individuals, including those involved in the drug
trade as well as wealthy sponsors providing financial
contributions to the Taliban and other affiliated groups,
are necessary.

The sanctions regimes must be thoroughly
enforced in full, with the cooperation of all concerned
States. In this regard, we appreciate the important work
being done by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team in connection with the sanctions
regime imposed by the 1988 and 1267 Committees.

We have even further enhanced our collaboration
with United Nations entities, including the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
In January 2017, during CTED's visit to Afghanistan,
new areas of collaboration were identified, and,
together with international partners, we look forward
to the implementation of those recommendations.

To conclude, we welcome the adoption today of
resolution 2462 (2019) and reaffirm our full support
for all international efforts to end the dangerous link
between all forms of organized criminal activities
with terrorism, including the financing of terrorism.
Afghanistan remains a committed partner in this
imperative, and its efforts and genuine fight against
global terrorism need to be recognized. We are
committed to fighting for the sake of security and
stability in our country and in our region and beyond.

