The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses deep alarm at
the situation in South Sudan. The Security Council
notes that while the ceasefire has largely held in
the former theatre of conflict in Greater Upper
Nile, it is deeply concerned with ongoing violence,
as reported in briefings to the Security Council
on 19 February. The Security Council calls upon
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
to uphold its responsibility for the protection
of civilians.

"The Security Council expresses particular
alarm at credible reports of armed men in Sudan
People's Liberation Army uniforms entering the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) protection-of-civilians site and
firing on civilians. The Security Council stresses
that attacks against civilians, UNMISS personnel,
as well as United Nations premises are unacceptable
and may constitute war crimes. The Security
Council calls upon the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan to investigate and prosecute those
responsible for the attack and commends the United
Nations for quickly announcing the establishment
of a high-level board of inquiry to be convened by
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and Department of Field Support,
which will conduct an in-depth investigation into
UNMISS response to this incident, and awaits with
interest its findings.

"The Security Council condemns reported
human rights violations and abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law and in this
regard expresses deep concern over those detailed
in the 11 March 2016 "Report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human

Rights (OHCHR) Assessment Mission to Improve
Human Rights, Accountability, Reconciliation and
Capacity in South Sudan", and the 4 December
2015 UNMISS/OHCHR report "The state ofhuman
rights in the protracted conflict in South Sudan".
The Security Council expresses deep alarm at
the numerous reports of sexual violence in armed
conflict. The Security Council also underscores its
grave concern at the deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, with an
estimated 2.8 million people who are severely food
insecure and that humanitarian access continues to
be restricted.

"The Security Council underscores its support
for the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC) Chair, Festus Mogae, and calls on all
parties to fully cooperate with him to advance the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan (the 'Agreement').

"The Security Council welcomes some progress
in the implementation of the Agreement, including
the commencement of the work of JMEC, the
establishment of some of the transitional security
mechanisms, the agreement on the selection
of ministerial portfolios, the appointment by
President Salva Kiir of Dr. Riek Machar as First
Vice President, and the parties' endorsement of the
J MEC transitional security arrangements proposal.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the failure of the parties to fully adhere
to their commitments to implement the Agreement.
In this regard, the Security Council calls for the
following steps to be taken:

"1. The Government of the Republic of
South Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement in Opposition (SPLM-IO) fully and
immediately adhere to the permanent ceasefire
in accordance with their obligations under
the Agreement.

"2. The Government of the Republic
of South Sudan, the SPLM-IO and all other
relevant actors extend their full cooperation to
complete implementation of the Juba security
arrangements as decided by the JMEC Chair
and agreed by the parties on 24 February 2016.

"3. The President, the First Vice-President,
and Vice-President, as set out in the Agreement,
take up their positions in the Transitional
Government of National Unity in Juba.
"4. The parties to the agreement abide
by and take no action inconsistent with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
30-31 January 2016 communique, which was
subsequently endorsed by the parties and
JMEC, on the issue of the Presidential Decree
on the creation of 28 new states.

"5. The Government of the Republic of
South Sudan and the SPLM-IO protect civilians
and civilian facilities, including schools and
hospitals, allow people to move freely, and
allow, in accordance with relevant provisions of
international law and United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance, full, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to help
ensure the timely delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all those in need.

"The Security Council expresses its intention
to review progress on the steps outlined above no
later than 31 March 2016.

"The Security Council underscores the
pressing need for accountability for violations
and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law in South Sudan,
including ongoing violations and abuses that have
been reported since the Agreement was signed. The
Security Council takes note in this regard ofChapter
V of the Agreement, calls for its implementation,
and appreciates the 26 September 2015 African
Union Peace and Security Council (AUPSC)
communique, in which the AUPSC requested that
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
take all necessary steps towards the establishment
of the hybrid court of South Sudan, which will
have jurisdiction over serious crimes committed
through the end of the transitional period. The
Security Council also calls for implementation of
the other mechanisms outlined in Chapter V of the
Agreement, including the Commission for Truth,
Healing, and Reconciliation.

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern at reports of repeated violations of the
Status of Forces Agreement and underscores the
importance of close cooperation on this issue. The
Security Council underscores its steadfast support
for UNMISS and renews its deep appreciation
of the courageous actions taken by UNMISS
personnel and troop- and police-contributing
countries to protect hundreds of thousands of
civilians under threat of physical violence and
to stabilize the security situation across South
Sudan. The Security Council recognizes the need
to strengthen cooperation between the Government
of South Sudan and UNMISS to ensure the safety
and security of peacekeepers and other United
Nations and associated personnel, including
humanitarian personnel.

"The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering
support for the people of South Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/l.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
