Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): In response to your
appeal, Mr. President, I will try to shorten my
statement and will limit myself to making some
observations relating to the inter-agency report.

First, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno, Assistant Secretary-
General Ibrahima Fall, and the Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Carolyn McAskie, for their
important briefings this morning. With regard to the
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa, I
wish to highly commend Mr. Fall and members of the
inter-agency team for the comprehensive and far-
reaching report. We appreciate in particular the depth
and analytical quality of the report. We fully endorse
all of its recommendations.

The report confirms beyond any doubt that the
conflicts in West Africa must be addressed in an
integrated and regional perspective. We believe that is
also true of the Great Lakes region, and that we will in
due course have to look at possibilities there as well.
The priority now should be to develop the necessary
strategies to implement the recommendations of the
inter-agency report in a time-bound manner. I would
like to ask Mr. Ibrahima Fall whether reflection is
already taking place in the Secretariat on an
implementation plan for the this important report.

Mauritius has always advocated in the Council
the need to involve regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping and peace-building
efforts. We commend the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for its vision for the
maintenance of peace and security in West Africa and
for the promotion of economic and social development
in the subregion. ECOWAS must be fully supported by
the United Nations system and the international
community in that endeavour.

Finally, I would like to mention that we are
disappointed that the tribunal for Sierra Leone has not
yet been established. We appeal to the donor
community to come forward once again and support
the establishment of the tribunal for Sierra Leone.

