Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his remarks. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/85) and to
thank his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah Haq,
for her comprehensive briefing to the Council in her
new capacity. We support her efforts and we support
the key coordinating role of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste.

Like others, I would like to praise the Timorese
people, Government and political parties, as the
security situation remains relatively calm and stable.
This considerable stabilization has enabled the
Timorese to address key issues such as the further
strengthening of State institutions and democratic
governance and the adoption of important measures to
fight corruption. In this context, the creation of the
Anti-Corruption Commission and the recent
appointment of its first Commissioner are all welcome
developments in the right direction. We also welcome
the successful holding of the village elections of 9
October 2009 without major incident, proving that the
Timorese people are committed to democracy and that
the political parties are demonstrating respect for
democratic principles and processes.

We are glad to see that all of the camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) have finally been
closed. We are confident that the Timorese authorities,
with the help of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), will also meet the
requirements for the reintegration of IDPs into society.
In the same vein, we hope that UNMIT's process of
handing over policing responsibilities to the Timorese
national police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL), will continue to be as smooth as it has been
until now. In this respect, we are pleased to note that
the resumption of primary policing responsibilities by
the PNTL has not led to an increase in criminal
activity. We take careful note of the wish of the
Timorese authorities to see the process of handing over
policing responsibilities finalized by the end of this
year in all districts and all units. That is an
understandable and legitimate request from a
democratic and sovereign Government.

However, we also think that things should not be
rushed and thus continue to support the Secretary-
General's gradual approach in this matter. We welcome
further progress achieved in the registration, screening
and certification programme for the PNTL in
accordance with the Policing Arrangement. It seems
also that quite a few logistical requirements must be
fulfilled in order to complete the handover process. In
this regard, the findings of the technical assessment
mission at the beginning of this year will surely guide
future efforts and further progress to enhance security
sector reform, internal security and national defence.
Improvement of the justice sector and its institutions
remains equally important.

Despite these considerable achievements, the
main issues that contributed to the 2006 crisis, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report - such as
poverty, unemployment, lack of an effective land and
property regime and a weak judicial system -
continue to pose important challenges and need to be
fully addressed in order to anchor stability in Timor-
Leste. That is a must for the sustainable development
of the country. In particular, the high rate of
unemployment among youth is not only worrisome for
the economic development of the country, but also
stands as a possible risk to the security situation of
Timor-Leste. Moreover, gender-based violence should
also be addressed comprehensively. In that regard, the
training of the PNTL to resolve community issues is of
utmost importance.

Given the progress achieved so far, we are
confident that Timor-Leste will eventually overcome
all these challenges. However, that requires continued
national dialogue and unity. Therefore, we join the
Secretary-General in encouraging the Government and
the opposition to continue broad consultation efforts.
We also believe that Timor-Leste requires the
continued support of the international community in its
quest for peace, stability and prosperity. We thus accept
the Secretary-General's recommendation, based on the
findings of the technical assessment mission, that
UNMIT's present strength and composition should be
maintained. In this regard, we fully support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
UNMIT's mandate for a further period of 12 months,
with the same composition and a gradual decrease of
the police component by mid-2011.

Let me conclude by wishing continued success to
the Timorese people and Government.

