The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated from the
representative of Serbia in which he request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremie
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I
should like to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Vice Federal Minister for European and
International Affairs of Austria, His Excellency
Mr. Johannes Kyrle. On behalf of the Council, I extend
a warm welcome to him.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
2
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members have before them document S/2009/497,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing my Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now
give the floor.


