Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of all,
I would like to thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) for the efforts they have made and their
commitment to strengthening civil society and lasting
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Five years after
Dayton, we have seen tremendous improvements in all
aspects of life in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would
especially like to emphasize the huge success in
restructuring the local police, as well as the reform of
the judicial system, which is on the right track. A
significant number of minority returnees have also
been registered across the board.

For Bosnia and Herzegovina, the main task is, of
course, the creation of a self-sustaining economy, and

S/PVAZAS

 

we expect the help of international community experts
to continue to contribute to the changes in our
economic legislation that we desperately need.
Furthermore - and here I feel very strongly - I am
pleased to express our appreciation for the very
positive and extremely important changes that we have
seen in Belgrade in recent weeks. Of course, the
changes that took place in Zagreb a year ago are also
very welcome. These changes are of paramount
importance for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
as a whole. The issues that are crucial for our region
are the commitment of all States, respect for
internationally recognized borders and the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
written and signed five years ago, as well as of
resolution 1244 (1999). We are also sure now that the
issue of the succession of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will be resolved within a
reasonable period oftime, for the benefit of all.

I was also very pleased to see Senator Biden, a
member of the United States Senate, here in the
Security Council today. As a representative of the State
that benefited greatly from the help of the United
Nations, I should like to take this opportunity to
express the hope of our people that a final agreement
among Member States regarding financial
contributions, the regular budget and the scale of
assessments of the United Nations will finally be
reached.

I would like to express my regret that the
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Muhamed
Sacirbey, is leaving his post. I have had excellent
cooperative relations with him since I came to the
Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina earlier this year.
Unfortunately, he was unable to come to the Council
today.

Finally, I would again like to thank Mr. Klein for
his work in UNMIBH, as well as the members of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole for all their sincere efforts made for the sake of
lasting peace and prosperity in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region.

