The Secretary-General: I would like to welcome
the Ministers who are present, including the French
Minister Delegate for Cooperation and Francophonie,
who is in the Chair, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana. I also welcome Mr. Chambas, the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). Mr. Wiltzer, it is very
good to see you here and see you presiding over this
meeting. I would also want to begin by saying to my
compatriot Nana Akufo-Addo "akwaaba", which
means "welcome".

ECOWAS has recently taken important initiatives
to tackle the serious challenges to peace and security
faced by the people of West Africa. As the Security
Council has acknowledged, these initiatives have
demonstrated the resolve of Africans to settle African
problems in cooperation with the international
community. This open debate is another significant
step in the Council's efforts to promote a regional
approach to those challenges, and yet another
illustration of the good working relationship between
the Council and ECOWAS member States.

The report before the Council (S/2004/200) is the
first one devoted specifically to cross-border problems
in the subregion. The report's recommendations are
practical. They have been grouped not in order of
priority, but rather under broad thematic headings such
as security-sector reform, disarmament, extortion,
naming and shaming and the proliferation of small
arms. They are not a shopping list for donors, but
rather a call to action. As such, they are directed at a
wide range of players, including the Security Council
and other parts of the United Nations system, bilateral
and multilateral development partners, the ECOWAS
secretariat, individual Member States in West Africa,
civil society organizations and non-State actors such as
suppliers of small arms and light weapons.

The overarching theme is that, if we want the
region's problems to be dealt with in an effective and
sustainable manner, these recommendations cannot be
carried out solely on a country-by-country basis. Their
implementation requires a multifaceted regional
approach. At the same time, it is clear that certain
issues have a particularly strong bearing on security
and stability, without which no other progress will be
possible. Special attention should therefore be paid to
the proliferation of small arms, the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and the use of child soldiers and
mercenaries, as well as to roadblocks, which greatly
impede the movement of persons and goods in the
subregion.

With this in mind, and to build on this report and
meeting, I have asked my Special Representative for
West Africa, Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, who is here
with us today, to convene a meeting in the region in the
near future to explore how ECOWAS and the relevant
United Nations entities can best move ahead. One
important step forward has already been taken with the
new arrangement whereby all my Special
Representatives and Force Commanders in the
subregion meet at regular intervals, under Mr. Ould-
Abdallah's chairmanship. In the same context,
Mr. Ould-Abdallah will also be doing more to promote
synergies between United Nations peace operations and
the Organization's humanitarian and development
efforts.

The root causes of the region's problems - and
indeed of the conflicts that spawn or exacerbate
them - were beyond the report's scope. But as we all
know, those root causes are linked above all to
questions of governance, human rights and
transparency. Regrettably, such abuses are all too
prevalent in the region. Until they are addressed with
real resolve, until there is a fundamental break with
authoritarianism and the culture of violence, exclusion
and impunity, I fear that whatever inroads we manage
to make in handling cross-border problems will remain
just that: temporary inroads, and fragile ones at best.

Therefore, I urge Governments of the region to
build on the gains they have recently made and
establish solidly democratic institutions and effective
regional organizations. West Africa is blessed with a
vibrant civil society that has wide-ranging experience
in conflict prevention, peace-building and
development. States must draw on their experience in
addressing their problems. I also urge the international
community to respond with all possible assistance,
including politically.

Finally, for its part, the United Nations will
continue its work and its efforts to work better as a
team to support the wishes of the region's people and
to strengthen cooperation with ECOWAS in pursuit of
our shared goal of peace, stability and development.
Let us all do our utmost to bring genuine change and
hope into the lives of people throughout the region who
are struggling to move beyond today's suffering and
reach better days.

