Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me great honour to speak on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and its
member States.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
President, for presiding over the Security Council this
month. We wish you every success in your task. I would
also like to congratulate the Jordanian presidency for its
excellent performance over the past few weeks. We also
thank the presidency for inviting us to take part in this
important discussion with regard to the situation in the
Middle East. I would also like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign and Expatriates Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for his statement, and
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

First of all, on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, I would like
to welcome the decision of the State of Palestine to
officially join the International Criminal Court. We
look forward to Palestine becoming a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations, thereby achieving part
ofthejustice that Palestine has been deprived of over the
past few decades. Palestine's joining the International
Criminal Court is a very important and natural step
in that regard. However, it is also very important for
Palestine to establish a framework of accountability for
those in charge of the Israeli occupation of Palestine
and responsible for the confiscation of Palestinian tax
revenues, the blockade against Gaza and the hunger and
war in Gaza, as well as other violations committed by
Israel against Palestine.

That brave step comes within the framework of
the obdurate practices carried out by Israel, which
has refused to honour its commitments. It violates
international law and impedes all negotiations aimed
at reaching a settlement of the issue. In fact, the Israeli
Prime Minister has rejected the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State. Therefore, we would like
to call upon all the countries of the world to honour their
commitments to support Palestine and acknowledge the
State of Palestine based on the borders of4 June 1967,
with Jerusalem as its capital.

The OIC is committed to the basic rights of the
Palestinian people, as well as to their self-determination,
their rights and the establishment of an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital. The OIC stresses
the importance of putting an end to the occupation by
Israeli troops of Arab territory, as well as the Syrian
Golan Heights and Lebanese territory. We call upon
the international community to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and to achieve a peace based on the two-
State solution.

Israel is stubbornly imposing its oppressive and
racist policies on Palestine. The statements ofthe Israeli
Prime Minister during the recent Israeli elections
confirmed the Israeli policies of building settlements
and the racist wall, as well as the use ofextreme violence
by Israeli troops against peaceful demonstrators. Israel
is carrying out a policy of deporting and intimidating
Palestinian people, in addition to other policies based
on impunity. Israeli troops have detained a number of
Palestinians, including members of Parliament, such
as Ms. Khalida Jarrar, without charges. The OIC has
condemned the serious threats and terrorist activities
carried out by Israeli terrorist settlers against the
Palestinian people under occupation.

In February, the Al-Huda mosque in Bethlehem and
a building affiliated with the Greek Orthodox church in
Jerusalem were destroyed. We condemn those attacks
on Islamic and Christian places of worship.

The OIC holds Israel fully responsible for all
those horrendous acts against the Palestinian people,
because Israel brought the terrorist settlers into the
occupied territory. We call upon all the leaders of the
international community to place them on the list of
terrorist groups.

The situation in the Gaza Strip is deteriorating
as a result of the Israeli blockade and aggression last
summer, in which more than 2,000 Palestinians were
killed. Because of that aggression, the humanitarian
organizations working in Gaza are suffering from a
shortage of funding. We must therefore support those
who are working in the humanitarian field. The OIC
calls upon the international community to give generous
donations to the Palestinian people and those who are
supporting them.

We call upon the Council to demand that Israel
put an end to its inhumane blockade against Gaza
and to implement resolution 1860 (2009) with regard
to the delivery of humanitarian aid to Gaza without
impediments. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
calls upon the Security Council to put an end to the
suffering of the Palestinian people and to protect
Palestinian civilians.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation welcomed
the convening of the parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention on 17 December 2014. We would like to
reiterate that those parties are obliged to force Israel
and its occupying troops to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention and to implement it in Palestine, including
in Jerusalem. In fact, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, during his
briefing before the Council last month (see S/PV.7417),
asked if it was time for the Security Council to take the
leading role. We would like to pose the same question.
We must move towards achieving the aspirations of the
Palestinian people and the independence of its State,
based on the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem
as its capital. We must also achieve a resolution of
the issue of the Palestinian refugees, according to the
internationally legitimate resolutions.

I would like to continue my statement in my
national capacity by stressing that the situation in Syria,
after four years of conflict, is the largest catastrophe
of the century. In fact, the Syrian authorities continue
to perpetrate crimes against the Syrian people and
to use chemical weapons against civilians. They
cooperated with terrorist organizations in order to
carry out a massacre in Yarmouk refugee camp, which
reached the level of a genocide against the Palestinian
refugees. They are impeding access of humanitarian
relief into the occupied territory. In fact, the Security
Council has committed to taking measures in cases
where chemical weapons are used by any party and
to punishing any party that hampers the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. However, such threats, unless
actually implemented, will do no justice to the people
but will cast doubt on the integrity and credibility of
the Security Council and help the Syrian authorities
to pursue their practices. Indeed, the practices of the
Syrian authorities have helped the terrorist groups to
expand in Syria.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, regardless
of the perpetrators. We also note stress that terrorism
is transnational and that, in order to uproot it, we need
to address the main causes that have led to its spread,
including the practices of the Syrians authorities
leading to suppression, chaos and sectarian sedation.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has shown its ability to
take firm decisions and support our brothers. We will
spare no effort in helping the Syrian people to achieve
their aspirations to dignity and freedom in a way that
preserves the territorial integrity of Syria and respects
the rights of people in Syria. We call on the Security
Council to implement the relevant resolutions, including
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), calling
for the establishment of a transitional governing body
in order to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people.

In conclusion, the Israeli Ambassador's statement
regarding the attack on Gaza and the support of the
Arab countries for the Palestinian people reflects a
double standard. It seems as ifhe wants only to highlight
what Israeli authorities have done in suppressing and
oppressing the Palestinian people in recent weeks. In
fact, the acceptance of such practices has to come to an
end. It is now time for the Security Council to prove to
Israel that it is not above the law.

