Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I congratulate Togo
and the President for being with us today, which is
testimony to the importance of the issue that the
Security Council faces today. I believe that, by and
large, all those who have spoken so far have been fully
supportive of this timely initiative.

I would like to thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
consistent efforts to monitor the situation in the region.
We thank Mr. Alexander Zmeevskiy for giving us his
considered opinion in this matter.

Pakistan has a long-term and deep-rooted
commitment to the security and stability of West
Africa. Over the years our peacekeepers in that region
have been deployed in Sierra Leone, C6te d'Ivoire and
Liberia. We therefore have an abiding interest in the
continued well-being of the region. Pakistan also has
close relations with all countries of the Sahel region
and supports the efforts of their Governments towards
peace, stability and socio-economic development.

The significant challenges faced by countries of
West Africa and the Sahel have serious implications for
their stability and development. There are complex
causes underlying the challenges, and I enumerate
them here: the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
foreign interference and intervention, and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In recent times these
difficulties have been exacerbated by transnational
organized crime, including narcotics and weapons
trafficking, piracy and terrorism, which, by
undermining Governments and social and economic
stability, are reversing gains that have been made,
especially in post-conflict situations.

Several recent United Nations reports have
highlighted the worsening security, economic and
humanitarian situation in West Africa and the Sahel
region as a result of those threats. According to the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office for West Africa (S/2011/811), criminal
organizations continue to use West Africa as a transit
point for trafficking cocaine and heroin. Also, the
report of the assessment mission (S/2012/42)
highlighted the impact that the Libyan crisis has had on
the already precarious security situation in the Sahel.

For the Sahel region, the Libyan crisis has been
like a genie in a bottle. The bottle has been uncorked,
and the genie is out. Many of us here are not yet even
aware of the mischief that this genie continues to play
in that region.

But when I am in doubt, I look upon the
European Union as an important source of information.
I am looking at their paper and reading from it the
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
The Strategy has four key issues, and I will read the
first, which is the most important:

"that security and development in the Sahel" -
this is very important - "cannot be separated,
and that helping these countries achieve security
is integral to enabling their economies to grow
and poverty to be reduced."
I read further:

"The Sahel is one of the poorest regions of
the world. It faces simultaneously the challenges
of extreme poverty, the effects of climate change,
frequent food crises, rapid population growth,
fragile governance, corruption, unresolved
internal tensions, the risk of violent extremism
and radicalization, illicit trafficking and terrorist-
linked security threats."

This, I think, is a far more comprehensive review
of this region by the European Union. We should take
from it. It names the three core Sahelian States as
Mauritania, Mali and Niger, though the geographical
conditions, and therefore challenges, also affect parts
of Burking Faso and Chad.

Why I read from this Strategy is to review the
relevance of what our friends feel so strongly about in
Europe, and rightly so. I believe that being among the
poorest countries in the world, the Sahelian States are
facing enormous stress. The proliferation of weapons
from Libya has been a catastrophe. Mali already faces
very significant undermining of its hard efforts to try to
rebuild, as I have said, according to the European
Strategy, its political-economic framework.

I would like to suggest that we have been a little
lax in allowing the situation to get so far out of control.
Are we really in control of the situation? The answer is
"Maybe, but more likely, maybe not". The reason is
that most of the institutions that are considering this
region, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), are, unfortunately, understaffed,
underfinanced and overlapping on many issues. Yet
nobody is in control. We have heard several members
here speak of how we can bring together this sort of
situation through institutionalization. We have recently
done so between Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan;
already, a cache of three tons has been stopped within
the last few days.

The question really is, are we interested in doing
something on a piecemeal basis, or are we going to try
to help this region substantially. Why do I say this? I
think we have not really considered what is happening.
As of today, with regard to the financing of this region,
unfortunately, the Council would be surprised to know
that whereas drug trafficking in the United States is
$37 billion a year, in Europe - if we do not count the
recent adjustments of the euro against the dollar - it is
about $33 billion a year. They are practically at par, if
you consider the value change of the euro. According
to my friends in UNODC, approximately 13 or 14 per
cent of all European illicit trade from South America
enters through the region we are discussing here today.
We are talking about approximately $4.25 billion
dollars.

In a region where total economies are $7 billion
or $8 billion, that amount of money traversing the
countries cannot be met by just looking at it in a
situation here and saying "Oh, you have not got the
institutions; yet, with what you have, you need to
empower them." Let us take UNODC, with a budget of
$460 million - 50 per cent of which is raised
voluntarily. They give 10 per cent of that to this region.
That means $4 million to fight an ingress of $4 billion.
I do not think it is going to be handled very easily. We
have not equipped ourselves in a genuine and honest
way in trying to resolve this problem. I think we ought
to be a little more street smart about this.

I also believe there are aspects that we tend to
overlook. While I praise the African Union's Plan of
Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the
Economic Community of West African States Regional
Action Plan against organized crime and illicit drug
trafficking and the West Africa Coast Initiative, their
impact cannot be optimal, due to various constraints,
not the least of which is that most of those countries
are handling the problems individually. They are not
being assisted to do this in a systematic fashion.

So while we talk about all sorts of situations, I
believe that there has been a further deterioration.
Interdiction efforts alone will only increase the price of
drugs; it will not eliminate the problem. Today, we see
a large number of people living in those regions falling
victim to this consumption, and that is going to further
exacerbate the situation. I believe that Europe, as the
ultimate consumer, should invest a lot more and give a
lot more attention to its own strategy document for
security and development in the Sahel, with much
larger commitments of financing and funding. I do not
see that happening at the United Nations.

I believe that another aspect that, as I said earlier,
must be controlled is the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. Africa remains a continent with rich
resources, but they have been pillaged for years.
Unfortunately, we see that those who pillage these
countries are very often in Government and otherwise
in positions of power, but we have not understood that
we can more easily tabulate the end-users of all these
pillaged products because all of them sit among us here
today - maybe including myself. We must look within
ourselves and be able to say "This is where this goes",
and then persuade our own membership to exercise
moral restraint to be able to stop this pillaging.

That has happened recently in the terrorist trade,
where we have said that money cannot be sent through
alternative sources; it must be sent through a banking
process or it will be suspect. Surely, we can do
something akin to that in helping Africa to retain for its
own people the resources that are being taken away so
mercilessly. Let us therefore do what the Europeans
also say - let us build the capacity of the States of
West Africa and the Sahel. This will help to combat
transnational crime, because they know best how to
handle it provided they have some resources to attend
to It.

I would say that, in the end, we in the United
Nations need to act coherently in this region, addressing
the diverse requirements of dealing with these
challenges. All relevant United Nations entities have a
presence on the ground in the region, but there is a need
to achieve greater coordination and synergy between
their respective and individual roles. But the States of
the region - and this must be reaffirmed here - must
enjoy special privilege and status to deal with bringing
it together; in other words, a stronger and larger
presence on the stage that the United Nations sets for
itself to be able to help this region.

