Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations for organizing this meeting on
the situation in my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and
for giving me the opportunity to address the Council.
Allow me to take this opportunity to again congratulate
the presidency on the very important work it is carrying
out throughout this month.

Allow me also to convey to the Security Council
the recognition and gratitude of my Government and
the Congolese people for the efforts made over the past
several years by the United Nations, which continues
to work to restore peace and stability in my country. In
particular, I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his determination and personal involvement in the
search for peace and a lasting solution to the situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo takes note of today's adoption of
resolution 2502 (2019) and welcomes the renewal of
MONUSCO's mandate for one year. That time will
be used to strengthen the strategic dialogue with the
United Nations until MONUSCO's orderly and smooth
withdrawal. The important gesture that the Council
has just made is by no means a mere formality but the
renewal of a common commitment of the Government,
the United Nations, the Great Lakes region and other
partners to work together for peace, security and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region with a view to achieving
the dream of sustainable development and economic
integration in the region.

Peace and security remain essential factors of
stability in the Great Lakes region, which is contingent
on full compliance with agreements and on the
political will of the leaders to work towards harmony
in the region. The loosening of tension and dynamic
cooperation observed throughout the year since the
accession to power of His Excellency Mr. Fe'lix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the Republic
and Head of State, augur well for a better future for
the region.

The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is generally calm, although it is still
dominated by the activities of national and foreign
armed groups, as well as by intercommunal conflicts,
mainly in the eastern part of the country. Some national
armed groups, chiefly the Mai Mai, are associating with
foreign armed groups and forming dangerous coalitions.
It is in that context that the President launched
large-scale military operations on 30 October in Beni.
The operations are being conducted by the Forces
arme'es de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, with the
aim of eradicating all those threats, in particular the
Allied Democratic Forces-Madina Al-Tawheed wa
Mujahedeen (ADF-MTM), a terrorist group with
allegiance to the Islamic State. The military pressure
of the FARDC has begun to bear fruit, including the
neutralization of seven Mai Mai militias and the
recovery of several military effects in Mwera, in Fizi
territory, on 2 November; the surrender of 20 Mai Mai
Nyatura fighters in Ngungu, Masisi, in North Kivu on
25 November; the surrender of 120 fighters from the
Mai Mai Kalume group in South Kivu on 2 December;
the destruction of more than 95 per cent of the bases of
the destructive elements in the Conseil national pour
le renouveau et la democratie and the capture of more
than 1,712 individuals, including 245 combatants and
10 political leaders ofthat harmful movement in Kalehe,
South Kivu, on 4 December; the recovery and control
of a number of ADF-MTM. strongholds, including in
Mayangose, Mapobu-Carrieres; and the neutralization
of leaders of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi, such
as Sylvestre Mudacumura, Musabimana Juvenal, also
known as J can-Michel Africa, and Charles Kakule.

Despite those advances, we must deplore the
change in strategy of the defeated enemy, particularly
the ADF-MTM. terrorists, who are now attacking
innocent populations in large urban areas, causing
death and desolation. Following the recent massacres
committed by elements of that terrorist group, the
President of the Republic decided to establish the
forward headquarters of the FARDC in Beni and called
for a more sustained involvement of MONUSCO.

The Head of State also proceeded to change the
entire command of the operational zone by rotating the
11,000 military personnel who were present in order
to relieve them and replace them with an increased
21,000 personnel. In addition, the Forces arme'es de
la Republique democratique du Congo formed a rapid
intervention brigade and special forces, which are
currently deployed in that part of the territory to ensure
the victory of our armed forces. The Government
has also deployed additional units of the Congolese
National Police in the extensive surrounding areas of
Beni that have been conquered by the FARDC in order
to ensure the security of the population.
As stated by the President of the Republic, the
Government and its armed forces are fully and
unstintingly determined to eradicate the armed groups
that are roaming the eastern part of the country, and
all possible means have been deployed to achieve that
objective. In that struggle, the Congolese Government is
counting on the support of MONUSCO and its partners
to restore peace, optimism and hope for a decent life to
the people of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, my Government appreciates
the decision of the Security Council, in choosing its
strategic priorities for MONUSCO's new mandate, to
opt for protecting civilians and providing support to the
stabilization and strengthening of State institutions, as
well as to major governance and security reforms. My
country does indeed count on assistance and support
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, both for national armed groups that lay
down their arms to return to normal civilian life and
for foreign armed groups. That is because - and the
Council will agree - the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme is of great importance for
reintegrating ex-combatants in order to ensure that they
do not fall into the hands of armed groups.

During the parliamentarians' meeting convened in
Congress on 13 December, the Head of State reaffirmed
his unwavering commitment to reforming the security
sector, first and foremost to transform the FARDC into
a powerful, trained and equipped army; review the
Congolese National Police reform plan in order to adapt
it and establish a new reference plan on the theme "one
nation, one police"; and reform the intelligence services.

The idea of concentrating MONUSCO troops in
the six provinces where the presence of the Mission
is deemed necessary is in line with the Government's
request to concentrate troops in provinces where
the threat level is very high and reduce troops in
areas where the threat is no longer present. In that
context, the President of the Republic has called for
a reconfiguration of MONUSCO, with a focus on a
qualitative resizing of the troops, which should be
fewer in number but better equipped and experienced
in dealing with asymmetrical warfare. My Government
intends to deepen its discussions on that topic within
the framework of our strategic dialogue.

The Government is tirelessly focused on ensuring
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as its function is to ensure that democratic freedoms
are respected, in particular by providing professional
supervision for public demonstrations. In the context
of combating human rights violations and violations
of humanitarian law committed against children in
conflict-affected territories, the Government continues
to implement the road map that was drawn up with
a view to ending the recruitment and use of children
in armed groups and to protecting them from sexual
violence. At the same time, the Congolese legal system
continues to pursue, independently and professionally,
hearings in the case of the assassinations of two United
Nations experts, taking into account the data obtained
from the international investigation and additional
elements from the team of the Special Prosecutor. The
most recent hearing, the thirty-second, was held on
3 December at the military court of the former province
of Kasai Occidental.

In conclusion, allow me to recall that resolution
2502 (2019), which Council has just adopted, is aimed
at strengthening the performance of MONUSCO in
order to put an end to the suffering of the people in the
east of my country. As everyone knows, that situation
has caused millions of deaths, and the entire Congolese
population is eager for it to end. It is now up to us to
effectively set that process in motion.

I cannot end my statement without thanking all
the troop-contributing countries and the Blue Helmets
who have made this great sacrifice in order to restore
peace and security to my country. On another note, I
would like to extend to you, Madam President, and to
all members of the Security Council, on behalf of the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
our best wishes for Christmas and the new year in 2020.

The meeting rose at10.35 a.m.
