Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres and our other
briefers for their presentations today. This is a timely
discussion as we work together to address a problem
that reaches beyond the capacity of any one State.

Following the territorial defeat of Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Iraq and Syria, we are
faced with the challenge of repatriating, prosecuting
and rehabilitating many Central Asian foreign terrorist
fighters who had travelled abroad to fight in terrorist
groups. The United States commends the Governments
of Central Asia for their actions to take responsibility
for their citizens in Iraq and Syria and their efforts to
repatriate them to their home countries.

On that issue, we can do more together than we
can alone. That is why the Council has taken a number
of significant steps to address the evolving terrorist
threat. We adopted resolution 2178 (2014) to prevent
foreign terrorist fighters travelling to battlefields and
resolution 2396 (2017) to deal with the challenges
of them returning to our own countries. We also
adopted several counter-ISIS financing resolutions
and expanded the sanctions regime of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities in 2015
to include ISIS. However, we only added Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan in Afghanistan to the
1267 list in May, and we need to designate the many
more ISIS affiliates operating across the globe.

In addition to our collective efforts at the United
Nations, we agree that regional and subregional
organizations continue to play an important role in
addressing the terrorist threat in Central Asia and
beyond. As other speakers have noted, NATO efforts
have expanded information-sharing, improving
preparedness and resilience to terrorist attacks and
increasing capabilities to defend against the use of
technology for terrorist purposes. The Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe has helped Central
Asian partners implement Security Council resolutions
on foreign terrorist fighters by holding workshops
to address this threat, as well as introducing new
programmes to counter violent extremism in the region.

In addition to regional organizations, platforms
like the C5+1 initiative, which includes the five
Central Asian nations and the United States, have
been useful in deepening counter-terrorism capacities
and facilitating dialogue on efforts to repatriate,
rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters.
Just yesterday, under the auspices of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, the United States co-hosted
a side event highlighting the experiences of those that
have repatriated their foreign terrorist fighters.

But regardless of organization, forum or platform,
all efforts to strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation
with the United Nations must be conducted in line
with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and applicable
international law. Efforts to counter terrorism that do
not respect human rights ultimately breed resentment
and violent extremism. When Member States or regional
organizations conflate terrorism with non-violent
political dissent, they do a disservice not only to the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
but to our global effort to defeat terrorism.

Unfortunately, that is the dangerous approach we
are witnessing in Syria, where the Al-Assad regime
and its allies justify air strikes on civilians, schools,
ambulances and hospitals as legitimate counter-
terrorism operations, which have killed over 1,000
people since April and left over 2,000 wounded. In more
than 50 cases, Russian and/or Syrian attacks have hit
medical facilities deconflicted by the United Nations,
putting the Organization's credibility and civilian lives
at risk. Those attacks must stop. Continued violence
in Syria will only further terrorist radicalization
and recruitment.

We are indeed deeply concerned by the situation in
Xinjiang, where more than 1 million Uyghurs and other
Muslims have been arbitrarily detained under the guise
of counter-terrorism. Men, women and children in
Xinjiang have been subjected to torture, forced labour
and invasive arbitrary surveillance, solely on the basis
of their religion and ethnicity. China, like all nations,
has every right to respond to actual terrorist threats,
but counter-terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to
repress the peaceful religious practices of Chinese
Muslims and an entire minority group.

Preventing and countering terrorist radicalization
and recruitment online and offline is a global concern.
The United States also works to ensure that terrorists
do not find safe haven online while we protect freedom
of speech. We collaborate voluntarily with technology
companies to share information in order to address use
of the Internet for terrorist purposes.

We urge regional organizations like the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States to look closely at revising how they
address terrorism in order to better avoid conflating
separatism, extremism and terrorism in their core
documents. We also urge them to fully promote the
observance of applicable international law.

It is important for the United Nations to work with
regional organizations to counter terrorism and prevent
violent extremism. However we must collectively
ensure that regional organizations reflect all elements
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, including engagement with civil society,
while promoting a human rights-compliant rule-of-law
approach to fighting terrorism. The United States is
committed to working with our Central Asian partners
and the broader international community to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism.

