Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I would first like to thank
President Duda of Poland for devoting today's open
debate to a theme so close to our Kingdom's heart.

AsthehostcountryofTheHaguePeace Conferences,
the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court and other important international legal
institutions, the Netherlands has a proud tradition of
championing international law. Today's subject is
embedded in our DNA. In fact, it is enshrined in our
Constitution, and there are good reasons for that. A
dependable, rules-based legal order is a prerequisite for
security, stability and economic growth. When adhered
to, it is our best guarantee of prosperity and the best
conflict-prevention tool available.

Today, and in spite of the vast progress that has
been made, our international rulebook is under serious
pressure. From the annexation of Crimea to the slave
markets in Libya and the suffering of the people in
Myanmar, a quick glance at the Security Council's
agenda makes one thing clear - that the world we
committed ourselves to building when we all signed
the Charter of the United Nations is still a long way
off. The situation in Syria has been a stark reminder of
a deep crisis, a protection crisis and a crisis of respect
for the hard-won gains in international law that we have
fought for since the end of the First World War. The
Geneva Conventions, the Charter and the Chemical
Weapons Convention - in Syria, all of those norms
were trampled.

Of course, the primary responsibility for the
protection of its citizens lies with a country itself. But
when it is not able or willing to do so, collective action
should be taken. In that case, says our Charter, the
primary responsibility rests with the Security Council,
especially with those five permanent members to
whom the Charter has granted a special privilege. I am
referring to the veto and to the need to use that special
privilege with the highest degree of responsibility, That
means with maximum restraint.

That has certainly not been the case with regard to
Syria. In the past seven years, the veto has been used 12
times. Twelve times impunity was allowed to become
the new normal. Twelve times innocent Syrian citizens
paid the price.

What would happen if we allowed this privilege
to be used as a licence to kill, as a means to obstruct
justice, as a way to prevent the truth from being told,
as a means to hold hostage those who want to uphold
the principles of the Charter? The Council would force
itself into irrelevance. The rules-based international
order would break down. Laws would again cede to
arms, and we would all lose.

We cannot allow that to happen. In the event of
mass atrocities, a paralysed Security Council cannot
simply be the end of the road. That conviction is widely
shared. It forms the basis of initiatives such as the
French-Mexican initiative and the code of conduct of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which are initiatives supported by a large majority of the
United Nations membership. Today I want to echo and
amplify their message: if and when the Council makes
itself irrelevant by inaction, other avenues will have to
be explored to make sure fundamental international
norms are upheld. In the run-up to the next session of
the General Assembly, we will consult with the group
to explore options to make this principle more concrete.

That brings me to my final point, that is, the
importance of accountability. There can be no lasting
peace without it. Whether in Syria, Libya, Yemen or
elsewhere, fact-finding, investigation and attribution
are essential elements in the accountability chain. They
send a clear message to the victims that justice may not
be swift, but it will, in the end, be done. I will therefore
not stop calling on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
When the Council does become paralysed, we have
to search for alternatives, such as the International
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria.
Today I am proud to announce that we will support the
Mechanism with another €2.5 million, in addition to
the €2.5 million that we contributed earlier. We hope
others will follow our lead.

The development of international law is a job that
is never finished. We must not only work to ensure
respect for existing norms, but also to strengthen
them by writing the next and very necessary chapters.
Standing on the shoulders of great men and women like
Hugo Grotius, Fyodor Fyodorovich Martens, Eleanor
Roosevelt and others, we must put protection up front.
Only in that way will arms be allowed to cede to the
law. Only in that way will peoples' expectations for
justice and humanity finally be met. The Netherlands
stands ready to contribute to attaining that goal, during
and after our Security Council membership.

