Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for convening this important debate. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

We have carefully listened to the statements made
during this important debate, which comes at an
exceptional time, considering the dangerous historical
juncture at which the Middle East has arrived since
many wears. This turning point is characterized by an
unprecedented threat to the security, stability, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries of the region. The
situation is further worsened by the attempts of some
parties to undermine the concept of the nation State
as recognized by international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, including through efforts to
establish sectarian allegiances on doctrinal, racial or
tribal grounds to create zones of influence that serve
the narrow interests of some parties from within and
outside the region.

There is no doubt that the selective manner in which
the Security Council has addressed the key issues ofthe
Middle East, as well as its evident double standards, has
significantly contributed to the degree of deterioration
and instability that the region has reached.

It is not my intention here to separately address
each one of the multitude of crises in the region, since
they are well known to all and are being discussed in
a great amount of detail at the relevant meetings of the
Security Council. In fact, it might be better to utilize
this meeting to assess the situation holistically and
attempt to adopt a comprehensive approach.

Everybody knows that reaching a just and
sustainable solution to the Palestinian question, on the
basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and past agreements, remains the utmost priority and a
necessary condition for achieving peace and security
in the region. The continued occupation and the
persistent unilateral measures that violate international
legitimacy are the most prominent reasons for terrorism
and chaos. Moreover, ignoring the Palestinian question
is helping some parties to exploit it in order to achieve
internal political gains and cover up negative regional
policies. Furthermore, the major international Powers'
blind eye to Israel's refusal to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons makes the
region vulnerable to conflicts, arms races and pretexts
for foreign intervention.

In that context, I would like to highlight an
outstanding model that was set by Egypt after reaching
a peace treaty with Israel, about 40 years ago following
five consecutive wars. Perhaps the first lesson to be
taken from that experience is that peace would not have
been possible without Egypt regaining all of its lands
and the reciprocation of specific political and security
guarantees. That proves that the roots of conflict in the
Middle East are neither religious nor ethnic and that
the Arab-Israeli conflict is, in its essence, a political
one. A sustainable settlement is therefore possible
through just and balanced solutions. In fact, dealing
with this conflict as if it were an inevitable religious
confrontation will only perpetuate it.

The second lesson is that reaching a peace treaty
will not prevent Egypt from continuously striving to
restore the rights of the Palestinian people and support
the liberation of the various occupied Arab territories.
Achieving peace between Egypt and Israel alone is not
enough to establish comprehensive and sustainable
peace. The rest of the occupied Arab territories must
be liberated and the Palestinian people's suffering and
the apartheid that they are facing, which represents
a shameful stain upon the face of humankind, must
be put to an end. The international community and
its institutions have failed for decades to implement
numerous resolutions, whether those related to
Palestine and other occupied Arab territories, or those
on the establishment ofa zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.

The region is witnessing a persistent attack on the
concept of the modern nation State, particularly since
the historic invasion of Iraq in 2003. Furthermore, some
parties are intensifying their systematic efforts to build
networks of doctrinal and ethnic allegiances. Some
States have even engaged in supplying terrorists and
illegal groups with weapons to undermine the authority
of certain Governments and threaten neighbouring
countries, which constitutes a recipe for spreading
chaos, further instability and more conflicts, as well as
a serious threat to security and stability at the regional
and international levels.

The continuation of those policies will definitely
change the current proxy wars, which are exacerbated
by fierce competition among some international and
regional parties over creating zones of influence,
into direct, protracted military confrontations. That
may haunt the future of entire generations of the
region, worsen economic and social crises and the
waves of refugees and displaced people and risk
the sudden turning of some regional conflicts into
global confrontations.

Egypt therefore calls upon all parties to take serious
action to immediately amend those policies and return
to the principles of international law and the Charter,
without any double standards. Egypt is proud of its
honourable track record and its commitment to avoid
initiating aggression or resorting to the use of force,
except in self-defence, or engaging in supporting,
funding or arming terrorist groups, illegal organizations
and secessionist entities with the aim of undermining
the sovereignty of its neighbours or achieving short-
term interests at the expense of stability and security
in the long term.

Furthermore, Egypt demands that other parties
commit to those same principles, in order to
preserve the future of the peoples of the region and
avoid bloodshed. In this regard, the President of Egypt
has on numerous occasions, foremost among which was
that of his statement at the beginning of the seventy-
second session of the General Assembly last September
(see A/72/PV.5), presented Egypt's vision for reaching
a comprehensive and integrated solution to the crises in
the region on the basis of these principles.

There is no doubt that the United Nations remains
the forum most capable of launching effective
international cooperation. In that respect, Egypt
expresses its readiness in principle to consider the
establishment of a mechanism similar to that referred
to in the proposal contained in the concept note
(S/2018/524, annex), submitted by Russia, at this
meeting regarding the launching of a regional and
institutional dialogue similar to the Helsinki Process,
which contributed to creating a stable and sustainable
security architecture in Europe. There is in fact no
alternative to the engagement of the countries of the
region in direct dialogue and negotiations under United
Nations auspices.

As a first step, we propose that the Secretary-
General, given his authority and impartiality, invite the
States ofthe region to a conference, with the participation
of the permanent members of the Security Council, to
negotiate the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which
could pave the way for the design ofa specific work plan
to establish a sustained system of political and security
arrangements that could achieve equal security for all
States in the region without discrimination. This would
in turn allow for all issues in the region to be addressed
in the framework of an integrated package, thereby
creating a climate conducive to confidence-building
and the resolution of existing crises.

Parallel to this negotiating track, there is an urgent
need for all effective regional and international parties
to unconditionally commit themselves to the principles
and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations
and of international law, specifically the following
principles: first, full respect for the sovereignty of
States, refraining from interference in their domestic
affairs under any pretext and refraining from the threat
or use of force; secondly, denouncing and condemning
all forms of terrorism and committing to combating it
by supporting the efforts of the Governments of the
relevant States upon their request; thirdly, denouncing
all sectarian policies, prohibiting any form of support
for illegal groups or organizations and the supply
of weapons to non-State actors without official
authorizations from authorities of the recipient State,
while recognizing the exclusive right of legitimate
Governments to use force in order to enforcing law and
order on their territories; and, fourthly, upholding the
principles of citizenship, equality, the rule of law and
human rights.

The commitment of all parties to those principles
and their engagement in serious negotiations on the
establishment ofan integrated system on the elimination
of weapons ofmass destruction, togetherwith sustainable
and balanced arms-control arrangements, would put an
end to the arms race and address all non-proliferation
concerns in a comprehensive manner. The continued
imbalance in military capabilities does not allow for
an environment conducive to confidence-building and
negotiations on other regional conflicts, in isolation
from this issue, which represents an existential threat
and puts the region at risk of an escalating arms race
and external military intervention.

Finally, we certainly look forward to the
constructive engagement of all parties in a negotiation
process under the auspices of the United Nations,
thereby sparing future generations from the scourge
of wars and destruction. I welcome the Secretary-
General's agenda issued few weeks ago on disarmament,
while expressing his commitment to establishing a
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. This calls for
a clear plan of action to establish such a zone within
a specific time frame, in accordance with the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
which is an integral part of the Treaty's indefinite
extension package.

Many regions of the world have managed to
overcome decades-long wars and conflicts and to
establish sustained peace and cooperation. This would
not have been achievable in the absence of clear rules
for coexistence, cooperation and respect for diversity
and differences. We are confident that the States of the
Middle East can set such rules, and we hope that our
discussion today will set the stage for concrete, practical
and serious steps to be taken in the right direction.

