Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to welcome back Special Representative
lessen-Petersen to the Council and thank him for his
excellent briefing. I would also like to thank Mr. Covic
for joining us here today and for his statement.

We have reached an important milestone in
Kosovo. After six years of working with the people of
Kosovo to establish a stable, multi-ethnic society, the
time has come to step back and assess their progress.

We welcome the Secretary-General's decision to
initiate a comprehensive review this summer of
Kosovo's progress in implementing the United
Nations-endorsed standards, and his intention to
appoint a special envoy to carry out that review. The
review will cover the benchmarks that lay out the path
to a multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous society. It
will provide the basis to judge whether there has been
sufficient progress to justify the start of a political
process to determine Kosovo's final status, which has
remained undetermined during the last six years. The
United States believes that while Kosovo is on the right
track, it still must make a major effort prior to the
comprehensive review to implement the standards.

Nevertheless, we should not take a positive
outcome of the review as a foregone conclusion, nor
should we assume that the subsequent launch of a final
status process will be automatic. Both will depend on
the outcome of the review, and that outcome is in the
hands of Kosovo's leaders, who should continue their
progress in implementing the standards.

Progress is needed on all the standards, but
particular emphasis should be placed on standards
affecting the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo. The
primary test of whether Kosovo has overcome the
tragic problems of the past and matured sufficiently to
allow the start of a final status process will be its
treatment of its minority communities. Effective
reform of local government, or decentralization, will be
a key test in this regard. The early launch of the
already announced pilot projects would help show the
Provisional Institutions' commitment to making
progress in an area of real concern to Kosovo's
minorities and would further the prospects for a
positive review.

With the comprehensive review imminent and the
prospect of final status talks approaching, we also look
to Serbia and Montenegro to engage constructively. We
welcome the preliminary signs that it is doing so.
Belgrade's decision to encourage Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the decentralization working groups is a
welcome step, as is the resumption of direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina on other vital issues,
such as energy, missing persons and transport.

In other areas, however, Belgrade continues to
discourage Kosovo Serbs from returning to their seats
in the Assembly and to their positions in Kosovo's
institutions and political life. This course is counter-
productive to the interests of Serbs in Kosovo. We urge
the Government in Belgrade to actively encourage
Kosovo Serbs to participate fully in all of Kosovo's
political institutions and working groups. Participation
is the most effective means for Kosovo's Serbs to
advance their interests in Kosovo.

The comprehensive review represents an
opportunity not only to address Kosovo's future status
soon; it is also an opportunity for Serbia and
Montenegro to reclaim its rightful place in European
and Euro-Atlantic institutions. We hope Serbia and
Montenegro will seize this opening by engaging
constructively in Kosovo, maintaining a constructive
regional role and fulfilling its commitments to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia.

Finally, as we set out to review Kosovo's
progress, it is appropriate that the United Nations
similarly review its mission in Kosovo to determine
whether it is properly organized and sized to meet the
current challenges. The mission of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
to ultimately work itself out of a job, and as progress is
made in transferring responsibilities to Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions, the size of the UNMIK
presence should be adjusted accordingly.

Again, we would like to salute and thank the
Special Representative for all of his hard work over the
last several months.

Thank you, Mr. Minister. I did not get a chance to
welcome you, but we are very pleased that you are
here.

