Ms. Achouri (Tunisia) (spoke in French): As all
the speakers before me have done, I too wish to thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi for the excellent briefing he
delivered. It was rich in information and full of good
news on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. His briefing focused in particular on recent
important developments since our meeting on 24 July.

I am referring especially to the decision taken at
the preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese
dialogue in Addis Ababa to begin the dialogue next
October at Addis Ababa. That agreement seems to
signal a decisive turning point in the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to augur a
positive outcome for the conflict in that country. All
parties are therefore urged to take concrete measures to
ensure that the dialogue reaches its ultimate goal,
which is the achievement of lasting peace and true
national reconciliation. The Security Council must
support this endeavour and encourage the parties to
embark on this dialogue in the same spirit that
prevailed in Gaborone. That was in fact the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General when
he spoke to the press through his spokesperson, in
response to this important development. The Security
Council must also continue to follow this matter very
closely.

Here, I welcome the initiative of the French
delegation to organize next week, when France holds
the presidency of the Security Council for September, a
meeting with Sir Ketumile Masire, the facilitator of the
inter-Congolese dialogue. We hope that that meeting
will provide an opportunity for the Council to identify
specific ways and means of supporting and
encouraging the dialogue and to make the dynamic of
inter-Congolese peace and reconciliation irreversible.

I would like also to congratulate the Irish
delegation on its initiative in convening the Political
Committee when Ireland holds the presidency of the
Council in October. We believe that these successive
meetings will enable the international community and
the Security Council to shoulder their respective
responsibilities towards the Congolese people and
towards the other peoples and countries of the Great
Lakes region.
However, it must be recognized that the
restoration of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo does not depend solely on the
inter-Congolese dialogue, however crucial it is to
achieving that objective. We welcome the progress
reported today in the area of disengagement and
redeployment.

We also congratulate Namibia and Uganda on the
action they have taken to honour their commitments.
But all parties must honour the entirety of the
commitments they made in the Lusaka Agreement, the
Kampala disengagement plan and the Harare sub-plans.
They must also fully abide by the resolutions of the
Security Council. Kisangani must be demilitarized in
keeping with resolution 1304 (2000). In that regard, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic (RDC-G)
must meet the Council's demands without precondition
or delay.

The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) of armed
groups remains the core issue and will determine
progress in other areas. This is a fact that the
Secretary-General pointed out to the Council on 24
July. We are disappointed that little real action has been
taken to date in this area. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to state that it would have preferred that the
initiative by the representatives of countries members
of the Council with Presidents Kabila and Kagame on
the DDRRR programme had been more conclusive.
However, we hope that the Secretary-General's visit,
which will include the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, will make it possible to re-
establish direct contact between the leaders of those
two countries, and that it will mark the beginning of
true cooperation towards a political framework,
something that is essential to implementing the
DDRRR programme.

As the Secretary-General stated at our meeting
on 24 July, the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is not yet irreversible. Major
challenges remain for the United Nations and for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ngongi - whom we take this opportunity to wish
every success. The challenges facing him and the
United Nations - both the Secretariat and the Security
Council - are daunting.

My delegation welcomes the current efforts by
the Secretariat and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) to pave the way for a transition to the third
phase of the Mission's deployment, a very important
phase during which MONUC will require all the
resources necessary to carry out the very complex and
often dangerous tasks that have been assigned to it. We
eagerly await the report on this issue to be submitted in
the near future by the Secretary-General. My
delegation will support any useful recommendations
that the Secretary-General might make in this regard.

The effective, full and speedy withdrawal of
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo also remains essential. The
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the other
wealth of the country must stop as soon as possible.
Above all else, the Congolese parties must embark on a
dialogue in the best possible frame of mind and without
any external interference. As the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel
Morjane, has stressed, the countries concerned must
demonstrate firm political will and commitment to
reconcile their security concerns and the need for
regional stability with the basic need to restore the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That seems to us to
be the only way to establish peaceful coexistence,
cooperation and development for the peoples of the
region, who have for so long been deprived of the
peace and security to which they are entitled. We urge
all parties concerned to face that fact.

