Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing. Time and time again, we have voiced
our despair at the depth of the suffering of the people
of South Sudan. The scale of the numbers is deeply
shocking: one third of the population has been forced
to flee their homes and more than half the population
lacks enough food to feed themselves and their
families. Yet the parties to the conflict, including the
Government, continue to mount offensives against
innocent civilians. They are deaf to the misery of
their own people. It is more important than ever that
the international community show the people of South
Sudan that we will act together to work for peace, even
if South Sudan's leaders will not.

Innocent civilians continue to pay the price for
the failures of the political elite. President Kiir's long-
overdue decree ordering safe passage for humanitarian
agencies is welcome. We hope that that will result in
real improvements in getting assistance to those who so
desperately need it, as physical restrictions - whether
resolved or not - represent just the tip of the iceberg
of the bureaucratic impediments, including the cost
of registration fees and delays in receiving permits,
which prevent humanitarians from reaching those most
in need.

Like others, we are extremely concerned that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
continues to face significant restrictions of movement,
including restrictions imposed by Government forces.
We are particularly troubled by a disturbing trend of
harassment, threats and physical assault on United
Nations staff. That must stop immediately. Those
responsible will be judged by their actions, not
their words.

South Sudan is at a crossroads: its leaders are being
offered a last chance to commit to peace and demonstrate
that they care for their people and for their country,
which they have repeatedly failed to do. Too many times
ceasefires have been declared while gunshots continue
to ring out, but the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) revitalization forum offers hope
for the people of South Sudan. I would like to reiterate

the United Kingdom's full support for that process and
to thank both IGAD and the African Union for their
hard work over recent months.

IGAD Foreign Ministers and the Special Envoy
have actively reached out to both the elites and civil
society across the region as part of their revitalization
process. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the region's work to bring an end to the conflict and
suffering in South Sudan, and we welcome the African
Union Peace and Security Council's clearly worded
communique of 22 September.

The international community must use the full range
of options to ensure that all the parties meaningfully
and constructively engage. That cannot be an open-
ended process that allows more delays, leading to more
suffering for the people of South Sudan. As the African
Union communique' of 20 September states, it must
be clear that this is a final chance and that there will
be consequences for not engaging. As a Council, we
should commit to return to this issue early in the new
year in order to consider whether we have seen enough
progress and whether there are individuals or parties
that are blocking peace, and we should be ready to take
appropriate action if so.

Given the fragile situation in South Sudan, we are
concerned that the Government is considering holding
elections next year. There is no possibility that the
conditions for good elections will be in place next
year. Seeking to hold them when the conditions are not
right is likely to drive further conflict. As the African
Union and IGAD have stated, the timelines in the peace
agreement must be revised to allow for a conducive
environment for holding elections. The national
dialogue must be held in support of the revitalization
of the peace agreement - it cannot provide a solution
in itself.

I want to conclude by reiterating our plea to the
leaders of South Sudan to stop the violence and to
engage meaningfully in the revitalization process,
to stop blocking and impeding UNMISS and the
Regional Protection Force, to stop attacks against
United Nations and humanitarian workers and to stop
denying humanitarian aid from reaching their people,
whom they are starving to death. South Sudan is at a
crossroads, and we should do all that we can to support
the region's efforts to ensure its leaders choose the
right path.

