I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today's open debate on the issue of global governance after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and for providing us with an opportunity to build on the discussions held during the past months, including during the German presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their insightful briefings. We are at a critical moment for the rules-based multilateral order. We need to refocus on the positive potential of cooperation instead of on putting our own countries first. If one of us fails, we all fail. We need to cooperate across our regions and continents if we want to successfully fight today's problems. In order to mitigate and prevent the heavy impact of global crises such as COVID-19, strong institutions and multilateral cooperation are needed. We must ensure the vitality of those institutions. Reform is an important aspect of these efforts. The founding principles of the United Nations need to be upheld, including the Charter's call on all Members of the Organization to refrain from the threat of the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. Many of the Charter's principles are timeless. At the same time, we must not be complacent; we need to be innovative so that our institutions are capable of tackling today's challenges. The Security Council has a central role to play in bringing to life the value of international cooperation. As we all know, the Charter endows the Council with special stature, powers and responsibilities. Its functioning is essential not just for its own reputation but for the reputation of the United Nations overall. The Council has lost trust because it was not able to find clear words on a joint approach to COVID-19 over a period of months, and to date progress in implementing resolution 2532 (2020) has been insufficient. Let me be very clear: when the Council is exclusively seen as a gallery for the great Powers, we all lose. It is up to all of us, permanent members and elected members alike, to keep the Security Council relevant and functional. It has become glaringly obvious: the Council needs to be reformed. Only then can we ensure its authority and legitimacy. Mention has been made of the World Health Organization (WHO), which is a central coordinating element of the multilateral system. Comprehensive global health protection, including pandemic preparedness and response, is possible only if WHO is strengthened in a sustainable manner. We should see the COVID-19 pandemic as an opportunity to address existing challenges for WHO in general and in the area of health protection in particular. At the moment, our expectations exceed the capacities of WHO. Innovation is also needed when it comes to dealing with emerging threats to international peace and security. We must do more on crisis prevention and on how to address catalysts of conflict such as human rights violations, the effects of climate change and threats to global health. We need to advance a more preventive agenda. And of course, for Germany, the future of multilateralism also requires a strong role for the European Union (EU). As the EU, we have taken some important steps in the response to the pandemic. We set up the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator together with civil society partners. We launched the Coronavirus Global Response initiative. Germany has been at the forefront of the global fight against the pandemic, showing solidarity through practical support and as a donor. Rest assured that we will continue to do so. Germany unequivocally supports the United Nations and advocates a joint approach for the international community in tackling global challenges. That is our only chance of success. Through the framework of the Alliance for Multilateralism, we seek to enhance the search for joint solutions. We strive to support the existing multilateral framework when it is challenged. Tomorrow, at the invitation of Foreign Minister Heiko Maas, foreign ministers will meet under the theme "Our Commitment and Contribution to Building Back Better", where initiatives in the fields of climate change and health among others will be presented. Let me conclude by reaffirming that my country is convinced that in this interconnected world, multilateral cooperation is the foundation of peace, security, prosperity, equality and justice. To uphold and strengthen this multilateral order, we have to nurture it and invest in it. We have to invest in its legitimacy.
