Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): As the
Council knows, the Ukrainians are very patient people.
We always find a way to agree. But in order to agree,
there must be stability. In order to achieve stability,
there cannot be a fuelling of instability. I asked many
times what hundreds of armed Chechens were doing in
Ukraine. What was their purpose? Had they come to to
protect Ukrainian orthodoxy, or Slav ethnicity? I asked
why hundreds of Cossacks in Crimea had come to
destabilize the situation. That does not help us to resolve
the issue but destabilizes the situation. Moreover,
they are not hiding that or concealing who they are.
I wondered what the Wolves Centurion, which was
established in the 1950s and then formed the Cossack
corpus of the Nazi Special Service, had come to do.
To fight the fascists - those who themselves support
Nazism? It is not very clear. It is unclear to us all what
may happen if suddenly citizens of another country
appear in our country. A group of 200 people gathered
in the streets, calling itself a people's republic and
saying that they would lead it. That is what happened
in Donetsk. A Russian citizen called himself Prime
Minister. What does that help? Does it foster dialogue?
Clearly not.

So today, when our sides have at least exchanged
some views and if we see that there may be a solution as
a result ofa bilateral dialogue, we need to find a way to
speak to those people. Why should Russia not also speak
to them? Why does Russia not explain to them what it
is doing in their country? It could be called mercenary
activities rather than assistance. That is fuelling the
flames of separatism, and it has continued for a long
time. It is true that the Government did not do anything
for 20 years to resolve the difficulties of the region. It
is true that it is a depressed region, where there are no
jobs. It is true that a State policy should address that.
That has been said. However, it is necessary to assist
and not seek to destabilize the situation.

