Mr. Toole: On behalf of Ms. Carol Bellamy, let
me join others in thanking you, Mr. President, your
Foreign Minister and your delegation for the expert
way in which you have handled these deliberations. In
addition, I thank the delegation of France for its
preparation of the draft resolution.

We welcome today's action-oriented discussion
and support very warmly the era of application about
which members have spoken. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, he is the
person here; we are the people on the ground. As Ms.
Bellamy noted in her briefing, we are on the ground
before, during and after conflicts, and it is partly our
job to make sure that some of the comments and
observations that have been made today are followed
up on the ground.

We were very pleased by the strong support for a
strengthened system of monitoring and reporting, as
requested even this morning in Ms. Bellamy's briefing.
The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
currently documents and reports on the situation of
women and children in all countries where we work, so
to add the issue of children and armed conflict has been
a major priority for us for the past 10 years. We
appreciate the interest of the Security Council in this
area, and we shall continue to do more in that regard.
Together with our partners, we shall develop
monitoring mechanisms at the country and field levels,
and we are also examining effective structures in order
to feed into appropriate forums such as the Security
Council, but also regional forums in which members
take part elsewhere.

I would also underline - as did the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General - that it is
important to note the various kinds of monitoring and
reporting that take place. Our aim is to feed into
existing human rights and other mechanisms to ensure
that children's rights and particular information on
those rights are reflected. That is the mandate of
UNICEF, and that is what we shall continue to do.

UNICEF is also very pleased to hear of the strong
support for child protection advisers. We strongly
support their work in the four peacekeeping missions
where they are deployed. They serve an important
function in relation to, first, capacity-building within
the missions themselves, and secondly, monitoring
reporting within the mandates of peacekeeping
missions. In addition, they allow the situation of
children to be addressed within the complete
peacekeeping operation itself and report back to
Council meetings. As Ms. Bellamy mentioned, we
would support deploying child protection advisers in
all peacekeeping missions.

Moreover, we were very pleased with the strong
support for efforts to support disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). We are
encouraged by the Council's interest in more sustained
DDR programmes. It is important that the DDR process
be automatically included in peacekeeping mandates.
As I mentioned, we are an operational agency. We
work with non-governmental organizations and other
agencies of the United Nations system on the ground,
and we shall strengthen our efforts to protect children,
to prevent their recruitment and to support their
reintegration once they have been demobilized.

There is also a need to ensure that the lessons
learned and the principles that come out of the DDR
process are endorsed once and for all. In that sense, we
believe that the demobilization of soldiers - as we said
this morning - should not wait for peace, for formal
DDR or for the required resources to be made
available. We would also underline that we recognize
that girls are particularly vulnerable and that they are
also recruited as child soldiers. They need specific
attention and assistance to be reintegrated. UNICEF is
also engaged in extensive dialogue with our partners,
and with partners to conflict, to ensure the release of
children from combat as quickly as possible.

We are pleased that a very large number of
representatives supported the list of countries -
including an updated list and an expanded list - on an
annual basis, including parties to conflicts who recruit
child soldiers. It is an important tool for advocacy and
an important tool at the field level that we can use
when we return to the country level.

Finally, we are very pleased with the strong
support for action to prevent conflict. It is only when
we prevent conflict that we can truly protect children
against the recruitment, exploitation and abuse linked
to armed conflict. UNICEF is working at the country
level and with partners at the global level to promote
the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

As stated by many delegations, our future is our
children. UNICEF will continue to intensify its work
with all members here and to strengthen the protection
of children in armed conflict.

