Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to join others in condemning the recent attacks in the Niger and in expressing our deep condolences to the Governments of the Niger and France and the families of the victims. I would like to thank Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), for her comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and Mr. Joao Genesio de AlmeidaFilho, Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil, on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their contributions. I also welcome the representative of Guinea-Bissau to this meeting. We join other Member States in expressing concern about the deteriorating security and humanitarian situations in Guinea-Bissau. We are worried about the potential risk of a resurgence of drug trafficking and organized crime in the country. We believe that maintaining unity and reconciliation is the only viable path for ensuring the stability and development of Guinea-Bissau. We commend the mediation efforts of the United Nations, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the group of five and other international partners to bring peace, stability and security to Guinea-Bissau. Without such efforts, the Bissau-Guinean people would have experienced more tension and unrest. Due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Guinea-Bissau is coping with many challenges, especially the fragility of its health-care system, food insecurity and malnutrition. According to the World Food Programme (WFP), about 63 per cent of households in Guinea-Bissau have reportedly experienced food shortages, and 80 per cent have met with difficulties in accessing markets due to the curfew, the lack of transportation or fear of infection. Around 180,000 children are not able to receive school meals because of the closure of schools. The situation could be aggravated by the negative impact of the fight against COVID-19. We welcome the international efforts of UNICEF, the WFP, the United Nations Development Programme and the International Organization for Migration in providing support for the authorities of Guinea-Bissau in creating and strengthening relevant mechanisms to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and develop pandemic risk-communication strategies, national contingency plans and funding the mobilization strategy. We note the challenges that the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) is facing in implementing its mandate under resolution 2512 (2020) and the United Nations transitional process ahead of the withdrawal and closure of UNIOGBIS by 31 December. In that regard, we would like to make the following points. First, we urge all parties to work together to narrow their differences, promote national reconciliation, consolidate government and ensure the effective functioning of institutions, while addressing political and socioeconomic challenges. Secondly, we call on the President of the country, the Government, Members of Parliament and all concerned parties to work in a collaborative manner to enact the critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry Agreement, the Stability Pact and the ECOWAS road map. It is also important to focus on the implementation of the reform agenda, in line with the ECOWAS decision of 20 April. We also welcome the proposal by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to establish a high-level platform to accompany the reform agenda. Thirdly, we stress the importance of enhancing the fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime and strengthening cooperation with the United Nations, particularly UNODC, and other partners in addressing the challenges. We emphasize the importance of the participation of women and youth in all decision-making processes. We also call on the United Nations, ECOWAS and the international partners to further provide substantial support and assistance to Guinea-Bissau so that essential aid can be delivered to those who need it. Last but not least, we reiterate our support for the full implementation of resolution 2512 (2020). We call on the United Nations, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Government of Guinea-Bissau to work closely together in implementing the transfer of the mandate from UNIOGBIS to UNOWAS and its drawdown plan and closure by 31 December.
