Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
just now.

At the outset, let me express my condolences
to the Government and the people of Iran following
the terrible attacks yesterday. In recent weeks, the
United Kingdom has stood firm through senseless
terrorist atrocities that targeted innocent people in
Manchester and London. These attacks show the worst
of humankind. They seek to intimidate us, to divide us
and to undermine our resolve. They fail every time. In
response, ordinary people show the best of humankind.
In the United Kingdom, we witnessed the men and
women of our emergency services, as well as members
of the public, show the greatest courage, even risking
their own lives to protect others from attack.

The Council has a duty now to show the same
courage, the same resolve as those ordinary men and
women in the face of such brutality. That is why the
United Kingdom is playing a leading role in the Global
Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant. Our collective efforts are bearing fruit. Da'esh
has lost over two-thirds of the ground it once occupied
in Iraq and nearly half of that held in Syria. More than
2.5 million people have now been freed from their
tyrannical rule.

Make no mistake - we are defeating Da'esh on
the ground. In Iraq, Mosul will soon be liberated. The
Iraqi security forces, with the support of the Coalition,
have successfully isolated Da'esh to a final holdout in
west Mosul. Thanks to the valiant efforts of the Iraqi
security forces, people are already starting to return
to their homes in liberated areas. In Syria, operations
against Raqqa have now begun. It is only a matter of
time before Da'esh loses its so-called capital.

But, ultimately, degrading Da'esh effectively
will take time, patience and sustained effort from the
international community, including the Council. It is
an effort that goes far beyond military support and
that is why the Global Coalition is supporting the
Government of Iraq to restore security, governance and
basic services across Iraq. Helping people rebuild their
lives is the first step to winning the peace. To counter
the longer-term threat of Da'esh, Iraqis need political
reconciliation and reform, and in Syria, we need to
see a long-overdue national political settlement and a
transition to a Government for all Syrians.

The threat we face is changing. As we successfully
degrade Da'esh in Syria and Iraq, we have seen its
propaganda promote attacks elsewhere across the
world. We have seen individuals inspired by these calls
carryout careless attacks in the name of Da'esh. As it
loses its caliphates, we are seeing its fighters flee. We
must work together to deprive Da'esh of safe spaces
across the world, tackling the threat of foreign fighters
travelling to new havens or returning to home countries.

We must also bring an end to their havens online.
The pervasive spread of Islamist extremism online has
gone on for too long. As one of the leads on the counter-
Da'esh communications effort and, in partnership
with Coalition countries, the United Kingdom has
successfully diminished the quantity, but also the
quality and the impact of that hateful propaganda. We
are working with the industry so that, together, we take
a more proactive approach to terrorist and extremist
content online. Engagement so far has resulted in
companies strengthening their terms and conditions
and the announcement of a shared database that will
catalogue known terrorist content from the Internet.
We have also seen a public commitment from Google,
Facebook, Twitter and Microsoft to look at options
for establishing an international industry-led forum
focused on this issue. There is much more to be done, so
let us call on industry to do the right thing and remove
hateful extremist content from its platforms.

Finally, if we are to defeat Da'esh, we must hold it
to account for its actions, whether online or in the real
world, and seekjustice for all Da'esh victims around the
world. That is why the United Kingdom has launched
a United Nations-led global campaign to bring Da'esh
to justice that will show that Da'esh cannot act with
impunity. It will act as a deterrent, both now and in
the future, and help to strengthen global security. Time
is of the essence. It is vital that we act now. We must
start gathering evidence before it is lost or destroyed on
the battlefield.

I therefore welcome the discussions we have had
with the Government of Iraq on this issue and the
significant statement by Prime Minister Al Abadi
calling, at the end of March, for "the United Nations
Security Council to issue a resolution to prosecute
Da'esh's crimes against civilians". We believe the
United Kingdom's proposal is the clear way forward
for the Council to answer Prime Minister Al Abadi's
call and we look forward to working with our Iraqi
colleagues so that the proposal can be finalized as soon
as possible.

