Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
Ambassador Colin Keating for their statements.

Twenty years ago, despite numerous warnings,
the States Members of the United Nations, and in
particular of the Security Council, were not been able
to take decisive measures that would have put an end
to the spread of ethnic hatred or to prevent genocide.
As my Minister of Foreign and European Affairs did in
Kigali on 7 April, I wish to pay tribute to the hundreds
of thousands of Victims of genocide. I also pay tribute
to the strength and determination of Rwandans who
were able to rebuild their lives and their country after
their terrible ordeal. Our meeting today will not restore
life to the more than 800,000 massacred Rwandans or
lessen the pain of the survivors, but it is an opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to applying the lessons
of the past in order to prevent such atrocities from
happening in the future.

The genocide in Rwanda unleashed a shock
wave that rocked the entire United Nations. It raised
fundamental questions about the authority and
responsibility of the Security Council, the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping, the scope of
international justice, the roots of violence and the
responsibility of the international community to protect
endangered populations from genocide. I shall focus on
two points: the responsibility to protect and the fight
against impunity.

The 1994 genocide highlighted the need for the
United Nations to strengthen its capacity to respond
to serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and to give greater attention to the
prevention of mass atrocities. It was a catalyst to the
development of the principle of the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. This principle,
which Luxembourg fully supports, was endorsed by the
2005 World Summit. Since then, the Security Council
has invoked the responsibility to protect several
times, most recently in South Sudan, Yemen, Mali
and the Central African Republic. The Council must
continue on this path and embody the principle of the
responsibility to protect in all its dimensions.

Luxembourg also reaffirms its full support for the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
for the Prevention of Genocide and its early warning
role. On our initiative, the Special Adviser was able
to speak for the first time before the Security Council
at its open meeting on 22 January (see S/PV.7098) to
sound the alarm about the Central African Republic.
Indeed, we must pay special attention to forewarnings
of atrocities, in a logic of prevention. Sustained efforts
are needed to end incitement to hatred and intolerance.
The implementation of the Rights Up Front initiative,
launched by the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General in December 2013, will also
contribute to strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations and the Council to respond in a timely manner.

Over the past 20 years, the Security Council has
come to recognize that the fight against impunity is
essential to preventing further genocide and to bringing
justice to victims. Created on 8 November 1994 at the
request of Rwanda, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) has played a crucial role. While the
ICTR is about to conclude its work and its transition to
the Residual Mechanism is in progress, we welcome the
significant progress made by the ICTR in developing
international law to bring justice to victims, apprehend
fugitives and prosecute persons responsible for
genocide and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

The ICTR has been a source of inspiration to
national and international courts, and in particular in
the creation of the International Criminal Court. Mass
atrocities committed in recent decades have shown
that it was imperative to create a permanent court with
universal vocation to end impunity for the most serious
crimes. It is more important than ever that the Council
fulfils its responsibilities to end impunity, including
by providing unfailing support to the International
Criminal Court.

This commemoration of the Rwandan genocide,
a moment of reflection and pain, is also a moment of
inspiration to action. We must act to prevent genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Whether for
Syria, South Sudan or the Central African Republic, we
must do our all to ensure that the Security Council lives
up to its responsibilities. Our goal must be to translate
the moral imperative of "never again" into action. The
unanimous adoption this morning of resolution 2150
(2014), drafted by Rwanda, impels us to do so. Let us
comply in honour ofthe victims ofthe past and to protect
future generations from the scourge of genocide.

