Mr. Beras Hernandez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we extend our
condolences to the people of Tunisia following the
death of their President. We would also like to extend
our sympathy to the Afghan family following the recent
attacks in Kabul.

I thank Ms. Mohammed, Ms. DiCarlo and
Ms. Afghani for their briefings.

In a timely and hopeful rapprochement exercise,
Afghan and Taliban political leaders met in Qatar a
few days ago and called for a reduction in violence. We
welcome that peace initiative by international actors.

We are encouraged by the positive feedback from
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo about her visit to
Afghanistan. The fact that she has seen progress in
the level of women's participation and leadership
they have assumed in decision-making processes is a
source of satisfaction. In addition, the Informal Expert
Group on Women, Peace and Security recently met
to discuss the situation of women, together with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and the United Nations country team,
which allowed us to reaffirm that it is vital to guarantee
women's participation in the September elections and at
the negotiating table to address the future of the country.

We highlight the resilience of Afghan women, who,
even in a hostile environment plagued by inequality,
have advanced and overcome significant obstacles.
We believe that it is urgent to put an end to sexual and
gender-based violence in Afghanistan, as it affects
the dignity, health and well-being of Afghan women.
We encourage the authorities to promote substantive
actions that prohibit it and to independently investigate
and bring to justice those responsible.

We applaud the development of the second phase of
the 2019-2022 National Action Plan on Resolution 1325
(2000): Women, peace and security and eagerly await
its early completion. We urge the Government and the
Taliban to integrate the meaningful participation of
Afghan women into the dialogue for peace.

Afghanistan is at a turning point with its elections
and peace negotiations. All efforts to enable the
Afghan people to escape instability and violence must
be exhausted. It is our duty to help them in a process
that must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led, with
the participation of all actors in society, in particular
women and young people.

