Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I wish to begin by expressing our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report and for his introduction of
it today. I also wish to commend the work of the Office of
the Iraq Programme and to pay tribute to all its personnel
working in Iraq in very difficult conditions.

The report of the Secretary-General, which is based on
a broad range of facts, shows clearly that the scale of the
humanitarian catastrophe in Iraq is inexorably leading to the
disintegration of the very fabric of civil society there. The
economic consequences of the many years of sanctions
have been reflected in all aspects of the lives of the people
of the country. The total impoverishment of the
population - which obviously falls short of generally
recognized health standards - serious employment
problems, the impossibility of having a normally
functioning educational system and other problems have led
to a situation where an entire generation of Iraqis has been
physically and morally crippled. They are in essence
outcasts of the world community.

The industrial infrastructure of Iraq has been damaged,
including the water supply and the energy and
communications sectors. The few remaining means of
transportation cannot provide for the sustainable distribution
of food and medicine. The epidemiological situation in the
country poses a threat on a regional scale. Mortality rates
among the most vulnerable groups of the population have
reached threatening proportions, as stated in the reports of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).

A more detailed picture of the situation is provided
by many publications and by the evaluations of people
who work, or have worked, directly in Iraq. Like other
members of the Security Council, I believe, I have
received a letter from Mr. Dennis Halliday, who used to
be the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq. Although he
has retired, he still continues to draw attention to the
tragic situation in that country. Under those conditions,
the steps being taken in the framework of the United
Nations humanitarian programme can barely ensure the
physical survival of the people, although, on the whole,
the programme is the only lifeline making it possible not
to break ties with the outside world.

As members are aware, the main pillar of the Iraqi
economy is the extraction and export of oil. A reduction
or suspension in oil exports could lead to even more dire
humanitarian consequences. We agree with the Secretary-
General's assessment, based on the views of the group of
oil experts that visited Iraq, of the catastrophic state of
the oil infrastructure in Iraq. One of the reasons for this
is the lack of spare parts needed for the rehabilitation of
Iraq's oil industry.

It is gratifying that the Security Council is finally
prepared to respond to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and to double the financial resources
being allocated to Iraq to buy spare parts and equipment
for its oil industry. We hope that the appropriate decision
will be taken in the coming days. It is important,
however, that the new sum to be endorsed - that is,
$600 million every six months - really gets to Iraq and
that the contracts for spare parts and equipment not be
blocked in the sanctions Committee, otherwise there
would be no point to that decision.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that according to Secretariat data there are now many
contracts for spare parts on hold in the sanctions
Committee - specifically $43 million for phase IV, $125
million for phase V and $174 million for phase VI. I
therefore would like to reiterate that, apart from the fact
that we are doubling the sum allowed for buying spare
parts and equipment, we should also draw attention to the
problem of the holds in the sanctions Committee.

We take note of the fact that the Secretariat has
prepared draft procedures for the work of the group of oil
experts, whose duties will include the approval of
contracts for the export to Iraq of spare parts and
equipment. We expect the sanctions Committee to endorse
those procedures very soon.

 

Much also remains to be done for the practical
implementation of other measures envisaged under the
humanitarian part of resolution 1284 (1999). Almost four
months after its adoption, we must note that the
implementation of those measures has been slow, to put it
mildly. This involves primarily speeding up and simplifying
procedures for the consideration and endorsement of
humanitarian contracts. We deem it necessary to reach
agreement on the classification of humanitarian goods in the
medical and agricultural sectors as soon as possible.
Requests for the delivery of such goods to Iraq would be
approved bypassing the sanctions Committee.

We also call on the Secretary-General and all
interested parties to work out practical measures as soon as
possible to utilize cash components in Iraq to buy goods
and train local staff.

We agree with the concerns repeatedly expressed by
the Secretary-General about the fact that certain problems
have not yet been resolved, such as shifting unused
resources from the 13 per cent account to the 53 per cent
account under joint purchases of food and medication. We
believe that the sanctions Committee should work more
actively in order to minimize the time needed to implement
all procedures regulating the implementation of the
humanitarian operation. There are also some shortcomings
in the work of experts from the Saybolt Company and
Cotecna, as well as the Banque nationale de Paris, who do
not always carry out quickly the necessary measures,
something that is crucial to ensuring the uninterrupted
delivery of goods to Iraq.

The blocking by certain delegations of humanitarian
contracts in the sanctions Committee continues to pose a
serious threat to the implementation of the humanitarian
programme. I have already spoken of holds being placed on
contracts for spare parts, a problem that is also typical in
the case of humanitarian goods. According to Secretariat
data, in the Committee to date humanitarian contracts are
being blocked to the tune of $1,747 million. Completely
artificial pretexts are trumped up in order to place on hold
contracts to deliver acutely needed equipment to rehabilitate
electrical power stations, medical equipment, vehicular
transport and communications resources.

The situation with regard to holds is obviously
artificial in nature. This is borne out by the fact that
contracts from certain countries are put on hold, whereas
requests for deliveries of similar goods from other countries
are endorsed without any problem. Continuing this practice
devalues any efforts the United Nations is proposing to
make to ease the consequences of the humanitarian crisis
in Iraq. We call upon the delegations concerned to review
their approach and fully implement the deliveries
contained in Security Council resolutions.

Today we cannot fail to react to another problem
that has been pointed out. The socio-economic and
humanitarian situation in Iraq is worsening because
civilian facilities in Iraq are constantly the targets of air
strikes by the United States and Great Britain. This is
happening in the so-called no-flight zones established
unilaterally, without the United Nations taking any
decision, and which encompass almost 65 per cent of
Iraq' s territory.

Our data show that United States and United
Kingdom aircraft invaded Iraqi airspace nearly 20,000
times between December 1998 and mid-March 2000. We
are particularly concerned about reports of strikes against
facilities that are being used in the United Nations
humanitarian operation, in particular against food-
distribution warehouses and against metering stations
along oil pipelines.

According to these analyses, 42 per cent of these air
strikes have resulted in human casualties. Over the past
year, 144 innocent civilians have died and 466 people
have been wounded as a result of these air strikes. Our
data show that 57 people have been killed and 133
wounded in southern Iraq, and that 87 people have been
killed and 313 wounded in the north. Claims that these
strikes were not directed against civilian targets do not
hold water. Facts - including facts from international
experts - attest to the contrary. Nor does the notion that
these air strikes were in retaliation for actions by Iraqi
anti-aircraft defences hold water: our data show that
facilities unrelated to anti-aircraft defence systems are
being hit.

The bombs endanger United Nations personnel, who
in a number of cases had to be evacuated from the areas
where they were working because of the air strikes. We
consider that the air strikes, along with actions,
circumventing the Security Council, to undermine the
Iraqi regime, create a very negative political backdrop for
efforts to speedily resume cooperation between the United
Nations and Baghdad, including in the area of
disarmament. I believe it is inadmissible to call upon Iraq
to cooperate while at the same continuing to bomb Iraqi
territory. In those circumstances, it is hardly likely that it
will be possible to deploy a new disarmament monitoring
system in Iraq - something that is crucial to implement

 

the decisions of the Security Council and to ensure that Iraq
no longer poses a threat to regional peace and security and
that it will not in the future resume its programme of
weapons of mass destruction.

The humanitarian programme, for all the importance
we attach to it, cannot radically change the situation; at
best, it has limited effects. We are convinced that there can
be no significant improvement in the humanitarian and
socio-economic situation in Iraq under the sanctions regime.
There is only one way out of this impasse, as the Council
agrees: sanctions must be suspended in the context of a
resumption of disarmament monitoring in Iraq in keeping
with resolution 1284 (1999).
In connection with the humanitarian programme, we
must not forget that, ultimately, only comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1284 (1999) can prevent the
disintegration of civil society in Iraq. How, specifically, we
implement the disarmament part of that resolution - and
what political backdrop will be created for that
implementation - will to a great extent determine the
solution of other problems we are currently discussing.

