Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi: (Mr. President, in your opening remarks you mentioned, among other things,
that stability, development and economic growth in
Africa are a high priority of the foreign policy of your
country. As an African, I should like to say that we can
attest to that; it is an indisputable fact. We commend
you highly on your initiative to visit the East African
subregion to bring us firsthand information on the new
developments taking place there. Your thoughtful and
substantive briefing and views are particularly timely
in view of the arrival and deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
peacekeeping troops. Let me also take this opportunity
to express my delegation's best wishes to the newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Legwaila Joseph Legwaila.

We in the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) are proud that one of us has been
charged with helping to restore peace and stability in
another region. We wish to stress the need for the
continuous and comprehensive implementation of
Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July
2000, which established UNMEE, as well as of other
relevant resolutions.

It is our firm hope that the commitment of the
parties to the agreement on cessation of hostilities will
allow the people of Ethiopia and Eritrea, who have
been subjected to the horrors of war, to enjoy peace
and security. Distrust, in our View, played a major part
in causing this conflict. Therefore, any confidence-
building measures which can be adhered to by the
parties will boost implementation of resolution 1312
(2000) and enhance further the peace between these
two neighbouring countries. It is in this context that we
view the confidence-building measures you have put
forward, Mr. President.

We know that the humanitarian situation is
deplorable, even under normal circumstances, due to,
among other things, the adverse climate in this region.
In addition, landmines pose a serious challenge to
security and to developmental activities. Therefore,
demining activities in the temporary security zones and
adjacent areas are crucial, and international assistance
is essential. It is our hope that the task of international
humanitarian workers will be facilitated so as to most
effectively alleviate the hardships suffered by those in
need.

We call on the two Governments to ensure the
protection of all international personnel. Their presence
in the area is a measure for building confidence
between the two sides in support of the peace process.

Today's briefing is taking place a few days after
the General Assembly's deliberations on the item on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity. It is in this context that
we view the importance and significance of
coordination and cooperation between the Security
Council and the OAU.

Finally, may I take this opportunity to place on
record our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to
your delegation for affording the wider membership of
the United Nations an opportunity to participate in the
Council's meetings. That in itself underscores the
importance you attach to transparency in the Security
Council's deliberations.

In conclusion, my delegation commends you, Sir,
for having, during your presidency, devoted
deliberations to burning African issues.

