Mr. Moallim: I am very honoured and humbled to
be among the invited briefers and to have been given
this opportunity to address the Security Council as a
representative of civil society in Somalia. My name
is Osman Moallim. I am the Chairperson of Somali

Non-State Actors and the Executive Director of
Somalia Youth Development Network. I want to begin
by thanking the Council for giving me the opportunity
to address its members as the Chair of Somali
Non-State Actors. I also want to stress the importance
of this opportunity to represent Somalia's civil society.
It means a lot for civil society, not only because it
encourages inclusivity, but also because it empowers
the vital role of Somalian civil society in achieving a
stable and progressive governance system in Somalia. I
would like to take this opportunity not only to indicate
our concerns but to strongly express our gratitude to
the international community and the Security Council
for their commitment to supporting the Somali people
in their time of need.

Somalia is certainly a work in progress and is
coming of age in terms of recovering from conflict,
transforming society and improving security and the
functionality of its regional and federal State institutions,
as Special Representative Swan made clear in August
in his remarks to the Security Council on the situation
in Somalia (see S/PV.8601). However, Somalia's
progress is reaching a precarious crossroads, where if
it takes the wrong road by postponing or cancelling the
upcoming election, it will undoubtedly compromise
years of international and Somali peacebuilding and
State-building efforts. On the other hand, by taking the
right road it can indeed further solidify and enhance
the gains made so far. The right road for Somalia now
is to organize the anticipated 2020-2021 elections in
a free, fair and inclusive manner. Credible elections
will provide a foundation for the country to address
all of its other pressing issues, such as the economy,
ensuring a peaceful society and security, so as to enable
it to make improvements on the political, economic and
social fronts.

Frankly, there are many challenges to transforming
the vision of universal elections in 2020 and 2021 into
reality. The time for organizing them is limited, as they
are to be held a year from now. There are concerns
about a lack of clarity among key stakeholders on
the progress that has been made towards making the
elections a reality. There is also a strong feeling among
stakeholders that the Federal Government and the
federal member states are remaining silent on such
important national issues as the electoral process, the
completion of the critical electoral law and amendments
to the Constitution regarding the election process
and policies envisaged, such as the electoral dispute
resolution mechanism, which have yet to be finalized.

As a civil-society organization, we have reviewed
the situation and provided our recommendations to the
Government and the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We have made it clear that notwithstanding
the insecurity and the fragility of the institutions in
most of the country, civil society generally welcomes
the one-person-one-vote process, coupled with the
required safeguards to protect and promote the political
rights of minorities and underrepresented groups such
as women and young people. Implementing a system
of proportional representation at this time, even if it
is limited by our many challenges, would open up the
political space and overcome many vested and corrupt
interests in the status quo. That would be a massive
improvement over the previous process for selecting
members of Parliament. It would increase the quality
of citizens' participation in that institution and reduce
the group-think mentality that is currently plaguing
our country.

We are also aware that the current relationship
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states is tense. That affects our security,
political institutions and State-building efforts.
Without cooperation between the Federal and regional
Governments, very little progress can be made
towards organizing a credible election. Security still
remains a major obstacle to the one-person-one-vote
election process. Although some major cities could
be relatively safe for the polls, people outside these
areas will probably face difficulties in voting or even
travelling to the urban hubs. Other obstacles include
designing the right process and putting the necessary
technical, logistical and financial requirements in place
before elections can be held.

It is imperative to ensure that as we transition to the
2020-2021 elections they can take place in the interests
of the people and of stability and democracy in Somalia.
Fair and free elections will increase confidence in good
governance and effect change through peaceful means.
We therefore need a new momentum to advance the
process is if Government institutions are to become
more inclusive and accountable and establish the rule
of law in the country.

I would therefore strongly recommend that the
international community encourage and support the
Government and the people of Somalia in the following
ways. They should improve security. The Federal
Government and the federal member states should be
brought together to enable them to reach a political
accommodation on a number of important issues, such
as the electoral model and other constitutional issues.
Representation and participation in the upcoming
electoral process should be strengthened and expanded.
The role of women in preventing and resolving conflict,
as well as in the electoral and political process, should
be strengthened. The general public's knowledge of the
electoral process should be enhanced and bureaucratic
delays should be resolved. Logistic and technical advice
should be provided when and where applicable, and
tensions between the Federal Government and federal
member states should be mitigated in the interests of
peace and stability for the people of Somalia.

Ultimately, we strongly recommend that the
upcoming one-person-one-vote election proceed
by consensus with no significant delays. With the
continued support of Somalia's international partners,
I believe that the Somali Government and people will
be able to continue on their journey towards a peaceful
and prosperous future. Somali civil society is able and
ready to support the process once a political consensus is
achieved. Once again, I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Council. I ask Council members to accept
the warm greetings of the Somali people for their
constant support in helping us re-energize Somalia
so that it can start taking steps forward again, since it
seems that the momentum has stalled.

I would like to end on this parting note. Women
in Somalia are known as the backbone of Somali
households and should also be recognized as the
backbone of the Somali nation. Without that backbone,
we would be paralysed. Their involvement in all
processes is imperative if we want to succeed as a
nation, but we must also protect our backbone.

