Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to congratulate Guinea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I also
wish to congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany on his outstanding work during Germany's
presidency last month. I also wish to thank Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei for their briefings and for the
tremendous efforts they have made to fulfil the
mandate given by the Security Council.

Four months ago, in this Chamber, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002) in a spirit
of unity and cooperation. The adoption of that
resolution fully manifested the determination of the
Council to destroy the weapons of mass destruction
possessed by Iraq and truly reflected the desire of the
international community for a political settlement of
the Iraqi issue. It is precisely for that reason that the
resolution has been widely welcomed and supported by
all countries the world over.

Undoubtedly, it is an arduous task for us to ensure
the implementation of the relevant Council resolutions
and the full and comprehensive destruction of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction. However, it is gratifying
to note that much progress has been made in the
weapons inspections, thanks to the unremitting efforts
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Judging
from today's reports by the two inspection bodies,
resolution 1441 (2002) has been implemented smoothly
on the whole, with progress made and results achieved.
It is true that there are also problems and difficulties in
the inspection process. That is exactly why it is highly
necessary to continue the inspections. We believe that,
as long as we keep to the road of political settlement,
the goal of destroying Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction could still be attained.

Resolution 1441 (2002) did not come easily.
Given the current situation, we need resolve and
determination and, more important, patience and
wisdom. The Council therefore needs to maintain its
unity and cooperation more than ever so as to preserve
its authority. We believe that the Council should
provide strong support and guidance to the two
inspection bodies in their work, let them continue
inspections and seek the truth until they have fulfilled
the mandate of resolution 1441 (2002). At the same
time, we also urge the Iraqi Government to take further
effective measures in earnest to strengthen its
cooperation with the inspectors on matters of substance
and to the creation of conditions necessary for political
settlement. Under the current circumstances, there is no
reason to shut the door to peace. Therefore, we are not
in favour of a new resolution, particularly one
authorizing the use of force.

The Iraqi issue bears on peace and development
in the Gulf region and in the world at large. With a
view to finding a solution to that issue, we must take
into full account the shared interests of all nations and
the long-term interests of human development. Now
that we have entered the twenty-first century, peace and
development still remain the major themes of our
times. All countries in the world, faced with the
common tasks of maintaining peace and achieving
development and prosperity, desperately need a stable
and peaceful international environment.

Among all things in the universe, human beings
are of paramount importance, and peace is the most
precious. Over the past months, right in this Chamber,
we have heard many times, from many United Nations
Member States, strong appeals to resolve the Iraqi
issue politically. Outside this Chamber, we have also
heard justified cries of "peace, not war" from the
peoples of many countries. The power of the Security
Council derives from all United Nations Member
States and from the peoples of all nations. We have no
reason to remain indifferent to those strong demands
and outcries. In order for the Security Council to be
responsible to history and to safeguard the common
interests of all peoples in the world, the Chinese
Government strongly appeals to the Council to
shoulder its responsibility and to do all it can to avoid
war and to maintain its efforts to achieve a political
settlement.

