Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistani delegation
thanks the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their
briefings.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia is a serious
problem that threatens maritime traffic in the Horn of
Africa, endangers the lives of the crews on board, and
impacts commerce and trade in the region and beyond.
While a decline in the incidence of piracy was recorded
in 2011 as compared with preceding years, the menace
is far from being eradicated. A recent report by the
International Maritime Organization indicates that in
2011 there were, on average, two pirate attacks every
three days. The threat posed by pirates to the peace and
stability of Somali coastal areas and hinterlands has not
diminished with the declining incidence of piracy.

Pakistan is of the view that the eradication of
piracy would require a concerted long-term strategy
involving a truly integrated approach that encompasses
political, security and governance tracks. Traditional
measures, as stressed in today's briefing, form an
essential element of the integrated approach that we
have been emphasizing. The effective prosecution and
correction of pirates through judicial means will
supplement the important work done by international
naval forces to interdict pirates.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/50) and
the briefing today have empirically evaluated the
administrative and financial details involved in setting
up regional prosecution mechanisms. In view of its
unique situation, tackling piracy has become a shared
responsibility. We value the support provided by
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania in assisting
with the prosecution of pirates. International assistance
with the capacity-building of the judicial sectors of
countries in the region will be critical. It is also
important to accommodate the views of Somalia in this
arrangement.

In principle, we associate ourselves with the idea
of setting up a regional prosecution centre in Seychelles,
subject to the consent of the host Government. An
effective post-trial transfer framework must be in place
if the regional prosecution centre to be effective. We
hope that the next meeting of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia will also deliberate on
the prosecution capacity of States in the region.

For our part, Pakistan is currently playing a role
in a number of counter-piracy operations. We have
participated in the two naval task force operations,
Combined Task Force 150 for countering piracy in the
Gulf of Aden, and Combined Task Force 151 for
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. Pakistan
assumed command of Combined Task Force 151 in
November 2011.

As others have said, no measure to counter piracy
can be effective without taking into account the root
causes related to the political and security situation in
Somalia. Building State capacity in Somalia,
preventing environmental degradation of its coastal
waters and improving employment opportunities would
be imperative to reducing the propensity of local youth
to opt for piracy. An effective way to combat piracy, in
the context of overall efforts for peace and security in
Somalia, is to provide more support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I take this
opportunity to welcome the adoption of resolution
2036 (2012) on strengthening AMISOM. With the
resolution adopted today, AMISOM. is closer to the
African Union's strategic concept paper.

We also welcome the London conference on
Somalia being held tomorrow. We hope that its
deliberations will go a long way in promoting peace
and stability in Somalia and combating the menace of
piracy.

