Mr. Lucas (Angola): We commend the Spanish
presidency for convening today's important meeting on
international judicial cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We would like to welcome Mr. Rafael Catala,
Minister of Justice of Spain, to the Security Council
and thank him for presiding over our debate. We also
thank the briefers, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Ms. Dorcas
Oduor and Mr. Robert Strang, for their insightful
remarks. We commend Spain for its efforts leading to
today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2322 (2016),
which is yet another landmark in the fight against this
scourge, through its establishment and reaffirmation of
important political, legal and operational provisions.

Today's meeting is taking place at a crucial time,
when terrorism has become an unprecedented threat
to international peace and security, owing mainly to
terrorists' capacity to adapt and persuade, including by
using information technologies, inciting people around
the world, especially the young, to join their ranks.
Terrorist groups take advantage of social and political
instability in many States, while economic, cultural,
ethnic and religious asymmetries make societies
vulnerable to the incitement and recruitment of young
people for subversive acts that can result in the loss
of lives, the destruction of social infrastructure, the
creation of refugees and the impoverishment of nations.
Unfortunately, this is a widespread phenomenon.
Terrorist movements, with different labels and
characteristics, are active in every region of the world,
a reality that calls for coordinated action and the
adoption of appropriate mechanisms for preventing and
fighting them.

Yesterday was particularly tragic, with terrorist
attacks committed in Istanbul, Cairo, Mogadishu and
Aden, along with the tragic return of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant to Palmyra. We firmly condemn
those attacks and offer our condolences to the victims'
families. Today's meeting is timely, since it gives us an
added opportunity to continue our active attempts to
intensify our shared struggle against the deadly threat
to people's well-being and to international peace and
security that terrorism represents.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is the main cooperative framework for
Member States working to search out, locate and bring
to justice those who support, facilitate and participate
in terrorist acts, as well as to deny them safe haven,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of national
and international law. The Security Council has taken
a decisive leadership role in that fight, and resolution
1373 (2001) is central to the endeavour. Its scope and
adoption under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations label terrorism as a true threat to international
peace and security. Under resolution 1373 (2001), States
have to work together to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts, increase their cooperation with one another,
become parties to the relevant international conventions
and protocols relating to terrorism and implement them
fully, take effective measures to prevent and suppress
the financing and planning of terrorist acts in their
territories, as well as strengthening ways to punish
offences on an international scale.

In order to achieve that, international cooperation
is a crucial tool, given that it is essential for
criminal justice practitioners who face new forms of
transnational criminality and terrorism to broaden their
criminal investigations and prosecutions so as to give
them international and even global scope. We have
put in place mechanisms for international cooperation
in the areas of extradition, mutual legal assistance,
the transfer of criminal proceedings and convicted
persons, the recognition of decisions by foreign
criminal jurisdictions, the freezing or seizure of assets
and cooperation between law enforcement agencies
relating to all types of criminality, including terrorism
and its financing.

Angola, which has much experience in fighting and
defeating terrorism, is fully committed to contributing
to implementing mechanisms designed to prevent and
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
To that end, we have adopted a set of legal, political and
administrative decisions for reinforcing international
judicial cooperation in preventing and combating
terrorism, particularly in relation to the financing,
incitement, recruitment and transit of terrorist fighters
through its territories. Among the legislative and
executive measures we have taken, we would highlight
the laws against money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism, and on international cooperation in
criminal justice; the tracking of money movements of
persons suspected of having connections with terrorist
activities; the control of foreign exchange flows and of
illegal migration; the strengthening ofsurveillance, with
the installation of high-technology equipment at entry
and exit points; the exchange of information between
national and foreign entities, including INTERPOL and
the Committee of Intelligence and Security Services
of Africa; and the strengthening of cooperation with
specialized United Nations organs and agencies.

To conclude, the dynamics and the actions of
terrorist groups highlights the need for greater
cooperation and exchange of information between all
nations and world entities. Terrorism can be defeated
only through a holistic and sustained approach by
all States, international and regional organizations
and civil society, in a common effort to isolate and
combat terrorist threat. In this endeavour, international
cooperation among law-enforcement agencies in
preventing terrorist acts and judicial practitioners in
holding its perpetrators accountable is key. The fight
against terrorism must involve all societies aiming to
build a more peaceful and just world, based on security,
peace and respect for human rights.

