Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia joins
all others in welcoming the present debate as an
important contribution to advancing the capacity and
effectiveness of peacekeeping. We therefore add our
voice in thanking the presidency for its initiative to
focus on specific aspects of partnerships in the context
of the regionalization of crisis management.

Coherence in constructing peacekeeping operations
remains an overriding objective. To achieve that,
we underline the centrality of the role of the United
Nations as the clearinghouse for generated experience,
standard-setting and coordination. The capacity of
the Secretary-General and the respective departments
should therefore be continuously strengthened. The
legitimacy of peacekeeping continues to rest with a
mandate from the Security Council, while the actual
implementation of operations relies on the engagement
of Member States, including by means of regional
arrangements. We therefore underline the continued
need to improve modalities for increased interaction,
consultation and coordination among all stakeholders,
including the mandating body - the Security
Council - the Secretary-General, troop-contributing
States and the respective regional organizations. Such a
need is particularly prominent in light of the increasing
experience of setting up hybrid peacekeeping
operations.

We strongly share the view about the significant
role of regional organizations in maintaining peace
and security. Indeed, regional organizations may hold
mandates to provide regional security or economic
and social cooperation, as well as to protect human
rights. The effectiveness of action at the regional level,
however, relies primarily on the strength of institutions
for regional cooperation. It should be admitted in that
respect that the levels of institutionalized cooperation
differ among regions. As a global Organization, the
United Nations is well placed to facilitate cross-regional
cooperation in order to complement regional capacities
and employ their comparative advantages.

It could be reasonably argued that proximity to
conflict implies a greater incentive for States adjacent
to conflict zones to seek resolution in the interests of
lasting regional peace and security. However, it would
also be realistic to expect neighbouring States to see
contrasting interests in conflict situations, to the extent
that they may favour one party to a conflict at the
expense of the other. In that regard, the effectiveness
of operations depends greatly on the explicit consent of
all the parties directly concerned in the conflict. The
specific nature of an operation, as well as the strength
and composition of a peacekeeping force and the
rules of its engagement, should be based on a political
agreement between all the parties to the conflict.

In dealing with considerable direct threats to its own
security over the past 23 years, Armenia has acquired
an acute understanding of the value of peacekeeping.
We have developed a firm foundation of self-defence
coupled with a solid peacekeeping component. The
peacekeeping brigade of the Armenian armed forces is
the main professional capacity-building framework for
that purpose. As a troop-contributing State, Armenia
has gained significant experience in peacekeeping
operations. We participate in NATO-led operations in
Kosovo and Afghanistan. In October, Armenia will
contribute a platoon to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, a demonstration of our intention to
gradually increase our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping.

As a member of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Armenia recognizes that the
Organization may have a possible role in peacekeeping,
decided on a case-by-case basis. Together with other
members ofthe Collective Security Treaty Organization,
Armenia has also been working on improving its
preparedness for peacekeeping. Both organizations
have been strengthening their institutional interactions
with the United Nations, which should eventually
enable them to perform shared peacekeeping tasks as
well.

In conclusion, I reiterate Armenia's strong
commitment to continued operational engagement in
promoting peace all over the world.

