The President: In my concluding remarks, let me
first thank all the speakers for the kind words
addressed to my delegation and to myself. It has been a
great honour for Singapore to have chaired this
meeting on such an important subject. Having
personally served as Permanent Representative to the
United Nations 30 years ago, it has been a pleasure and
privilege for me to have interacted with distinguished
Permanent Representatives during this week.

When I opened the meeting this morning, I
indicated that at the end of the debate I would try to
draw on some specific conclusions from our
discussions, which I hope will feed into the future work
of the Council's Working Group on Africa, as well as
the work of the Council on African issues. I also hope
to further refine these points and distribute them
eventually to Member States on my own responsibility.

Before drawing these conclusions I would like to
once again thank Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul,
Ambassador Amadou Kebe, Ambassador Ivan
Simonovic' and Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima
Fall for their excellent contributions. On behalf of the
Security Council, let me also express our deep
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Mr.
Ibrahima Fall for the invaluable contributions that he
has made to the work of the Security Council. We have
immensely benefited from his incisive analysis of
issues and his tremendous vision. We wish him all the
best in his new endeavours.

There can be no doubt that we have had today a
rich debate. When Mauritius and Singapore sent out
their letter of invitation to all Members, we really had
no idea that this invitation would receive such an
overwhelming response, 35 non-members addressing
the Council. It indicates that there is a great desire on
the part of the membership to give input and
recommendations to the Council's work on Africa.

It is not an easy task in a brief summary to
capture the many points that were made today. My
remarks should therefore be viewed as a first step
towards culling the important points made today. I
shall divide my remarks into two parts. Firstly, I shall
try to draw some general points that were made.
Secondly, I shall list some of the specific suggestions
that were put across for the ad hoc Working Group to
follow up on. I apologize in advance ifI have left out
any major points made by speakers, but will capture
these points in a consolidated summary

Several general points were made. Firstly, as
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Ivan Simonovie said effective strategies to
deal with conflict prevention and recovery require a
comprehensive approach. Indeed, this is probably one
of the main conclusions we could draw from today's
debate. Many speakers observe that there had been a
series of initiatives on Africa, ranging from the broad
initiative of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) to more specific initiatives. A
challenge is to ensure that all these initiatives work
together coherently. Here, too, the ad hoc Working
Group could make a valuable contribution.

The second general point that emerged was a
strong appeal made by non-members for Council
members to consider carefully all the points of view
put forward today, especially by African Member
States. I have no doubt that Council members have
listened carefully to the points that have been made and
requested by the African Group. Some members of the
Council have also responded to these points. As a
result, we have had a rich and interactive dialogue. But,
then, dialogue is not an end in itself. Several speakers
have emphasized that the Council needs to work out a
partnership with African States so as to respond to
African challenges. We hope that the healthy dialogue
we have had today will help create the partnership that
many have called for.

Thirdly, it was suggested that the Working Group
could work out a balance sheet of successes, failures
and lessons learned in tackling the problems in Africa.
Ambassador Greenstock, for example, suggested a
lessons-learned exercise on Sierra Leone. I am citing
only one example, but many other concrete examples
were offered for lessons-learned exercises.

Fourthly, it was suggested that, unlike the
Security Council - which tends to be more formal and
more reactive - the Working Group was an informal
and ad hoc body and could be more proactive and
could experiment with innovative measures. That was
suggested by the Chairman of the African Group, the
Permanent Representative of Benin, and his suggestion
may be worth reflecting on.

Fifthly, there was broad agreement among all
speakers that the Working Group should not duplicate
the work carried out by the Security Council; rather, it
should assist the Security Council in its work and
should provide value-added contributions.
I should now like to turn to some of the specific
suggestions that were conveyed today to the ad hoc
Working Group. Those specific suggestions relate to
the seven items outlined in the ad hoc Working Group's
programme of work.

With regard to the Economic and Social Council,
the following suggestions were made: that the Working
Group could appoint a representative to work with the
Economic and Social Council's ad hoc Advisory Group
when it is created, in preparation for the high-level
General Assembly meeting on Africa to be held on 16
September, which could include discussions on the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD);
that there is a need for the Working Group to adopt an
integrated approach and to ensure a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peace-building, another area for
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council; and that cooperation
between the Working Group and the Economic and
Social Council could address the failure of partnerships
between members of the United Nations family and
could help to address the economic and social causes of
conflict.

On confidence-building in the Mano River
region, it was suggested that the Council should listen
to the views of African regional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), on what needs to be done for the region;
and that the Working Group could look for joint
solutions affecting the three Mano River Union
countries - for example, joint disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, a joint
plan of action against the illicit arms trade, and
possibly a rationalization of the posts of the two
Special Representatives ofthe Secretary-General.

On the role of Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in Africa, it was suggested that the
Special Representatives should work closely with each
other despite their different geographical mandates,
especially in the field ofpreventive diplomacy.

On assistance to electoral processes, while
speakers noted that the Security Council had no direct
role in elections observation, the Working Group could
reflect on formulating rules acceptable to all
concerning a possible partnership between the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to observe
electoral processes in the months preceding elections,
during elections and during the announcement of
results. That will obviously require careful
consideration. The Working Group should also help to
ensure that the Council remains seized of the situation
in conflict areas, even after successful elections.
Premature withdrawal from such areas in the past led to
the re-emergence of factors that could embroil States in
yet another conflict.

On the establishment of groups of friends,
speakers noted that groups of friends were a good idea,
particularly useful for gathering information on
specific situations and in the areas of mediation and
providing good offices. However, they could not
replace the Council in its work.

On the question of cooperation with the OAU and
subregional organizations, there was a particularly rich
discussion. One suggestion was that the Working
Group should facilitate the circulation of all OAU
Central Organ decisions and those of other security
organs of subregional organizations as Security
Council documents to ensure their effective
implementation. There was also a suggestion that the
Working Group should facilitate periodic interaction
and dialogue between the Council and the OAU, and
that there could be regular exchanges of early-warning
information between the Working Group and the OAU.

On the question of inviting non-governmental
organizations and academics to join the Group's work,
many speakers noted that this was useful to their
exchanges in seminars involving non-governmental
organizations and think tanks and it could contribute to
the Council's decision-making.

As I said, this brief summary cannot do justice to
the rich debate that we had today. Earlier, my officers
had given me a long list of suggestions to mention in
my concluding remarks, but, given the lateness of the
hour, I could mention only a few of them. I am also
pleased to inform the Council that my summary will be
posted on the Singapore Mission's web site, and that
later we will post a more detailed record of all the main
points that were made during today's debate.

The main purpose of today's debate was to
provide a stepping stone for the Council to continue
focusing actively on the many challenges that we face
in Africa. We hope that, when the next debate is held
on this subject, members will refer to the rich debate
we had today. In that connection, I am pleased to hear
that the United Kingdom will be building on the results
oftoday's debate during its July presidency.

Finally, I should like to thank all participants for
their participation and for their contributions to the
debate.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration ofthe item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.30 p.m.
