Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres and the other briefers for
being here today. I also thank France for its leadership
on the issue and for organizing today's discussion.

Violent extremism in the Sahel is a growing
problem, and responding to this violence is more
dangerous than ever. We applaud the men and women
ofthe armed forces ofthe countries ofthe Group ofFive
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We also salute the region's
partners, particularly France with its long-standing
counter-terror operation. And we thank the brave men
and women serving in the world's most dangerous
peacekeeping mission, in Mali. All those forces and
missions have lost personnel. Civilians have also been
the victims of violence across the region, including
the tragic attack in Burkina Faso in August. Many
families have lost loved ones - earlier this month,
four members of our special forces and five members
of the Niger army were killed on the Mali-Niger border
while working together as partners to ensure peace in
a threatened region.

But it is not just violent extremism that plagues the
people of the Sahel; crime is also a growing problem.
Historical trade routes across the region provide
an opportunity for some of the worst actors in the
continent. Criminals who traffic in drugs and human
beings seek to profit from the chaos in the Sahel and are
succeeding, to the detriment of human security in West
Africa. During the Security Council's mission to the
Sahel region last week, we witnessed the dedication to a
brighter future by Government officials, officials from
the Group of Five for the Sahel and members of civil
society and of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Those men
and women are fighting an expanding threat that is
mobile and resilient and has little respect for life. Their
dedication is not only admirable, but worthy of the
Council's continued attention and support.

The United States supports the initiative of the G-5
Sahel countries to develop a Joint force and deepen
cooperation, which has the potential to improve security
and complement the efforts ofthe peacekeeping mission
in Mali. To that end, the United States will continue its
long-standing bilateral support to the security forces of
the members of the G-5 Sahel. We will also continue
to work closely with our partners to help the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force to be effective and well-coordinated with
other counter-terror efforts in the region. The United
States is committed to stabilizing the Sahel region. We
are proud to announce today that we plan to provide
up to $60 million in bilateral assistance, which we will
work with our Congress to identify, in order to help
stand up the Joint Force.

We understand that the Force will need ongoing
support, and we are eager for opportunities to
work closely with our partners to make this effort a
successful one. However, we believe that the G-5
Sahel Joint Force must be owned first and foremost
by the countries of the region themselves. We expect
that the G-5 Sahel countries will take on full regional
ownership of the Force within a period of three to six
years, with continued United States engagement. That
is the approach that will be most effective in the end to
free the region from terror.

We are inspired by the region's effort and
intent, but we have reservations about encumbering
a large peacekeeping mission with tasks it would
not traditionally perform. The Mission in Mali has
struggled to reach its full troop authorization. It
continues to suffer from a lack of enabling equipment
and it expends most of its resources protecting and
resupplying itself. Moreover, the Mission is coming
under increasing attack from violent extremists and
shifting operations and locations. For those reasons,
the Mission struggles to execute its strategic objective:
to support the peace process in Mali. Its ability to focus
on its core objective could be further compromised by
a mandate to support a force with a broad concept of
operations and recurring needs. We owe it to the troops,
as well as to those who have lost their lives, to protect
the Mission's vital resources from further overstretch
and ensure that they are devoted to supporting a
political solution in Mali.

I note that we also have serious and well-known
reservations about using United Nations resources to
support non-United Nations activities. We will each
bring different strengths, insights and resources to bear
on addressing insecurity in the Sahel. We look forward
to discussions with our Security Council colleagues in
the coming days on how best to bring the Force to life.

We know that security alone will not solve the
complex and entrenched challenges in the Sahel, and
we applaud the G-5 Sahel for encompassing aspects of
resilience, governance and infrastructure in addition
to security.

The mass closure of schools and the loss of safety
and opportunity that comes from extremist violence
threaten an entire generation. For many, the temptation
to join the extremists is strong. We cannot abandon the
people of Mali, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mauritania
and Chad to this fate. A long-term solution must be
found as the G-5 Sahel Joint Force continues to evolve,
and security gains must be consolidated by bringing
good governance.

In Mali, interim authorities in the northern part of
the country need to deliver services to show the local
population that their presence will deliver concrete
improvements for the Malian people. The United
States will continue to work closely with regional
stakeholders and partners to identify the needs of the
Force and tailor our support as effectively as possible.
We look forward to participating actively at the donor
conference in Brussels, which will help the Force move
closer to directly addressing and defeating this threat.

It is important to remember that the fate of the
region is ultimately in the hands of the Governments
in the Sahel. After several difficult months, the
armed groups have reached a long-term ceasefire and
expanded dialogue. These are positive signs, but serious
differences between the Malian Government and the
armed groups continue to challenge the peace process.
The armed groups and the Malian Government must
work together to implement the agreement.

As with all peacekeeping missions, we must see
the Government working with MINUSMA towards
achievable outcomes and a durable political solution.
Real progress here would provide the surest path to
greater security in the region.

In closing, let me reiterate our strong support for
the undertaking of the G-5 countries. We welcome this
regional ownership of security and stabilization in the
Sahel. We will continue to stand with the people of the
region as they take these important steps towards peace
and security.

