Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this public debate
on the Middle East. I also thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto for
his comprehensive and - I must add - unfailingly
lucid briefing on the often opaque and always complex
situation in the Middle East region. The picture of the
situation in the Middle East that Mr. De Soto has
presented reflects, indeed, a mixture of anxiety and
expectation.

First, on Palestine, the international community
harbours deep concerns over the unremitting
deterioration in the political, security, economic and
humanitarian spheres in Palestine, and in particular
about the political conflict between Palestinian factions
over the past few weeks, which has resulted in many
deaths and casualties. While the international
community can and should help, it is the Palestinians
who bear the primary responsibility to bring unity to
their effort to address those problems. We therefore
commend the fact that President Abbas and Hamas
Political Bureau head Mr. Meshaal agreed, in their
recent talks in Saudi Arabia, to form a unity
Government in order to end the political difficulties in
the Palestinian territories.

That positive step should contribute to the
resumption of the peace process. Japan strongly
expects that, based on the agreement, the violence will
cease and the new unity Government that is to be
established will make serious efforts to advance the
peace process with Israel. Japan gives every
encouragement to the Palestinians and Israelis in their
common effort to find normalcy and peace, and will
follow developments closely.

In that regard, we welcome as a positive step the
fact that the Government of Israel has taken some
measures for the partial transfer of tax and customs
revenues to the Palestinian Authority and the easing of
restrictions on the movement and access of the
Palestinian people following the summit meeting held
last December between the Israeli and Palestinian
leaders. That being said, we expect Israel to take steps
to reduce the number of checkpoints and to transfer
further tax and customs revenues. Japan also expects
that both the Israeli and Palestinian sides will continue
their peace efforts with strong determination,
especially regarding the remaining issues, such as the
improvement of the dire humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people, the extension of the ceasefire
agreement to the West Bank, and the safe return of the
abducted Israeli soldier, as well as the release of the
Palestinian prisoners.

At the same time, the international community,
on its part, particularly countries in the region and the
major donors, must undertake and strengthen proactive
engagement to support the Palestinians' efforts to
advance the peace process. Japan welcomes the recent
diplomatic initiatives of the international community to
revitalize the peace process, including Saudi Arabia's
mediation efforts towards the agreement on the unity
Government, the initiative by United States Secretary
of State Rice to hold a tripartite meeting among Israel,
Palestine and the United States, and the convening of
the Quartet meetings. It is hoped that those efforts will
lead, through further direct talks between the parties,
Palestine and Israel, to a two-State solution reflecting
previous international references, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the road map
and the Arab peace initiative.

Of particular importance in that regard, in our
view, is the need to give strong, tangible and visible
support to President Abbas, who has been exerting the
most serious efforts to ensure the interests of all of the
Palestinian people. If a new Palestinian unity
Government, once established, lives up to the intention
to achieve peace and peaceful coexistence with Israel,
the international community will undoubtedly respond
positively to such a new direction.

For its part, Japan will continue its assistance to
the Palestinian people as a major and long-time
participant in the international donor community for
Palestinians. We will implement projects for
strengthening the Office of the President, for
humanitarian assistance, including medical care and
public health, and for job creation, as part of our
support for President Abbas in his endeavours for
peace. Japan will also continue working on the concept
of a corridor of peace and prosperity, which is a
development plan for the Jordan Valley, through
regional cooperation involving Israel, Palestine and
Jordan. Further action on that initiative will follow.

Let me briefly touch upon the situation in
Lebanon. Japan supports the efforts of the Lebanese
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Siniora, to achieve stability in Lebanon. Japan hopes
that the concerned parties and factions in Lebanon will
engage proactively in the efforts for stability and
reconstruction in the country through dialogue and
without resorting to violence.

In that regard, we appreciate the International
Conference for Support to Lebanon convened in France
last month, which sent a strong message reconfirming
the resolve of the international community to continue
providing support to Lebanon. At the same time, we
strongly condemn the terrorist attack on innocent
civilians that took place in Lebanon today, the day
before the second anniversary of the attack against
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others.

There remain many challenges to be addressed,
foremost among them the issue between Lebanon and
Israel, to ensure the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and the stabilization of the situation in
Lebanon. The disarming and disbanding of all
remaining militias, as well as the delineation of the
border, are among the key issues that must be tackled
with vigour. A comprehensive peace that includes both
the Lebanese and the Syrian tracks is the only way to
achieve permanent peace in the region. From that point
of view, Japan expects Syria to play a proactive role
for the realization of regional peace and stability.

In conclusion, the Middle East region is fraught
with risks and dangers, but at the same time there are
encouraging initiatives that require strong support from
the international community if we are to avert the
further escalation of tension and conflict. Not least
among the issues to be tackled are the situation in Iraq,
the Iranian nuclear issue and the situation in Lebanon.
Those issues are all affected by and interrelated with
one another.

That is why it is so important to ensure that
progress is made on the core, central issue in the region -
the Middle East peace process, including the
Palestinian problems - leading to a positive outcome.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan's readiness
and determination to continue its proactive,
constructive engagement in the region and to extend
the maximum assistance possible in order to contribute
to the efforts to achieve a just, comprehensive and
permanent peace, while working for stability and
development in the region as a whole.

