Mr. Fall: I will be very brief. The representative
of France raised the issue of how neighbours would be
fully accepted in the conference. I can only report that
when the meeting of the National Coordinators was
held in June in Nairobi, the issue of Zambia was raised.
It was at that meeting that a decision was taken to
include Zambia among the core countries. I think the
same procedure may be followed. I intend to discuss
with President Konare of the African Union
Commission the issue of how the Union and the United
Nations can coordinate their action in that way.

The same representative raised the issue of what
concrete actions will be put in motion after the 2004
summit. I think that this will be concretely responded
to by the summit itself. I am sure that the preparatory
process will help the summit to respond in this
connection.

The representative of Germany raised the issue of
how the involvement of civil society, especially
women, will be ensured. What I can add to the report
and my presentation is that the gender dimension will
be kept. We are currently in the process, for example,
of recruiting a consultant on gender issues for the
Office of the Special Representative in order to ensure
not only that the meeting of the women will be
prepared in a timely manner, but also that, in our daily
work in the preparatory process, my Office will take
into account the gender dimension.

As to the involvement of the private sector and
other sectors in the conference, I want to say that we
are in contact with the labour unions and the private
sectors in several countries of that region. We intend to
involve them because, at the end of the day, this
process should also be theirs, taking into account the
important impact that economic development and
regional integration can have on their business.

Last but not least, I would like to thank all the
countries that have expressed their support for the
preparatory process in general, the African Union and
the United Nations partnership - especially the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I also wish in particular to
thank Cameroon and other countries that have referred
to the necessity of providing adequate resources for the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region and have assured
the Office that that would be reflected in the
presidential statement to be issued at the end of this
meeting.
