Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing on the situation in Mali. We also
welcome the presence at our meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop.

We have been consistently of the opinion that
a stable settlement of the situation in Mali is can be
accomplished only through the rigorous implementation
by all parties in Mali of the provisions contained in
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. In that regard, we note the positive trend in
its implementation. We welcome the launch of the
proccess to establish the interim authorities in the five
northern regions of the country, as well as the launch
of the mixed patrols. We think that this could end the
current stagnation and call upon countries to build on
that progress. We also note the great significance of
the National Accord Conference, which was conducted
on the initiative of the Government. We believe that
this will also provide an impetus to the peace process
in Mali.

We are concerned about the remaining security
issues in Mali. The attacks by jihadists on civilian
facilities, the Malian military and United Nations
peacekeepers continue. We are also concerned by the
fact that terrorist activity - including, unfortunately,
by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb - is spreading to
the central part of the country and growing increasingly
sophisticated. We welcome the political resolve of the
Malian parties that made it possible to implement the
Algiers Agreement in spite of the barbarous attack on
18 January on the camp of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism. Given the situation, we are convinced that
it would be appropriate to fully support the parties to
the Agreement rather than use the threat of sanctions.
Security measures should be strengthened by taking
effective steps to resolve serious socioeconomic issues
in the north. In that regard we expect the development
strategy for the northern regions to be passed. We know
that Bamako is actively working on that right now.

Despite international and regional efforts,
terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region remains the
main threat to the security and stability of that part
of the continent. The international terrorists there are
increasing their activities. They are trying to broaden
their geographical scope, and we are witnessing the
emergence of new groups and leaders. There was a
recent terrorist attack against the French forces, and we
extend our condolences to the French in the wake of the
death of a French soldier.

The security situation is also influenced negatively
by the porous borders open to international criminal
groups, drug trafficking, illicit weapons trafficking and
other smuggling. We recall that terrorism and violent
extremism in Mali and the Sahel came from outside.
The radicals in the region appeared after the situation in
Libya was destabilized. Without progress in the Libyan
settlement, it will be impossible to definitively resolve
the issue of terrorism in the Sahel. We are convinced
that coordinated steps, both by the Africans and the
international community, will continue to be important
to fighting this development. We note in that regard the
initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel to create
a regional force. However, it is becoming increasingly
obvious that military measures will not be enough. The
extremist ideology must be countered effectively.

We also need to eliminate its breeding ground by
finding more effective solutions to the socioeconomic
issues in the region and strengthening State institutions.
In that regard, the consistent implementation of the
United Nations comprehensive strategy for the Sahel
is becoming increasingly topical. We need to make
sure that this mechanism gives increasingly efficient
yield. Given the opinion of Mali's partners, we
supported resolution 2295 (2016), which extended and
strengthened the mandate of the Mission. We believe
that its full implementation will help ensure the safety
of the peacekeepers, increase the effectiveness and role
of the Mission in stabilizing the northern areas of Mali,
and help the peace process as a whole.

We are concerned by the fact that the numbers of the
military and police components of the Mission are very
far from the levels planned. We call on the Secretariat
to become more actively involved in ensuring that the
Mission reaches the needed parameters and that there
is the necessary rotation of contingents. We should
not put on the back burner efforts to ensure that the
peacekeepers have all the necessary basic services and
means of protection. The safety of Mission personnel
should remain our absolute priority.

