Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation listened very attentively and with a great
deal of interest to the report on the situation in Iraq
submitted under Security Council resolution 1483
(2003) by the Ambassadors of the United States and
the United Kingdom, who represent the Coalition
Provisional Authority. Their briefings, for which we
thank them, help us to better understand what is
happening in Iraq and to assess the magnitude and
complexity of the challenges confronting the Iraqi
people, a people traumatized by three decades of an
autocratic and brutal regime, three devastating wars
and a decade of inhumane sanctions, and who are
living today under foreign occupation.

As the Security Council meets for the first time in
a public meeting since the end of the oil-for-food
programme, a programme which alleviated somewhat
the cruel effects of the sanctions, my delegation would
like to know more about the daily lives of the Iraqi
people. Exactly what is the situation from an economic
and social standpoint, since the end of hostilities? Is it
possible to have a more detailed description of its
foreign trade and, in particular, the exploitation of its
natural resources and the revenues that generates?

In this regard, the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board of the Development Fund for Iraq
has an important role to play, but does not seem fully to
have begun to play that role. In addition to the
information given to us by Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, could the Secretariat give us some information
on the reasons why the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board is not operating normally?

The information reaching us today from Iraq
regarding the economic and social situation is very
grim, and the report of the Secretary-General of 23
February 2004 (S/2004/ 140) confirms that. Many Iraqis
today are living in particularly disturbing and
precarious conditions of poverty. While progress has
been made in certain areas since the end of hostilities,
in other areas progress is taking longer to materialize.
The disturbing economic and social situation is
compounded by a phenomenon which is all the more
worrisome, so gravely does it jeopardize any chance of
recovery in Iraq: violence. Each day, extremely fierce
attacks occur, particularly in Central Iraq, and the
civilian population, especially women and children are
the primary victims.

These odious acts must not only be firmly
condemned by the entire international community, but
everything possible must be undertaken, and this is the
responsibility of the occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, to better ensure the protection of
the populations. The sooner the Iraqi people recovers
its full sovereignty, and decides freely on its destiny,
the sooner it will regain peace, stability and the road to
progress.

In this regard, Algeria reiterates its appeal for an
end to the occupation and the recovery by the Iraqi
people, as soon as possible, of its sovereignty, its
independence and its control over its destiny. The date
of 30 June 2004 must therefore be respected by all
parties concerned, including the Coalition Provisional
Authority, which must work concretely so that the
hand-over of sovereignty can take place on that
scheduled date.

Developments in recent weeks in Iraq and the
request made jointly to the United Nations by the Iraqi
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional
Authority to dispatch a mission on the feasibility of
elections in Iraq broadly show that the role of the
United Nations in Iraq today is vital. The
Organization's return to that country in order to help
the Iraqi people obtain democratic and representative
national institutions and to rebuild the country ravaged
by war is therefore not only necessary, but must occur
as soon as security conditions allow and as soon as the
United Nations mandate is clearly defined.

While awaiting that return, the United Nations
should be able to provide its assistance in due course
within the framework of the mandate to be defined by
the Security Council and in agreement with the
legitimate representatives of the Iraqi people.

As the Secretary-General recommends in his
report (S/2004/ 140), and because it is the wish of the
Iraqi people, the United Nations, as an independent and
impartial institution that has the confidence of all
political stakeholders in Iraq, should, in the current
phase, be able to provide assistance to these
stakeholders. This assistance will enable them to reach
an understanding on the competence, the structure and
the composition of the transitional body that must
temporarily lead Iraq, as well as on the process through
which that body will be established. In this way - and
this is essential - the United Nations will have
contributed to the establishment of a representative and
credible government body with which the entire Iraqi
people can identify, to enabling a transfer of
sovereignty to that organ that is as orderly and smooth
as possible, and to ensuring that the date of that
transfer - 30 June - is maintained, in accordance
with the wishes of all Iraqis.

As of now, the United Nations, with its vast
experience in electoral assistance and with the
confidence of the different Iraqi stakeholders, should
make its experience and its expertise available to the
Iraqi people in order to establish a legal electoral
framework, as well as the various aspects of the
electoral process. In this way, the direct elections that
all parties in Iraq consider an essential step for the
building of democracy can take place at the end of this
year or, at the latest, at the beginning of next year.
Everything must be done in this regard so that the
electoral timetable is strictly observed and so that the
Iraqi people may directly elect the men and women
who will build the future of Iraq and who will guide it,
we hope, into freedom, democracy and progress.

Algeria takes note of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, contained in his report of 23
February (S/2004/140), which deserve the support of
our Council and of the entire international community.

Lastly, Algeria would like to reiterate its support
for the Secretary-General for his actions in Iraq and
express its appreciation to Mr. Brahimi for the new
dynamics that he has been able to create and for the
independence and impartiality that the United Nations
has displayed in this situation, which is in every regard
fraught with risks.

