Mr. J allow: The implementation of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) completion
strategy has gained significant momentum in the past
six months. The evidentiary phase of the cases of all
the current detainees have been concluded, pending two
judgements to be delivered in the course of this year.

My Office has also concluded the updating of the
case files of all fugitives, in respect of both pleadings
and evidence. We have also concluded the rule 71 bis
evidence preservation proceedings in respect of two of
the three cases concerned, that is, Kabaga and Mpiranya,
and are now scheduled to conclude in respect of the
third case - Bizimana - by the end of this month. That
exercise will greatly facilitate any trial work that will be
undertaken by the Residual Mechanism.

Litigation over the referral of cases has been a
significant aspect of the work of my Office during the
same period. We were successful in obtaining the referral
of five cases of indictees - two of them detainees and
the rest fugitives - to Rwanda for trial under rule 11
bis. The decisions on two of those cases or applications
are now pending, and I am planning to file one more
application - which would be the last one - shortly.
I also hope that by the end of 2012 all the cases of the
indictees that were earmarked for referral to national
jurisdictions will have been transferred to Rwanda,
leaving only the cases of the top three fugitives, that is,
Kabuga, Mpiranya and Bizimana, to be taken up; those
have been reserved for trial by the Residual Mechanism.

The success of the referral strategy to date has
been largely due to the commitment on the part of the
Government of Rwanda, with the support of the ICTR
and the development partners, to undertake extensive
law reform and capacity-building measures designed
to ensure a fair and effective trial within the Rwandan
legal system. I would like to commend the Government
of Rwanda for its cooperation in that respect and the
Governments of Canada, the United States and the
European Union for their support in the implementation
of those measures, whose purpose is to strengthen the
Rwandan legal system.

The referral strategy has not only brought dividends
to the Rwandan legal system; it has also made timely
and proper completion of the ICTR mandate a
probability. Equally important is the fact that the referral
decisions of the ICTR have facilitated the deportation or
extradition to Rwanda of suspected ge'nocidaires from
national jurisdictions where prosecution or extradition
has hitherto been beset with technical difficulties. In
that way, the gaps in the struggle against impunity have
been closed.

The cases of Bucyibaruta and Munyeshyaka,
referred by the ICTR to France for prosecution,
continue to progress before the investigating judges
in that jurisdiction. The prosecution and management
of appeals have also been of paramount importance,
as the workload of the Office of the Prosecutor for
the biennium increased substantially. Following the
delivery of judgement in one multi-accused trial and in
one single-accused trial, namely, Karemera et a]. and
Ndahimana, respectively, my Office has been litigating
33 appeals from final judgements and the sentences
returned in 12 cases. It has also been actively making
advance preparations for six potential additional appeals.
We anticipate that my Office will conclude its appellate
workload, including any possible appeals from the two
pending trial chamber judgements, well within the time
frame of the completion strategy.

If the pending referral applications are also
successful, the focus of my Office in respect of tracking
will shift to the three top-level fugitives earmarked for
trial by the Mechanism. However, we shall continue to
provide support to Rwanda for the tracking and arrest of
those fugitives whose cases have been referred to that
jurisdiction. It should be recalled that all States have an
obligation, pursuant to article 28 of the ICTR statute and
the orders of the ICTR Referral and Appeals Chambers,
to arrest such fugitives within their territories and
transfer them to Rwanda or other jurisdictions as may
be designated by the Chambers.

Tracking of the top three continues to be a challenge,
with information at our disposal continuing to link
Kabuga with Kenya, Mpiranya with Zimbabwe and
Bizimana with various locations in the same sub-Saharan
region. It is imperative, in the interests of peace and
justice, that all States collaborate and support the ICTR

in the arrest of those fugitives and that the international
community, acting through the Security Council, bring
its influence to bear on the States that are harbouring
them. While those three cases are earmarked for trial
by the Mechanism, it may become necessary, should
the three continue to evade justice for a long time, to
consider at some stage the option of referring their
cases to the appropriate national jurisdiction for trial.
Also, given that the fugitives are suspected to be in the
East, Central and Southern African regions, my Office
is actively encouraging regional inter-State institutions
in the area to make the arrest of those fugitives a
priority within their regional efforts to strengthen the
maintenance of peace, security and justice.

In order to ensure a smooth and effective migration
of our records and archives to the Mechanism, my
Office is also currently working on the preparation and
archiving of its holdings, both in Kigali and Arusha,
and is consolidating the related archiving regimes and
security frameworks. The servicing of foreign requests
for assistance in investigations and trials has continued
as an important function over the reporting period. In
order to strengthen the efforts of Member States to
bring to trial the Rwandan suspects appearing on the
INTERPOL list, my Office has, during the reporting
period, provided assistance to 10 Member States in
respect of 44 such requests relating to the investigation
or prosecution of genocide cases within the national
jurisdictions. That assistance function will be taken
over by the Office of the Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, Arusha Branch, from 1 July 2012.

With the appointment of all three principals of the
Mechanism earlier this year, efforts to establish the
Arusha Branch have moved quickly, thanks to the hard
work of its Registrar and the cooperation of both the
ICTY and the ICTR. Staff members at the respective
offices, the Tribunals and their principals have devoted
considerable time and energy to ensuring that the
Mechanism takes off as planned and functions effectively
from 1 July 2012. From that date, the Mechanism will,
we are confident, commence operations, focusing
on the tracking of fugitives, the provision of witness
management and support, the servicing of foreign
requests for assistance, preparations for possible trials
and the establishment of the Mechanism archives.
Recruitment of the core staff of the Branch is actively
under way. I expect to have a number of staff of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism on board to
commence the operations by 1 July.

Meanwhile, with the declining workload of the
ICTR, we have intensified the separation of staff whose
services are no longer required. Within my Office, that
has resulted in a significant scaling down of staffing
in both Kigali and Arusha. It is no doubt a challenging
process, but one that is necessary given the impending
closure of the ICTR. We remain indebted to the staff
members, who have worked hard and over many years
to make the commitment of the United Nations and
the mandate of the ICTR to bring justice and peace to
Rwanda a reality, not only for the people of Rwanda but
for the rest of the world.

Finally, I would like to thank the Security
Council and its members, as well as His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for my appointment as
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
a term of four years. I shall do my utmost to effectively
implement the letter and the spirit of resolution 1966
(2010) and the statute of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

