Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): at the outset, my delegation commends the
initiative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to organize this
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, and more
specifically on the reconstruction of institutional
architecture in countries emerging form conflict. I
would also like to express our gratitude to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Jose Luis Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, for their
valuable contributions to the present debate. Allow me
finally to thank Ambassador Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany and Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his enlightened
leadership in that role.

Peacebuilding is one of the most difficult and
complex tasks of the United Nations. Over the years, it
has also become one of the most important, insofar as
it prevents countries emerging from devastating
conflicts from sinking back into violence.

1l-21268
Rebuilding institutional architecture is an
extremely critical issue and calls for particular
attention, as reflected in today's debate. My delegation
would therefore like to focus on three issues we deem
to be important: the assistance that the United Nations
and the international community as a whole can
provide to these countries; the question of national
ownership; and aspects relating to partnerships.

Institution-building in post-crisis countries is an
important pillar of peacebuilding. This is an issue that
must be taken into account as soon as hostilities cease
in order to establish viable and lasting peace. Indeed, a
number of post-conflict countries lack effective
institutions capable of preserving a painfully won
peace. In other cases, the pre-existing institutions
themselves are the cause of conflict.

The United Nations and the international
community must ensure that peace so achieved is
preserved. This approach allows for peacebuilding, to
prevent any resurgence of conflict, and is fully
consistent with my country's conception of conflict
prevention.

International assistance, however, should not
obscure the responsibility of the authorities and other
national actors or their participation in the process
aimed at rebuilding the institutions of their country.
Assuming that responsibility would lead them to
greater ownership of the institution-building process
and the strengthening of national capacities.

With regard to issues related to the partnership
among the various players in the reconstruction or
strengthening of institutions, coherence and
coordination among them is necessary to avoid
overlapping tasks. In Sierra Leone, for example, the
establishment of a single programme for change,
bringing together the areas of security, development
and policy, has considerably streamlined the work of
the administration and has at the same time
strengthened the coherence of its actions and the
country's taking charge of the peace process.

Coherence must begin at the level of the United
Nations, through the clear definition and distribution of
tasks among the various bodies involved in efforts to
rebuild institutions in post-conflict countries. We
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Peacebuilding
Commission in that regard. Next, coherence must
extend to partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. They are sometimes better placed to

11-2l268
resolve some issues and to consider, with the host
country, the question of institution-building.

We also welcome the initiatives undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Commission to strengthen relations
between the United Nations and the World Bank, which
have enabled the Bank to take better account of the
priority needs of countries such as the Central African
Republic during 2010. We encourage the Commission,
in its coordinating role, to develop partnerships with all
financial and donor institutions able to help the
countries on its agenda. The Commission should also
involve all actors, including women's organizations.

In their report on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex), the co-facilitators recommended that special
attention be devoted to the partnership between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Gabon considers their recommendations a substantial
contribution. The Council would stand to benefit from
consulting with the Commission throughout all phases
of peace operations, from their preparation through
their renewal and to their withdrawal.

As we have often underscored, Gabon believes
that the issue of institution-building in countries
emerging form armed conflict should be planned for, as
circumstances require, when a peacekeeping operation
is established. Furthermore, we should not lose sight of
the fact that control of the political and security
process is, in our View, a central element of the
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy. To that end, we
urge our financial partners to continue their efforts to
finance reconstruction.

We welcome the fact all of those elements have
been taken into account in the draft presidential
statement that has been submitted to us, which we fully
support.
