Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
am gratified to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you the best as you
guide the work of the Council to a successful
conclusion. I wish also to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China, for his
distinguished work as President of the Council for the
month of February.

Hardly a day passes without our reading about the
sanctity of the rule of law and its importance in
civilized societies. Israel claims to be a State based on
the rule of law, but we have seen that it is a State
marked by hostility to international law and the norms
of human society. The assassination of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and his companions as they left a Gaza City
mosque was one link in a chain of terrorist acts
doggedly carried out by the Israeli Government,
targeting and mercilessly assassinating Palestinian
activists.

Today, international relations are in a very grave
situation because of the precedence being granted to
the logic of force over law, and because of the lack of
respect for international norms. This has led to total
disregard for the norms of justice, to the consecration
of the law of the jungle, to the adoption of double
standards in political affairs, to the complete distortion
of the norms of international law and to utterly strange
interpretations of those norms. This gives rise to
flawed, baseless explanations regarding the concept of
self-defence as set out in the Charter. Such
interpretations do not accord with opinions handed
down by the International Court of Justice with regard
to the fundamental principles of that right and the
conditions under which it can be used by States
collectively or individually to defend themselves.

This principle is a key law of international
relations, but it has been misused in an attempt to
justify acts of aggression by the Israeli Government,
which has no hesitation in carrying out its policy of
killing, displacing or impoverishing the Palestinian
people in full view of the entire world and in flagrant
violation of international law and the principles of
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and its two Additional Protocols of
1977. All of this has distorted the principle of the self-
determination of peoples and their right to resist
occupation and to defend their sovereignty and
territorial integrity, long consecrated in the United
Nations Charter and since confirmed by resolutions and
decisions of the General Assembly and by opinions of
the International Court of Justice.

The policy of prevarication and deception
pursued by the Government of Israel, to which the
majority of peace-loving Member States object, cannot
be accepted or used as a way to settle international
problems by means of armed forces, by bombarding
with fighter jets and by attacking with missiles. We
should seek solutions through commitment to the
principles of international law and justice.

International efforts to fight terrorism, no matter
how effective, will not be able to eradicate that
dangerous phenomenon without addressing its root
causes and the conditions that lead to its prevalence.
Those efforts will not succeed while the situation of
people under occupation continues to deteriorate and
the international community fails to find a just solution
to occupation. The spiral of violence will not end as
long as the international community fails to combine
international political initiatives with serious work and
as long as the Security Council remains unable to
condemn Israeli terrorism. As long as there is
occupation, there will be resistance.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia expresses its grave
concern and sadness over the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories that results from the continued
Israeli crimes against the Palestinian people and the
assassination of the martyred Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.
That was a senseless act of aggression, which aimed
first and foremost at killing international efforts to
revive the peace process in the Middle East.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like to
associate itself with the international community in
condemning this criminal act that runs counter to all
international law and international humanitarian law.
We call upon the international community, as
represented by the Security Council, to share and
shoulder the responsibility vis-a-vis the situation in the
occupied Arab territories and the Palestinian territories.
The Council should shoulder its responsibility towards
the Palestinian people by providing international
protection and by putting an end to the senseless Israeli
policy and its oppression of the Palestinian people.
That oppression will only lead to a further deterioration
of the situation and will be an impediment to any
attempt to put an end to the bloody conflict in the
region.

