Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Uruguayan presidency for organizing this important
and much-anticipated interaction with the general
officers in charge of specific peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and the general officers in charge of the military
components of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
their briefings on important issues so critical to the
success of peacekeeping.

Allow me to begin by paying tribute to them
and to the more than 100,000 peacekeepers deployed
around the world. Without their everyday actions,
their personal commitment and their courage, and
that of their soldiers, the men and women who have
demonstrated, very recently, in the Central African
Republic and Mali, their acceptance of the ultimate
sacrifice, in what state would our world, already so
weakened by the proliferation of crises, be? How many
civilian lives have been saved by the Blue Helmets,
who are increasingly confronted with direct and often
asymmetrical lethal threats? Let me assure them of our
admiration, our trust and our support for their noble
task. Let me also assure them, above all, of the constant
care taken within the Security Council to provide
them with the mandates, means and political support
necessary to ensure the success of their missions.

It is our responsibility within the Council to
fully understand the challenges that they and their
soldiers face, including the complex environments
and security threats. We do that by listening to them
today, and even more so through regular dialogue with
troop-contributing countries, which now takes place
systematically each time the Council takes the initiative
to renew a mandate.

Today, I would like to highlight three key points
that underpin their day-to-day work.

First, we are mindful ofthe smooth conduct of their
military operations, both during the pre-deployment
training phase, the deployment phase, of course, and
the withdrawal phase. That would not be possible
without integrated planning in New York among all
the actors of the Security Council, Secretariat, the
troop-contributing countries, and also the host States.
That integrated planning must also continue on the
site of the activities, through coordinated action by all
constituents. That is the key to their success.

Secondly, I would also like to stress the importance
of giving them the means to carry out their mission.
That is our responsibility and our commitment. We
have a duty in the Council to ensure that they deploy
with the best trained troops. To that end, I would like
to stress the importance of the regional peacekeeping
conferences, in particular that held in Paris in October
2016, which was devoted to peacekeeping in French-
speaking environments and during which language
training and the importance of interaction with the
local population were highlighted.

It is also important that their troops be deployed
without hidden national restrictions and with acceptable
and standardized protection capabilities, as well as with
facilitating capabilities that will enable them to conduct
their operations under the best conditions in terms of
efficiency and protection. We hardly even need to
underscore here the crucial importance of having a fully
coherent and unified command structure on critical
capacities. Here I would stress medical- evacuation
capacities, which must be available around the clock,
seven days a week, because threats do not stop on the
weekend or at night. I would also mention the equipment
that is needed to protect against improvised explosive
devices in cases where troops face such threats in their
theatres of operation.

Thirdly, and finally, we must be very clear
with regard to robust peacekeeping. If we ask Force
Commanders to implement robust mandates, then
we commit ourselves for our part to provide them
with all of the necessary political support as well as
adequate capacity, in full accordance with their rules
of engagement, which must also give them the means
to successfully accomplish their mission. This is our
moral commitment towards them.
This annual meeting with Force Commanders
is vital in order to enable them to share their current
concerns; they should never hesitate to turn to us. We
in the Council consider them to be our armed branch in
the service of international peace and security.

Allow me to conclude my statement by once again
paying tribute to the Force Commanders. Their current
peacekeeping profession is not an essentially military
one, perhaps, but it is a task that only the military can
carry out with such success. I thank them warmly once
again for their exemplary commitment in the service
of peace.

