Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan and you, Mr. President, Ambassador Oh
Joon, for the briefings and the commitment with which
all have presided over the Committees established
under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), and 1540 (2004), respectively. I would like to
thank our Lithuanian colleague for her joint briefing,
which highlighted the continued cooperation between
the three Committees and their groups of experts.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the European Union.

Current events, whether in the Sahel, the Horn of
Africa or the Middle East, remind us every day to what
extent terrorism continues to threaten international
peace and security. In the face of that scourge, we
welcome the fact that the three competent Security
Council Committees and their groups of experts
continue to interact with a view to coordinating their
activities and to exchange information on the issues
before them.

We encourage the three groups of experts to
continue coordinating their outreach activities and
their field visits in order to facilitate the participation
of their respective experts and to ensure a consistent
approach. The assessment visit to Mongolia - which
takes place this week, headed by Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, on behalf of the the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, with the participation
of the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the 1267/1989 Committee - is a good example in that
respect.

We welcome the commitment of the three groups
of experts in the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which has contributed to
the preparation for the United Nations fourth global
counter-terrorism strategic review.

The sanctions regime established under resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) on Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities is one of the most important
multilateral tools that the international community has
for combating terrorism. It targets the various factions
of Al-Qaida and its affiliates to deprive them of
weapons and funding, limit their movements and thus
weaken their ability to perpetrate acts of terrorism.

For the regime to be effective, the listing process
for persons and entities and the delisting procedures
must be guided by the principles of equity, respect for
the rule of law, credibility and transparency. Similarly,
sanctions must be applied diligently. The consolidated
list must also evolve in step with the threat.

We support the rapid and strategic work by the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, which seeks to
ensure that the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council support national and regional responses to the
evolving terrorist threat from Al-Qaida. That approach
encourages Member States to take ownership of the
listing process. It proved its worth last week when,
at the request of Nigeria, the Committee approved
the listing of Boko Haram on the sanctions list. That
designation is welcome and fully justified.

We commend the role of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team in highlighting the changing
nature of the Al-Qaida threat and for recommending
ways to adapt sanctions to the noted changes in the
protocol and scope of that threat. Mr. Evans and his
Team can rely on our full support in discharging
their mandate. We support the recommendations of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and believe it is necessary for the Committee
to maintain a comprehensive approach linked to an
ongoing assessment of the threat.

The Office of the Ombudsman plays an important
impartial role in applying the sanctions regime. The
Committee continues to work with the Ombudsman on
delisting requests. That process helps in ensuring that
the Al-Qaida sanctions list is targeted and effective. We
congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost on the independence,
professionalism and courage with which she fulfils
her mission. The review of resolution 2083 (2012)
next month will be a useful opportunity to further
strengthen the procedures and effectiveness of the
Committee and the Office of the Ombudsman. The
Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions
has made constructive proposals in that regard, in
particular to improve information-sharing between the
Office of the Ombudsman and the Member States and
to strengthen the transparency of decisions to delist or
maintain elements on the sanctions list.

Regarding the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, we support the efforts of the Committee to
strengthen the capacity of Member States to help them
to fully implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Those efforts are a response to the guidance
given by resolution 2129 (2013), which renewed the
mandate of Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. We welcome the fact that the Committee
has decided to pay enhanced attention to the fight
against hostage-taking for ransom and the prevention
of terrorists' misuse of travel documents.

We commend the work of Mr. Laborde at the
head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. The close interaction between the
Executive Directorate and Member States is essential
for the full implementation of their commitments in the
fight against terrorism. We encourage the Executive
Directorate to continue its capacity-building activities
and to propose mechanisms for technical assistance to
countries that request it. Luxembourg is prepared to
assist in that regard. We have thus sponsored a regional
workshop on the freezing of terrorist assets, which is
organized jointly by the Executive Directorate and the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force. The workshop is being held today, tomorrow and
the day after tomorrow in Tunis.

Finally, regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), it cannot be stressed
enough that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The threat from terrorists or other non-State actors who
might acquire, develop, traffic or use such weapons is
elevated. It is the duty of all Member States to fight
against that threat.

During the open debate (see S/PV.7169) held on
7 May by the Korean presidency on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), the Council renewed the commitment it had
undertaken 10 years earlier. It acknowledged the role of
the 1540 Committee as a clearinghouse that connects
applicants and providers of assistance and recognized
the essential contribution that civil society, industry
and the private sector have to make. To counter the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we must
indeed mobilize all possible efforts. The Council
also stressed the importance of close and effective
cooperation and coordination between the 1540
Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The cooperation of those three Committees and
their Groups of Experts has created synergies. We must
continue on that path. Everyone will thus win, and
terrorists will lose.
