The Secretary-General: Once again I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your success in using your
presidency to focus world attention on Africa and its
problems, and I join you in welcoming President Mandela
to the Council Chamber. His presence with us today is a
credit both to him and to you, Mr. President. It shows the
dedication and seriousness which he brings to his new task
as Facilitator of the peace efforts in Burundi, and it also
shows how much he values the assistance the Council can
give him as he undertakes that formidable task. By coming
here he pays all of us a compliment and puts us under a
strong obligation to show ourselves worthy of his faith.

Mr. President, you have done well to make the conflict
in Burundi the subject of this open meeting. Of all the
many crises and conflicts confronting Africa today, perhaps
none is more urgent. Certainly in no other country is it so
easy to imagine a repetition of what we have all sworn
must never be repeated: ethnic killing on a genocidal
scale. Again we see two ethnic groups locked in
apparently implacable hostility to one another, a steadily
escalating spiral of violence and killing and a faltering
peace process in which the different parties pay lip
service at best.

Some progress has been achieved in the four
commissions in Arusha and through consultations in
Dar-es-Salaam. We all remember with gratitude the
efforts made by the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere to push
the process forward. Yet serious disagreements remain on
some key issues - such as the future composition of the
army, the electoral system and the transition period -
while others - such as guarantees for the minority
community and the question of reconciliation versus
impunity - have yet to be seriously addressed.

Also, we are all acutely aware of the unstable and
volatile regional context in which this drama is taking
place. We shall no doubt discuss that dimension in more
detail next week when the Council considers the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But we cannot
ignore it when discussing Burundi, which is not only
affected by events in neighbouring countries but also has
the potential to further destabilize the region, especially
if violence continues to escalate, prompting more of the
population to flee across the borders.

For all those reasons, I heartily welcome the
involvement of President Mandela and place great hopes
in his ability to revive the peace process. We in the
United Nations Secretariat are determined to give
whatever help we can, and I am sure the Council will
wish to do the same. The appalling humanitarian
consequences of the present political stalemate would in
themselves provide sufficient reason to do so.

Hundreds of thousands of Burundians have died over
the past 10 years. The number of Burundian refugees has
now reached 500,000 and is growing by the day. More
than 800,000 people, 12 per cent of the country's
population, are internally displaced, many of them as a
result of a deliberate Government policy of forcibly
relocating civilians in circumstances where this cannot be
justified under international humanitarian law. Since
September alone, over 300,000 innocent men, women and
children in the region surrounding Bujumbura have been
herded into camps where they are deprived not only of

 

their freedom, but of the most elementary means of
subsistence.
The humanitarian impact of this policy has been
disastrous. As the World Food Programme reported this
week, thousands are now in special feeding programmes,
and more are entering every day. But many sites are
inaccessible by vehicle, which makes the delivery of
assistance very difficult. We are on the verge of another
humanitarian catastrophe, for which the world will
undoubtedly hold the Government of Burundi responsible.
I fully endorse the statement on this subject that was issued
today by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee.

Two days ago, the Government of Burundi announced
its intention to set up a parliamentary commission to
investigate the health conditions prevailing in the camps
and to start dismantling those in the province of Bujumbura
Rural within two weeks. I welcome this announcement, but
urge the authorities to go further and abandon this
inhumane and illegal policy altogether. So long as the
camps exist, the Government must allow independent
humanitarian agencies full access to them and must at all
times ensure the safety of humanitarian workers, both
international and local.

No party in Burundi should assume that the justice of
its cause or the iniquity of its opponents is as obvious to
the rest of the world as they may seem to itself. And
certainly, no party should assume that outsiders will come
to rescue it from the consequences of its own folly and
intransigence. One side may think itself entitled to the
world's sympathy because it represents an ethnic minority,
the same ethnic group which has been the victim of
genocide in Rwanda. The other may equally plausibly see
itself as the victim, right now, of oppressive minority rule.
But neither can escape its share of responsibility for the
escalating violence or for the lack of progress towards a
political solution.

As a fellow African, I can only echo Mr. Mandela's
words to the parties in Arusha on Sunday. Their willingness
to sacrifice the lives of their fellow citizens on the altar of
their political ambitions amounts to a betrayal of millions
of other Africans who are struggling to promote the
continent's recovery. It is a grievous obstacle to those of us
who are trying to engage the sympathy and support of the
rest of the world on their behalf. I strongly urge all parties
to cooperate with him in seeking a political solution. If they
do, I remain hopeful that, this time, the international
community will assist them.

This help cannot be confined to the diplomatic
sphere; it must also have an economic dimension. While
humanitarian aid has continued to flow to Burundi - and
the United Nations Development Programme, in
particular, has mobilized $6 million in a trust fund to
address the needs of local communities affected by the
crisis - other forms of international support have been
interrupted since mid-1996.

But once donors are convinced that there is a serious
effort by the Burundian parties to find a political
compromise, they too should be prepared to make an
effort. Burundians will need generous help to reverse the
effects of seven years of conflict and to begin at last to
address their country's most basic development needs.
With that help, they could lay the foundations of a
tolerant, democratic political order, in which all ethnic
and social groups can find their place. And that, in turn,
would be a major contribution to peace and security
throughout the region.

To place such hopes in the generosity and
enlightened self-interest of donors may seem naive in the
light of past experience, but your success, Sir, in focusing
attention on this Council's work in Africa emboldens me
to expect that, where Africans really do show a
willingness to tackle their own problems, more fortunate
countries, led by your own, will indeed be willing to help.
Meanwhile, I know the Council is impatient to hear from
Mr. Mandela, so let me not delay him any longer.

