Mr. Karugarama (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to contribute to this debate. My
delegation wishes to thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their comprehensive reports on
progress made in effectively discharging the mandate
of the ICTR.

The ICTR has registered progress in the
discharge of its mandate. Some of the most notorious
genocide suspects have been arrested and brought to
justice. An increasing number of countries have
increased their cooperation with the court. A number of
countries have responded to Rwanda's call to arrest
and extradite other genocide suspects whose cases do
not fall under the mandate of the ICTR. Rwanda has
consistently and persistently cooperated and supported
the ICTR and will continue to do so.

As a result of the legal powers and resources
vested in the court, as well as the specific support that
Rwanda provides, the ICTR has managed to register
significant achievements. We are informed, for
example, that before Christmas the ICTR will read one
of the long-awaited judgements in the case involving
four senior ex-military commanders: Theoneste
Bagosora, Gratien Kabiligi, Anatole Nsengiyumva and
Aloys Ntabakuze.

In 2003, the Security Council adopted resolution
1503 (2003) providing for completion of the ICTR's
activities. The resolution set two deadlines for
completion: December 2008 for all trials and
December 2010 for all appeals. The resolution further
directed that those cases that may not be completed
within the set deadlines - especially those involving
mid- and low-ranking suspects - should be transferred
to national jurisdictions, including Rwanda's. Under
the resolution, the ICTR was required to devise an
implementation strategy and to report to the Security
Council on its effective implementation.

As part of the implementation of the resolution
on completion, the ICTR Prosecutor began
consultations with the Government of Rwanda on
possibilities for transfer of cases to Rwanda. The
transfer to Rwanda is based primarily on the fact that
the crimes falling under the ICTR's mandate were
committed in Rwanda, mostly by Rwandans and
against fellow Rwandans. The evidence and witnesses
used by the court are mainly from Rwanda. The ends of
justice administered by the Tribunal are supposed to be
more visible in Rwanda than elsewhere. That makes
Rwanda the State most responsible for and concerned
in the pursuit of justice over those crimes. In that
regard, Rwanda has found it imperative to participate
fully in the determination of matters pertaining to the
ICTR, particularly the completion process.

Over the past three years, Rwanda has been
preparing to handle ICTR transfer cases. The
preparations were done in consultation with the Office
of the ICTR Prosecutor. As part of the preparations, a
comprehensive piece of legislation was passed in
March 2000 to govern the transfer of cases from the
ICTR and any other State to Rwanda. The law provides
sufficient guarantees for fair trial. It was negotiated
between the ICTR and Rwanda and is specifically
based on the ICTR's rules of procedure and evidence,
as well as other best practices recognized and applied
by the ICTR. The law allows the ICTR to monitor trials
and recognizes the ICTR's primacy and right to call
back transferred cases in the event that the requisite
standards are not met.

Modern courtrooms have been prepared. For the
past two years, a joint programme has been running
between ICTR and Rwanda under which we have
conducted familiarization, interaction and training
between the ICTR and Rwandan judges, prosecutors
and members of the bar association, including court
administrative support staff. A modern holding cell has
been constructed in Kigali to accommodate ICTR
detainees who will be appearing in court in Kigali.

Both the Prosecutor and the Tribunal's Registrar
have conducted a series of visits to Rwanda to verify
Rwanda's readiness and willingness to receive ICTR's
outstanding caseload. They have expressed their
satisfaction with the level of readiness attained by
Rwanda's judicial institutions in that regard. We have
been able to make these preparations with the bilateral
and multilateral support of our development partners,
including some members of this Council.

Following a judicious assessment of Rwanda's
competence to handle transfer cases, the ICTR Chief
Prosecutor made requests to the ICTR judges to
transfer some of these cases to Rwanda. Five requests
were filed by the Prosecutor with the court. In all the
requests, Rwanda supported the ICTR Prosecutor by
presenting evidence of its readiness and willingness to
handle the cases according to the required standard.
Rwanda appeared as amicus curiae in those requests.
Despite all these efforts, the ICTR judges rejected four
of the applications, and one is still pending.

The ICTR has acknowledged that Rwanda has
attained a sufficient level of competence in its legal
and judicial system. However, inadequacies still exist.
These inadequacies are common to all systems and are
not insurmountable. There are remedial measures
inherent within our judicial system that seek to address
the concerns raised by the ICTR judges in their
decisions, for example on witness protection and
equality of opportunity for the prosecution and the
defence. Rwanda has addressed most of those concerns
and will continue to do so. We therefore urge the ICTR
Judges to re-examine the transfer of cases to Rwanda.

We reiterate that ICTR decisions have the effect,
unfortunately, of undermining the trust and confidence
that Rwanda has painstakingly built. It is this trust and
confidence that have led certain Governments to
apprehend some of the most wanted fugitives, found on
their respective territories.

However, we are particularly concerned that, for
example, on the basis of the ICTR decisions, the German
judicial authorities, citing ICTR precedent, released two
notorious genocide suspects - namely Callixte
Mbarushimana and Rwabukombe Onesphore - and only
a few a days ago a French appellate court released another
genocide suspect in spite of the overwhelming evidence,
again citing ICTR precedent.

The ICTR rulings rejecting the transfer of cases
to Rwanda almost amount to an invitation to States not
to cooperate with the transfer and apprehension of
these fugitives. That is why we call upon the Security
Council to consider this matter as the potential cause of
a serious judicial impasse that will definitely create an
impunity gap, and we invite the Council to take
remedial measures accordingly.

We re-emphasize that the fugitives still at large
are not limited to the 13 appearing on the ICTR list. It
is very important for this Council to ensure that the
conclusion of the ICTR mandate does not become an
amnesty for those not included on the ICTR condensed
list. Rwanda appreciates the continued efforts of some
Governments to apprehend the fugitives. The
proceedings for their extradition to Rwanda are
currently under way in various countries, notably the

United Kingdom, Sweden, New Zealand, Finland, the
Netherlands and Canada, to mention but a few.

The ICTR statute, in article 26, makes Rwanda
the primary destination for convicted persons to serve
their sentence. In 2001, the ICTR transferred six
convicts to another jurisdiction without due regard for
the provisions of article 26 and without serving notice
to Rwanda, as required under rule 103 of the Tribunal's
rules of procedure. In March 2008, an agreement for
the transfer of convicts to Rwanda was finally signed
between the ICTR and the Rwandan Government. This
agreement has been ratified by both chambers of the
Rwandan Parliament. In spite of that agreement and its
ratification by our Parliament, about two weeks ago the
ICTR transferred two other suspects, Hassan Ngeze
and Ferdinand Nahimana, to the Republic of Mali.

We are aware that 10 others may soon be
transferred to another State in an outright breach of the
spirit of the very statute that established the ICTR. We
believe that the transfer of cases and of convicts to
Rwanda will make justice apparent to Rwandans, who
are both the victims and the perpetrators of the
genocide. Our reading of the spirit and intent of article
26, in juxtaposition with rule 103 of the Tribunal's
rules of procedure, would indicate that Rwanda should
be the favoured destination for the transfer of cases and
convicts, and that this should be the rule rather than the
exception, as has been the case. The ICTR should feel
the compelling need to have justice not only done, but
also seen to be done by Rwandans, who are the primary
beneficiaries ofits mandate.

Lastly, the issue of the transfer of archives to
Rwanda remains pending. Consultations have been
ongoing with the team designated to study and make
recommendations on the matter. We have reiterated our
desire and readiness to take full custody of the
archives. Rwanda has submitted a formal request to the
Security Council, expressing our desire to have the
archives stored and managed in Rwanda. We hope for
the best in the Council's decision on the matter.

At this crucial juncture, Rwanda shares the
Council's desire to reach a reasonable and effective
conclusion to the ad hoc mandate of the Tribunal. We
therefore urge the Council to do all within its power to
ensure that the ICTR completion strategy is reached
without undermining the fight against impunity - or
creating an impunity gap - and the efforts of my
Government in that regard.

