The President (spoke in Chinese): The fact that
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who has just returned to
New York after visiting a number of countries, is attending
this meeting attests to the great importance that he and the
Secretariat attach to the situation in Sierra Leone.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the first
meeting of the Security Council for the month of May, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Mr. Robert Fowler, Permanent
Representative of Canada to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of April 2000. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Fowler for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone


The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara ( Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2000/373, which contains a
letter dated 2 May 2000 from Sierra Leone.

Members of the Council also have received
photocopies of a letter dated 4 May 2000 from Sierra
Leone, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2000/380.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the outbreak of violence in Sierra Leone
in recent days. It condemns in the strongest terms
the armed attacks perpetrated by the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) against the forces of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and
their continued detention of a large number of
United Nations and other international personnel.
The Council expresses its outrage at the killing of a
number of United Nations peacekeepers of the
Kenyan battalion and its deep concern for the
UNAMSIL troops who have been wounded or
remain unaccounted for.

"The Security Council demands that the RUF
end its hostile actions, release immediately and
unharmed all detained United Nations and other
international personnel, cooperate in establishing the
whereabouts of those unaccounted for, and comply
fully with the terms of the Lome Peace Agreement
(S/ 1999/777).

"The Security Council considers Mr. Foday
Sankoh, as leader of the RUF, to be responsible for
these actions, which are unacceptable and in clear
Violation of their obligations under the Lome
Agreement. The Council condemns the fact that
Mr. Sankoh has deliberately failed to fulfil his
responsibility to cooperate with UNAMSIL in
bringing these incidents to an end. The Council
believes that he must be held accountable, together
with the perpetrators, for their actions.

"The Security Council commends UNAMSIL
forces and the Force Commander for the courage,
resolve and sacrifice they have shown in attempting
to bring this situation under control. It expresses its
full support for their continued efforts to this end,
and for the overall fulfilment of their mandate. It
 

calls upon all States in a position to do so to assist the
Mission in this regard. The Council also expresses its
support for the regional and other international efforts
under way to resolve the crisis, including by the
Economic Community of West African States.

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
the situation closely and consider further actions, as
necessary."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOO/ 14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.

