Mr. Delattre (France): (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking Venezuela for its presidency
during the month of February and by wishing every
success to the presidency of Angola. I also thank the
United States for having presented resolution 2270
(2016), which we have just adopted unanimously.
In carrying out its fourth nuclear test, on 6 January,
and a long-range launch using ballistic technology, on
7 February, North Korea once again decided to defy
the international community. Those two acts, which
are seriously destabilizing in effect and in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions, not only pose
a threat to international and regional peace security,
but also defy the non-proliferation regime, which is the
backbone of our collective security.

It was up to the Security Council to challenge that
defiance and act decisively by adopting resolution 2270
(2016). Now it is done. Our adoption of this resolution
significantly strengthens the sanctions regime and
represents a turning point in the Council's approach to
the North Korean proliferation crisis. Several elements
are worth highlighting.

First, the resolution decides to put in place
unprecedented sanctions against North Korea and
sends a united and unambiguous message on the part
of the Security Council to Pyongyang, namely, that
there is a price to pay for the provocations and the
irresponsible and destabilizing headlong rush by the
Pyongyang regime.

Moreover, the sanctions adopted today have targeted
goals. They aim, on the one hand, at hindering and
putting an end to the North Korean nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes in a concrete manner. On the other
hand, the sanctions target the diverted revenue of the
North Korean regime to fuel the illicit programmes at
the expense of the North Korean people, who continue
to suffer under the yoke of totalitarianism.

Finally, the resolution keeps the door open for
dialogue and insists on the need to resume the Six-
Party Talks. Our final objective is not sanctions, but
rather denuclearization and peace and stability on the
peninsula through a negotiated solution.

It is up to North Korea to show in a sincere way
and through concrete gestures that it is ready to resume
dialogue with a view to giving up its nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. The spiral of provocation
leads us to an impasse and offers us no other option than
to strengthen sanctions, as a means and not as an end of
themselves. Dialogue and negotiations, based on a very
firm position, are the only viable option to ensure the
full and verifiable denuclearization of the peninsula.

Owing to all of those reasons, France voted for the
adoption of this resolution, co-sponsored it along with
approximately 50 Member States and will continue to
be mobilized to ensure its full implementation.

