Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for this
briefing and commend him for his active efforts since
his assumption of his position to promote a political
settlement in Syria.

Years of conflict in Syria have brought profound
suffering to the country and its people. The Syrian
people long for peace and to return home and rebuild
their normal lives as soon as possible. The large-scale
conflict in Syria has essentially come to an end.

China welcomes the meeting in Sochi on 14 February
of leaders from Russia, Turkey and Iran to discuss
the Syrian issue, which produced a joint statement
reaffirming continued efforts to crack down on terrorist
groups and individuals listed by the Security Council,
as well as a renewed commitment to the Syrian political
process. As the next step, the international community
should focus on promoting work in the following areas.

First, we must continue to advance. the process of
political settlement in Syria. The United Nations should
strengthen coordination with the Syrian Government,
promote the prompt formation of a representative
Syrian constitutional committee that is acceptable to
all and that accommodates the legitimate concerns of
the Syrian Government and all other parties with a
view to launching an effective and sustained Syrian
political process. The United Nations should continue
to intensify its efforts and act as the main channel
of mediation. The members of the Council should be
united and speak with one voice in order to create the
conditions for a political solution to the Syrian issue.

Secondly, we must persist in combating terrorist
forces. There is a tendency for terrorist groups in Idlib
to re-emerge, which threatens Syria's security and
stability and hinders reconstruction and the return
of refugees. The international community should
strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation, harmonize
standards, crack down on all terrorist groups listed
by the Council and prevent the resurgence of terrorist
organizations to undermine the hard-won stability of
the security situation.

Thirdly, we must encourage Syrian parties to meet
each other half way. In accordance with the spirit of
resolution 2254 (2015), on the basis of respect for
Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, and in line with the principle of a Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led process, the parties concerned
in the Syrian issue should promote the adoption of
an inclusive political process by all Syrian parties
and seek a solution acceptable to all. China has been
consistently committed to a political solution in Syria.
We stand to ready to enhance communication and
cooperation with the United Nations and all other
relevant parties and to play an active and constructive
role in advancing the political settlement in
Syria.

