Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the work that you and your friendly
delegation have been doing during your membership
of the Security Council and your presidency of it
this month.

On 9 October the Turkish regime began a new
chapter in its aggression against my country, in
flagrant violation of international law, the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the outcome documents
of the Astana meetings and the Sochi memorandum,
all of which stress the importance of respecting Syria's
territorial integrity and sovereignty. The Turkish
aggression has resulted in the occupation of Syrian
territory and the killing and injuring of hundreds of
martyrs and civilians, including women, children
and public servants. It has also displaced hundreds
of thousands of people and done significant material
damage to schools, hospitals and vital infrastructure
such as dams and power and water plants. It seems
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs considers all of that an illusion undeserving
of attention, which shows that its humanitarian claims
are empty.

It is unfortunate that neither Ms. Mueller nor
Mr. Khiari condemned the Turkish aggression, referring
to it as the Turkish military operation in north-eastern
Syria as if it were in north-eastern Venus, Mars or
Mercury, not a country that is a founding member of
this Organization and is sovereign under international
law. As they always do, the Turkish regime and its
partners in the aggression against my country have
tried to legitimize it and whitewash the facts. To justify
its aggression, the Turkish regime included in its letter
addressed to the President of the Council (S/2019/804) a
number of lies that fool no one. It claimed, for instance,
that the aggression is intended to facilitate the return of
displaced persons, preserve the territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic and combat terrorism. It even
gave its aggression the name "Operation Peace Spring"
and called the area it seeks to occupy a "safe zone",
in an illustration of the schizophrenia of the Turkish
regime, which only a few years ago announced a zero-
problem approach to its neighbours. That has ended up
as an approach of zero principles, zero friends and zero
good-neighbourliness.

It is not that surprising that in its aggression against
my country the Turkish regime invoked Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations, since that echoes the
approach taken by its NATO allies. They have invoked
that article to justify direct military intervention,
invasion and the undermining of the sovereignty,
security and stability of a number of States Members
of the United Nations. That was the case when the
so-called international coalition was established, an
illegitimate coalition whose crimes and puppet militias
paved the way for the current Turkish aggression. It is
strange that this magical article should be invoked by
some to justify waging wars and military aggression
on countries that are members of the United Nations
without any consideration for the actual mandate of
the Security Council, which is the maintenance of
international peace and security. We all remember what
happened in Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya. Perhaps the
Council ought to hold a meeting with representatives
of the Office of Legal Affairs in our Organization to
clarify this important article of the Charter, debunk
the myths and misconceptions surrounding it and
distinguish between legitimate self-defence, on the one
hand, and war, invasion and aggression on the other, all
of which are condemned by the Charter.

My Government condemns the Turkish aggression
in the strongest terms and categorically rejects the
Turkish regime's attempts to justify its actions on
pretexts of self-defence or counter-terrorism. This
regime has violated the Adana security agreement
concluded between both our countries in 1998. It has
recruited, supported, trained and armed thousands
of terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters from
more than 100 countries, according to United Nations
reports. Those terrorists were welcomed by Turkish
intelligence officials at Turkish airports with a view to
facilitating their infiltration of the shared border with
my country. Their crimes were pre-planned. For years,
they were provided with political, military and media
support before they were recently integrated into the
invading forces in their aggression against the north-
east of my country.

Turkey's aggression has today been condemned
by the representatives of several European countries.
They referred to that aggression as unilateral Turkish
action, or as the Turkish operation, at best. However,
that condemnation does not in any way absolve those
countries of being accountable for their own actions in
creating the current situation. They laid out on a golden
platter all of the justification Erdogan needed to carry
out his aggression and played a key role in supporting
and sponsoring the illegitimate separatist militias in
north-eastern Syria. They also played a major role in
instigating the emergence and exacerbation of the threat
posed by terrorist organizations currently operating in
and around Idlib.

The former United States Special Presidential
Envoy for the Global Coalition Against Da'esh, Mr. Brett
McGurk, confirmed that Turkey had allowed 40,000
Da'esh operatives from 110 countries tojoin its terrorist
ranks, refusing to close its shared border with Syria.
Those were McGurk's words and that is the reality. Did
those countries not realize what was happening? What
did they do to dissuade the terrorists from coming to
my country? They did nothing - nothing but lament
international humanitarian law. We must combat
terrorism with international humanitarian law. We must
not send terrorists back to their places of departure in
Europe; rather, we must accommodate Da'esh terrorists
in lO-star hotels and ask the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to provide them with food

from the best restaurants in Paris. By this, we would
have implemented the international humanitarian law.

It is regrettable that some continue to demonstrate
their usual traits of hypocrisy and double standards.
They commend the Turkish regime for its so-called
generosity in hosting Syrian refugees and its cross-
border humanitarian action. They choose to ignore
the fact that Erdogan would not have welcomed a
single Syrian citizen were it not for his plans to use
Syrians as tools for achieving his expansionist agenda
in the region, to fulfil his illusions of establishing the
"Ottoman Sultanate of Erdogan" and to use them as a
means ofblackmailing Europe. He has repeatedly issued
threats against Europe, even if that means hundreds of
Syrians drowning in death boats belonging to Turkish
smugglers in the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas.

Erdogan would not have facilitated any United
Nations cross-border action were it not for his desire to
cover up the smuggling of tens of thousands of foreign
terrorist, arms shipments and looting oil, antiquities,
wheat and Syrian factories and produce across the
border. Those were the real outcomes of resolutions
2449 (2018) and 2165 (2014). Was the Council aware
of all of that? Of course it was aware, but the hostile
actions of some Governments against Syria prompted an
allegiance with the devil at the expense of international
law, ethics and human values, resulting in the bloodshed
of the Syrian people.

The Ottoman Empire first occupied Syria in 1516.
The same Empire fell at the gates of Damascus in 1916.
I ask the Council to take note of that coincidence. In
1516, the Ottoman Empire occupied Syria; in 1916, more
than 100 years ago, the Ottoman Empire ceased to exist
at the gates of Damascus - not Vienna. Our neighbour,
Turkey, must understand that we share common history,
geography and interests - not hostile relations.

My delegation sent an official letter to the Council
yesterday containing the detailed response of the
Syrian Government to the information contained
in the sixty-third report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions related to the
humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2019/820). In view
of the time constraints, I will simply reiterate that
improving the humanitarian situation significantly in
my country will require full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic by
countering external political, military and economic
interference in the domestic affairs ofmy country. It will

also require ensuring the full withdrawal of all foreign
forces that are acting illegitimately in the Syrian Arab
Republic. They are violating the sovereignty of my
country, thereby supporting terrorism and obstructing
our efforts and those of our allies to improve the
humanitarian situation, as is the case in Rukban camp in
the occupied area of Al-Tanf- an area that no one has
mentioned today. Not one speaker has mentioned the
fact that Al-Tanf, which is Syrian territory, is currently
occupied by United States forces. We also reiterate the
importance of lifting the unilateral coercive measures
under which the Syrian people are suffering. It is
equally important to ensure full cooperation with the
Syrian Government in supporting its efforts to combat
terrorism and make progress in the humanitarian and
development fields. Not to do so would be fishing in
troubled waters.

Finally, I wish to refer to our recent interaction
with Ms. Marcaillou, who was recently in Damascus,
as she mentioned in her briefing. She attended
important meetings with my colleagues in the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, and we informed her that we had
developed a two-pronged national mine action strategy.
We also clarified that a significant and important
part of our demining work is being carried out by the
Syrian Government and our Russian allies. We further
explained that an Armenian mission, specialized in the
field of demining, is undertaking commendable efforts
in this field. We informed her that we are continuing
to cooperate with the Aga Khan Development Network
to remove mines in the Salamiyah area. We also told
her that the European Union (EU) claims to fund 30
humanitarian projects in Syria, but that it has not
allocated any funding to demining projects. We told
Ms. Marcaillou all that in Damascus. The EU rejects
funding the efforts of the United Nations Mine
Action Service to remove mines in Syria. Is demining
not a humanitarian activity? If demining is not a
humanitarian activity but a political one, then I ask:
Why did Ms. Marcaillou brief the Council today on the
humanitarian situation in Syria?

