Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting, and I welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo
Garcia to the Chamber. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Arnault for his briefing.

Colombia's presidential and parliamentary elections
were recently held smoothly, and its peace process has
yielded some positive progress. China appreciates the
effort made by former President Santos, the Colombian
Government and other relevant parties. I also appreciate
the fact that since President Duque Marquez's
inauguration, the new Colombian Government has
made efforts to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
the situation in the country, formulate a new national
development policy and commit to implementing the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, with the aim of continuing
to promote the peace process in Colombia. That will
help to realize peace and development in Colombia and
is also very significant for the maintenance of peace
and stability in the whole region. For the next phase,
Colombia still needs to comprehensively implement
the peace agreement and achieve the reintegration of
former combatants into society, including into political
and economic aspects of life. At the same time,
Colombia is still facing security challenges such as
organized crime and drug trafficking. Achieving social
and economic development will continue to be a long
and arduous task.

Against that backdrop, China hopes that all parties
in Colombia will further consolidate a consensus on
maintaining State security and stability, achieving
development, firmly promoting the peace process and
working to solve differences through dialogue and
negotiation. The stage that the Colombian peace process
has reached today did not come about easily, and it is
an example of the Security Council's cooperation in
responding to regional hotspots. The Security Council
should work together with the international community,
continue to strengthen its support to Colombia, respect
the leadership of the Government and the people and
provide constructive assistance to Colombia in its
peace process.

China is grateful to Special Representative Arnault
and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
for their contributions to promoting the peace process
in Colombia over the past year. We welcome the recent
adoption of resolution 2435 (2018), which renewed the
mandate of the Mission for a year. We hope that the
Mission will further strengthen communication with
the Colombian Government and the relevant parties,
work to address the reintegration of former combatants
and guarantee the security of the conflict-affected
areas, as well as promote mutual confidence among all
the parties in Colombia and positively implement the
peace agreement.

China would like to work with all other members
of the Council to support the Verification Mission in
the implementation of its mandate, advance the peace
process in Colombia and make our contribution to
realizing comprehensive peace and stability in Colombia
as soon as possible.

