Mr. Tomat: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU).

We note the progress made in the implementation of
the peace agreement since it was signed in Bangui. We
have also identified important areas for action and are
concerned at some challenges in terms of the security
commitments of certain parties. In terms of progress, it
is important to underline that the agreement is the sole
collective road map. The momentum it generated needs
to be maintained and strengthened. All actors should
implement it in good faith.

The Government of the Central African Republic,
under the leadership of the President and the Prime
Minister, continues to deliver on its commitments.
They deliver despite challenges and the difficulties of
the process. State authority is slowly being restored.
The Central African Armed Forces and internal
security forces are being deployed. The first batch
of special mixed security units has been established
in the west. The Security Council has recognized the
progress achieved in security sector reform, which led
to the easing of the arms embargo. We see this as a
most welcome move. We are also pleased to see that
neighbouring countries are actively contributing to
creating a positive climate for the implementation of the
peace agreement. This needs to be further encouraged.

In certain areas, we look to the Government to
take further action with greater determination. Such
issues include transitional justice, which is an essential
element ofreconciliation and the fight against impunity.
We also encourage the authorities to make progress, in
parallel, on such issues as decentralization, the status of
former Heads of State and the law on political parties.
Government action could also be more cohesive by fully
associating members of armed groups with the peace
agreement and integrating them into its implementation.
Taken together, these measures, along with the broad
awareness-raising about the peace agreement, would
send a clear signal to the wider population that the
political tide has definitively turned to the better. If the
people of the Central African Republic are to benefit
from the peace agreement, we also need to do more
with respect to including civil society, political parties,
the military and women in the peace process.

Let us now consider some challenges. Even if have
seen improvements in terms of security, the overall
security situation remains fragile. Several armed groups
continue attacks against civilians and against each
other. The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation (DDRR) process is essential and
should be accelerated. The peace agreement provides
for all the necessary mechanisms to respond to
Violations. The guarantors of the agreement should not
shy away from using the provisions of article 35 thereof
to engage non-compliant armed groups. In particular,
we support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) in its recent robust responses.
MINUSCA's assertiveness sends a positive signal to the
civilian victims of the conflict, particularly in the face
of the recent arrests of members of some armed groups.

In this context, I would also like to take a moment
to offer my sincere condolences, on behalf of the
European Union and myself, to both MINUSCA and
the families of those brave soldiers who recently lost
their lives in a tragic accident.
The special mixed security units are part of the
security set-up. As mentioned by previous speakers, the
first such unit was recently launched in Bouar, which is
very good news. The launch of the first unit will have
a significant impact. Several groups are now asking
to join. Their members see a concrete and immediate
opportunity to be reintegrated and return to normal life.
Like our partners in Government, the African Union
and the United Nations, we want to see more such units
deployed. Demobilization, disarmament, vetting and
training of combatants identified for participating in
these units are critical steps for their establishment.

A few weeks ago, the European Union, the African
Union and the United Nations successfully conducted
a trilateral joint high-level mission to the country,
which I had the pleasure of accompanying. It was
encouraging to see that all three organizations agreed
on the principles for the special mixed security units to
work successfully. The European Union will continue
funding such units under these conditions. Our initial
contribution of €3.4 million since May is already with
the African Union in support of special mixed security
unit members.

The European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA) has trained
Central African Armed Forces trainers in charge of
training the special mixed security units. We are also
funding AU military observers, who will monitor the
deployment and activities of the special mixed security
units. We stand ready to mobilize further support for
the next phases. For that, MINUSCA's mandate must
foresee the capacity to support the special mixed
security units. Putting these units in place is clearly
important. At the same time, this operation should not
divert attention from the DDRR process and ongoing
security sector reform.

Previous speakers mentioned the critical juncture
we are facing with the elections in 2020 and 2021.
Only a peaceful, inclusive and transparent process
will help consolidate the country's democratic record.
The constitutional calendar should be respected.
Postponement is not an option, and we hope political
parties will act responsibly. The EU is ready to provide
financial and technical support, and we encourage
other partners to join our efforts. Most important
will be MINUSCA's support for the whole electoral
process in terms of security and logistics. We request
that MINUSCA's mandate be explicitly amended to
that effect.
I should like to add some final words to update
the Council on other aspects of EU support to the
Central African Republic. The EU Training Mission
I just mentioned is leading the defence sector reform,
providing strategic advice and operational training.
To date, the EU Training Mission has trained five
battalions of the national armed forces. On 16 October,
more than 1,000 recruits graduated from this training.
Altogether, 4,000 members of the armed forces staff of
all grades and ranks have benefitted from EUTM-RCA
operational training. Another 1,500 have completed
courses in such military areas as human resources,
logistics, planning and information technology.

The EUTM-RCA will continue to work hand in hand
with MINUSCA and other players, in full transparency.
We would like to see MINUSCA's mandate include
provisions relating to its support for members of the
Central African Armed Forces personnel trained
by EUTM-RCA. In parallel, we are supporting the
strengthening and countrywide deployment of the
internal security forces. Following President Touadera's
request, the EU is currently planning the deployment
of a European advisory mission to the Central African
Republic to further support the internal security forces.

All instruments combined, the EU has mobilized,
since 2014, an envelope of€850 million. We have taken
measures to accelerate and, where needed, realign our
programmes so that the population can rapidly benefit
from peace dividends.

I should like to sharejust three figures relating to the
Bekou trust fund, in terms of health care alone. Over the
last reporting period, 1.7 million medical consultations
were given, helping people, including more than 80,000
children and pregnant women, to recover. Around
170,000 births were assisted by skilled birth attendants.
Similar figures can be seen in the areas of primary
education, animal health, microfinance and textiles.

Thousands of small farmers and their groups have been
equipped and helped to access the local markets.

A few months ago, Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission, went on an official visit to the Central
African Republic. Both she and the President Touadera
confirmed our shared commitment to working together
for the ultimate benefit of the people of the Central
African Republic. We know that the situation remains
complex and fragile, with humanitarian problems and
structural weaknesses. We will continue to work with
our partners in the Government and in civil society, the
African Union, the United Nations and the countries of
the region. We will remain fully engaged in the Central
African Republic in order to support our friend and
partner at this important juncture.

