Mr. Somavia (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
Following an active process of consultations, this draft
resolution has been put before us; we shall vote in favour
of it.

Ever since the regrettable incident of 24 February was
brought before the Council, we have based our actions on
the following basic tenets: first, we have endeavoured to
express our sensitivity to the humanitarian dimension of the
incident, as valuable lives were lost; secondly, we have
worked for the preservation of the principles and norms of
international law; and thirdly, in the sphere of procedure,
we have wanted a clear investigative process that would
provide us with accurate background information as to
what in fact occurred.

In regard to the first point, our position was clear
from the first day. As representative of a country which
attaches special importance to humanitarian aspects, we
could not but deeply regret the loss of four lives through
the downing of two aircraft registered in the United States
on 24 February last. For us it is impossible to justify
these deaths, and we can only the hope that they may
help avoid recurrence of such events.

In connection with the second point, we have also
affirmed from the outset as fundamental the need to
comply with the norms of international law which govern
civil aviation, and in this respect we have supported the
principles and norms of the Chicago Convention of 1944,
clearly establishing the validity as a norm of customary
law, of article 3 bis of that Convention. In that context,
one of our objectives has been to reaffirm the absolute
need for that norm to be respected by all States in order
to ensure the proper use and security of civil aviation.

With respect to the third point, we agreed that the
Council, together with deploring the events, should go
beyond that and ask the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to conduct an investigation of the
case and transmit its conclusions to the Council.

We have carefully studied this issue in the technical
report, its recommendations and conclusions, and in the
ICAO resolution of 27 June, which transmits it. We have
expressed our appreciation for the efforts made by
ICAO's technical team, yet we recognize the difficulties
faced by the team in arriving at a conclusive document
because of the limitations inherent in the nature of the
investigation.

All that notwithstanding, we appreciate the resolution
adopted by the Council of ICAO, as it provides us with
important substantive elements and reaffirms principles
which we deem to be fundamental.

Nobody is unaware that above and beyond the
factual aspects of the incidence itself, the controversy
stemming from it straddles two different questions: on the
one hand, the downing of unarmed civil aircraft, and on
the other hand, the use of civil aviation in a manner
inconsistent with the Chicago Convention. When
confronted with the task of placing the importance of the
two questions in proper perspective, it is obvious to us
that human life is the supreme value which we must

 

protect, just as we must protect the security of civil aviation
in this case, by defending and reiterating the applicable
norms of international law. Thus, we shall participate with
our vote in the adoption of this draft resolution.

But at the same time, it is our hope that this incident
will allow us all to reflect, so that in the future everyone
may be able to held avoid similar situations. My delegation
hopes that States will take the appropriate additional
measures to prevent the improper use of civil aviation, as
is reaffirmed in paragraph 5 of the draft resolution.

Also important to us is the decision taken by the
Council of ICAO to establish a mechanism for prior
information in the case of possible actions contrary to
article 3 bis, and for reporting to the ICAO. We also hope
that the ICAO study on security aspects relative to the
recommended standards and practices and other rules on the
interception of civil aircraft will help in preventing future
tragedies of this kind.

We conclude with a feeling of profound sorrow at an
incident we deplore, which Chile would prefer had never
occurred, in the firm hope that the Council will not have to
deal with such a matter again, and in full solidarity with the
families of the victims.
