Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to thank you,
Madam President, and all ofthe members ofthe Security
Council and the large number of representatives
speaking on behalf of the entire international
community for reaffirming their commitment to justice
for the Palestinian people, and for their call for an end
to the occupation so that we can actualize the global
consensus on the two-State solution. We cannot have
the two-State solution without ending the occupation.
We challenge the one delegation that is refusing to
accept that it is an occupier and refusing to tell everyone
here, and throughout every corner of the globe, that it
is willing and ready to withdraw from our land and
to allow for the independence of our State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, so that we can achieve the two-
State solution.

Let me also say that those who speak about lies
should not themselves tell lies. We know for a fact that
Palestinians under 50 years of age are not allowed to
come to Jerusalem to practice their religious freedom.
We know for a fact that Palestinians from areas outside
ofEast Jerusalem and the West Bank cannot freely come
to exercise their religious freedoms in Al-Aqsa Mosque
or in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. We have sent
many letters to the Council telling the stories of the
restrictions imposed by those who say that Jerusalem
is a city that is open to everybody to practice their
religion. We live the daily reality in which thousands
and sometimes tens ofthousands of Palestinians pray in
the streets close to the holy sites in Jerusalem because
the Israeli occupying authority denied them such rights.

Let me also note that the representative of the
occupying authority said "since the unification of
Jerusalem". We know that there is a Security Council
resolution saying that everything that Israel has done
unilaterally in annexing Jerusalem is null and void and
has no legal authority. Israel is alone - isolated - in
not accepting East Jerusalem as an occupied territory.
The entire international community - those who
are represented in this Chamber and those who are
not - are all united in stating that Israel is occupying
East Jerusalem and that it must withdraw from East
Jerusalem. We agree that Jerusalem is one of the final
status issues, yet the Israeli representative speaks to
the Council with such disrespect, saying "since we
unified Jerusalem" - in other words, they do not
want to withdraw from it. Is the behaviour of such
authorities - leaders, including the Deputy Speaker
of the Knesset, who, together with extremists, stands
on top of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and raises the flag of
Israel - the behaviour of a Government that is really
interested in peace with us? Or is it the behaviour of a
cavalier colonial Power that disrespects the people that
it occupies?

We are familiar with that behaviour - everyone
here is familiar with that behaviour. All colonialists
behave in the same way: they blame the victims for their
own crimes. As all of them in history were defeated, we
are confident that this colonial authority will withdraw
from our land so that we can have a two-State solution.

We thank you again, Madam President, for this
support. We look forward to seeing this collective will
to be translated into the adoption of a draft resolution
that demands from the occupying Power that it
withdraw from our land and negotiate with us in good
faith the end of occupation so that we can celebrate the
two-State solution after the State of Palestine acquires
its independence.

