Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Sanctions, as a measure of coercion made available to the
Council by the United Nations Charter, have been
increasingly applied by this Organization in recent years,
targeting more than 10 countries or entities. Some of these
sanctions have managed to have certain effects, while the
majority have fallen short of the expected results; in some
cases, there have been severe consequences. It is therefore
absolutely necessary to review and improve the use of
sanctions. China supports the establishment of an informal
working group to carry out a review of Council sanctions,
to make an in-depth study of ways to improve them and
to submit a report on this matter.

In our View, an in-depth study of the question of
sanctions should focus on two main priorities. First, the
practical effectiveness of sanctions must be enhanced.
Prior to adoption, all aspects of the sanctions, in particular
their effective monitoring, should be taken into full
consideration. During the process of implementation,
developments and problems concerning sanctions should
be tracked closely and measures should be taken in a
timely manner to help Member States to strengthen their
implementation capability and to deepen cooperation and
coordination between the countries and agencies
concerned.

Secondly, we must work out concrete ways and
means to address humanitarian consequences created by
sanctions which have a direct humanitarian bearing on
thousands of innocent civilians. The working group
should conduct thorough assessments in this regard and
come up with specific and feasible solutions in areas such
as the expansion of humanitarian exemptions, prior
analysis, retrospective evaluation, the adjustment of
sanctions regimes in accordance with real situations
during the process of implementation and the
establishment of criteria for the suspension or lifting of
sanctions.

Past experiences of the Security Council have
demonstrated that sanctions may be able to help provide
some solutions, but by no means in all cases. The Council
cannot neglect the severe humanitarian problems brought
about by sanctions. That is why China has consistently
maintained that resort to sanctions should not be made
easy. Needless to say, sanctions against a sovereign State
by any country unilaterally and in the absence of
authorization by the Security Council are far from
appropriate.

It must also be pointed out that it takes time to
address the drawbacks of sanctions. In a note by the
President of the Council at the beginning of last year, a
number of measures were proposed for improving work
in this field. Unfortunately, some measures have not been
fully put in place. The working group should really pay
attention to the question of how to enhance the efficiency
of sanctions committees, including how to optimize their

 

working procedures. Moreover, the working group should
seriously consider the valuable suggestions and proposals
made by many agencies and scholars, with a View to
pooling wisdom and resources.

