Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Madam President, first may I congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I very much welcome all the efforts by South
Africa for the Council's work this month. I am
particularly grateful for the invitation to attend this
meeting, and I would like to thank you for the
document that you distributed containing the concept
paper for this discussion; it has been a very useful
basis for this debate. We very much hope that we will
be able to achieve a positive outcome. That will help to
promote cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

I consider important the horizontal cooperation
among regional organizations and the League of Arab
States. The Arab League has a privileged relationship
with the African Union, since eighty per cent of its
citizens live on the African continent. Fifty per cent of
the Arab League members are also members of the AU,
and one fifth of the members of the AU are members of
the Arab League. So it is a very specific situation and
demonstrates the advantages of the horizontal
cooperation between the two organizations.

The great challenges at the beginning of the
twenty-first century have pushed us to promote the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations. On the basis of that principle, the
African Union and the League of Arab States are
working to develop African and Arab relations. We
base this on positive and realistic elements that take
into account the joint strategic interests of the two

organizations. We are doing so in close cooperation
with the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, with a View to resolving conflict, promoting
international peace and security and ensuring stability
and development.

On the basis of the shared responsibility of the
United Nations and regional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
League of Arab States and the African Union - given
their geographic location and the situation of their
peoples - are cooperating closely and taking positive
steps to resolve Arab and African problems. That
cooperation has proved effective in helping to resolve
various crises.

We are trying to ensure security and stability in
the Arab world as a whole. Our cooperation is evident
in particular in the peace negotiations in the Sudan and
in the context of our joint efforts to resolve the crisis in
Darfur, as well as to ensure security and stability in
Somalia. This reflects the tripartite cooperation among
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council. However, it goes without saying that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is one of the most important factors. That
is obvious, and it has been taken into account in the
various policies adopted by the African Union and the
League of Arab States. Those two organizations play
an effective and positive role in resolving regional
conflict through the adoption of measures aimed at
ensuring peace.

International peace and security must be
guaranteed by international law, and we hope that the
promotion of cooperation among the United Nations,
the African Union and our organization will have a
positive impact on international peace and security.

We must take into account international law,
recommendations and resolutions, and provide the
technical and logistical support required to carry out
the tasks assigned to us. The Security Council must
recognize the resolutions adopted by regional
organizations and promote the role of those
organizations. The Security Council should turn to
them and involve them in conflict resolution. The
African Union and the League of Arab States can be at
the forefront in playing a positive role in this respect.
In this context, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
reaffirmed the need for an effective partnership
between the Security Council and regional
organizations so that we can step in quickly to try to
resolve conflicts and crises. We therefore support
regional mediation efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of conflicts at the regional and international
levels.

In the context of the institutional relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
the African Union and the League of Arab States are
working to promote better coordination among regional
mechanisms to achieve peace and security, sustainable
development and the eradication of poverty in Africa
as a part of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. In this context, the League of Arab
States reaffirms the importance of cooperating with the
African Union and providing it with the support that it
requires to face up to new challenges, especially in the
area of collective security measures, so that it can
respond effectively and rapidly.

It is important to put in place an effective conflict
prevention mechanism in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. The report of the high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations gives new impetus to
the promotion of international peace and security,
which will require greater cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. It does
without saying that cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations and the
coordination of joint efforts will have a tangible impact
in terms of achieving security and regional and
international stability.

