Allow me to express my appreciation to Estonia for convening this timely and important discussion on the working methods of the Security Council. My delegation also appreciates the leadership of Kuwait and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the previous and current Chairs of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, on this issue. We look forward to incorporating the eight Notes by the President that were adopted in December 2019 into the revised note S/2017/507 at the next opportunity. We also thank Ambassador Rhonda King and Ms. Karin Landgren of the Security Council Report for their insightful briefings today. At the open debate on this topic last year (see S/PV.8539), I highlighted our expectation that all elected members take working methods seriously during their term in the Council. Indeed, one of the yardsticks against which we will judge all elected members is their commitment to improving the working methods of the Council. We are therefore heartened that the group of 10 elected members of the Council (E-10) has, for a second consecutive year, reiterated its commitment in this regard. Singapore fully endorses the joint statement by the E-10. This is not to divide the Council between the permanent and elected members, but to increase transparency and accountability to the wider United Nations membership. After all, the Charter of the United Nations clearly states that the Council acts on behalf of all United Nations Members, which have conferred on the Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. As the vast majority of States Members of the United Nations are not members of the Security Council and often face great difficulties or resource constraints in being elected to the Council, it is of utmost importance that the Council's work be conducted transparently. As a small State, Singapore strongly supports improving the Council's working methods. This perspective benefits all States, large or small, including the permanent members of the Council. It is an area where we can make an immediate and noticeable difference without getting caught up in the legalities and technicalities pertaining to Charter amendments. I would like to draw attention to several areas. First, we are pleased at the efforts undertaken to preserve transparency and accountability despite the challenges posed by coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The Council was the first main body of the United Nations to adapt its practices to ensure business continuity without sacrificing transparency and accountability. We are encouraged by the Council's efforts to continually improve its provisional working methods in the light of COVID-19 and commend in particular the letters each successive presidency has issued to reaffirm and improve upon these practices. A greater number of public meetings have also been held; since the outbreak of the pandemic, 16 open video-teleconferences have been convened. We welcome the continued publication of the outcomes of these meetings, including the written records of all the statements submitted. As for closed consultations, we understand that they are often necessary to promote candid and frank discussions among the main stakeholders. Nevertheless, we believe that it would be useful if key decision points from these meetings were shared with the wider membership. The General Assembly's consideration of the annual report of the Council is a vital exercise in transparency and accountability. We trust that the new timelines stipulated in note S/2019/997, namely, that the report must be "discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council no later than 30 May, in time for its consideration by the General Assembly immediately thereafter", will be upheld. It is important for the General Assembly to have robust discussions on the work of the Council, as that enhances the legitimacy and credibility of the Council. Similarly, the monthly assessments of the work of the Council are equally important. We are disappointed that only seven monthly assessments were issued for 2019 and note that only two monthly assessments have been issued thus far for 2020. We hope that more Council members will submit their monthly reports on time. My second point is on inclusiveness. We are encouraged that the Council has made greater use of various formats, such as the Arria Formula meeting and the Toledo-style dialogue, to engage more interactively not just with the wider membership of the United Nations, but also with members of civil society. We are also encouraged by the regularization of introductory and wrap-up meetings with the wider membership by the presidency of each month and are pleased that the date and time of these meetings is now being communicated to all Member States well in advance. We hope that these meetings will continue as a standard practice and that they will contain more interactive discussions and greater analysis. My delegation is also encouraged by some signs of increased intra-Council inclusiveness. The earlier on-boarding of newly elected members is a positive step to better equip the elected 10 members of the Security Council for their terms. Nevertheless, we think that there is room for improvement in the burden-sharing system and distribution of work among Council members. In particular, we hope that more Council members will be given the opportunity to assume penholderships or co-penholderships on issues. A monopoly over penholderships has potential drawbacks. It increases the risk of Council products being drafted from a fixed lens and disenfranchises the Council members that do not have opportunities to take a lead role on issues. A Council with members who feel sidelined is not only non- inclusive but will also be ineffective in representing the interests of the wider United Nations membership. My third point relates to agility and effectiveness. The Council's record on this aspect remains mixed, with a strong voice being taken on some specific issues, but a lack of timely and adequate action on others. The veto unfortunately has too often been used to block Council action aimed at preventing mass atrocity crimes. Singapore joined more than 100 countries in supporting the Franco-Mexican initiative and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct on limiting the use of the veto in the consideration of mass atrocity crimes. While the permanent five members have special privileges, these privileges come with increased responsibilities. This perspective applies not only to the use of the veto on draft resolutions, but also to the "informal" vetoes on other products of the Council. Otherwise, the Council would not be able to discharge its duties in the maintenance of international peace and security. In conclusion, we call on all members to continue to engage constructively in improving the working methods of the Council by making practical proposals. We thank the Estonian presidency for convening this discussion today and look forward to a good outcome of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions under the able leadership of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
