Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I
also listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel.

China is deeply concerned about the long-standing
stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks and
the economic and humanitarian difficulties facing the
people of Palestine. In September 2011, the Quartet
set the end of this year as the deadline for reaching an
agreement between Palestine and Israel. The Middle
East peace process is now once again at a crucial
crossroads. The question of Palestine has always
remained the crux of the Middle East issue. The long-
standing stagnation of the Middle East peace process is
not conducive to peace and stability in that region. The
regional turbulence should not divert the international
community's attention from the Palestinian question.

China has always advocated that the parties
concerned should, on the basis of the relevant United

Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for peace
in the Middle East, resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiation and achieve the ultimate goal
of establishing an independent Palestinian State living
side by side in peace with the State of Israel.

China urges the two sides to take practical steps
to remove barriers to the peace talks in order to seek
an early resumption of the peace talks and subsequent
progress. Israel should assume the responsibility for
taking the first step. We urge Israel to immediately stop
the building of settlements, to lift the blockade on Gaza,
to release Palestinian prisoners and to improve their
living and medical conditions. We urge Israel to actively
cooperate with the international community in such
efforts towards peace in order to create the conditions
for relaunching the peace talks with Palestine.

The international community should increase its
sense of responsibility and urgency for advancing the
Middle East peace process. It should work actively to
bring the two sides back to the negotiating table and
to promote measures by both sides to rebuild their
mutual trust. China hopes that the Quarter will play an
effective role and come up, as soon as possible, with a
proposal for the resumption of the peace talks between
Palestine and Israel.

China supports a greater role for the Council in
helping to restart the Middle East peace process. We have
always backed Palestine's just pursuit of the restoration
of its legitimate rights as a nation and its establishment
as an independent State with full sovereignty on the
basis ofthe pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We also support Palestine's membership in the
United Nations and other international organizations.

China is extremely worried about the continuing
tension in Syria, as the Syrian issue has a bearing on
peace and stability in the Middle East. Any solution to
the question of Syria should be based on observation
of the purposes and principles of the Charter and
on the basic standards governing international
relations. It should also be based on respect for Syria's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and on continuing
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, Kofi Annan's six-point plan and the final
communique of the Geneva meeting.

China is against any external imposition of a
settlement on Syria and any efforts towards so-called
regime change. A political settlement is the sole viable
way of defusing the crisis in Syria; military means
would only lead to more pressure and greater conflict.
It is urgent that all forms of terrorism or violent acts in
Syria and any efforts to encourage or abet a resort to
military means be halted forthwith and that a political
transition, led by the people of Syria, be started
instead. China calls on all of the parties in Syria and the
international community to cooperate with and support
Joint Special Representative Brahimi in performing his
good offices in the effort to reach a political solution to
the Syrian question.

China is concerned about the impact of the current
Syrian situation on its neighbours. We call on the
parties concerned to bear in mind the overall interest
of regional peace and stability, to respect one another's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, to continue to
exercise restraint and to refrain from any action that
could lead to an escalation of the situation, so that
everyone can work together to maintain regional peace
and stability.

