Mr. Serry: We meet today against the background
of the recent disturbing cycle of violence in Gaza
and Israel and a dangerous escalation that concluded
with the Egyptian-brokered ceasefire agreement
on 21 November. At the same time, this week the
Palestinians are expected to follow through with their
intention to approach the General Assembly seeking
non-member State observer status.

Those two significant political developments
supersede any other aspect of our regular reporting
and merit dedicated focus in my briefing today. Both
underscore that the status quo is unsustainable and
that it is all the more vital to identify a way ahead to
urgently put the peace process back on track. Both take
place amid other growing regional concerns, mainly
linked to the conflict in Syria, which continues at an
alarming rate.

On Gaza, the Secretary-General briefed the
Council last week about his urgent visit to Egypt,
Israel, the occupied Palestinian territory and Jordan,
and the intense diplomatic effort that culminated in
the announcement of a ceasefire agreement welcomed
by the Council, which principally calls for a reciprocal
cessation ofhostilities. I will therefore focus my remarks
first on the next steps, which require difficult work in
order to finalize the details left open in the agreement
before the ceasefire can take firm hold. 1 will also brief
the Council on the proactive role of the United Nations
on addressing recovery and humanitarian needs in
Gaza, which I visited Sunday.

The Secretary-General asked me to stay in Cairo
in the days following the announcement of a truce
and his own efforts for the purpose of contributing to
reaching agreement on the comprehensive elements
of the ceasefire. In the so-called understanding for a
ceasefire, Israel and Palestinian factions agreed to stop
"all hostilities" and, after an initial period of 24-hour
calm, begin discussions on some of the long-standing
issues to be addressed for a broad, durable ceasefire to
take firm hold over the longer term. Security remains
central to those discussions. I can report that Egypt
and the parties have already commenced intense
discussions on how to deal with the issues listed in
the understanding. The United Nations, present on the
ground, is working closely with Egypt in providing
inputs and suggestions to those discussions.

The calm has largely held, despite the firing of a
few rockets in the hours following the agreement and
renewed shooting incidents during a demonstration
along the fence inside Gaza, which claimed the life of
one Palestinian demonstrator. It is now paramount that
the parties respect the calm and allow time for the other
elements of the understanding to be worked out. Yet we
know that this will not be easy.

It is painful that, despite consistent warnings, we had
yet another major escalation four years after Operation
Cast Lead. The devastating round of violence is a stark
reminder of the fact that the status quo is unsustainable.
There will be no progress if Israel's legitimate security
concerns are not addressed. At the same time, it will
give Palestinians a strong additional stake in a durable
calm if it leads to a lifting of the closure on Gaza. This
is, at long last, an opportunity to address the underlying
causes of conflict captured in resolution 1860 (2009),
which provides the international legal framework for
stabilizing the situation in Gaza. Core elements of
the resolution remain unimplemented. These include
an end to weapons smuggling and the full opening
of crossings. The understanding now provides a
framework to address the opening of crossings and
facilitate the movement of people and the transfer of
goods, as well as refrain from restricting residents' free
movement and targeting residents in border areas. It
has been agreed that other matters as may be requested
shall be addressed. Efforts to prevent the trafficking of
arms and put in place long-term security arrangements
should also be part of the discussion for a sustainable
and durable calm.
I am pleased to note that implementation has
started in earnest and that Israel has, in principle,
agreed to the extension of the maritime fishing limit
to six nautical miles. This is already a significant
result, but it is not sufficient on its own. More needs
to be done with respect to crossings and freedom of
movement. As a next concrete measure of progress, we
hope to see a liberalization of import of construction
material - including aggregate, steel bars and
cement ~ through existing crossings. Exports from
Gaza and transfers into the West Bank should also
become part of the mechanism.

But it also essential that we address other
aspects of resolution 1860 (2009), which calls for
tangible steps towards Palestinian reconciliation. The
Secretary-General has continually supported efforts
for Palestinian unity in the context of the Palestine
Liberation Organization commitments and the work
of Egypt in this regard. It is my hope that the crisis
in Gaza has also created an opportunity to overcome
differences in very tangible ways. People, both in Gaza
and in the West Bank, expect nothing less from their
leaders.

The devastating impact of the violence during the
eight days of fighting is now clear. An estimated 158
Palestinians, including 103 civilians - 33 children and
13 women among them - were killed. In a particularly
distressing example of civilians bearing the brunt
of the suffering, 10 members of the Dalu family
were killed in an Israeli air strike on their house on
18 November. Approximately 1,269 Palestinians were
reported injured. Six Israelis - four civilians and
two soldiers - were reported killed by Palestinian
rocket fire, and 224 Israelis, the vast majority of them
civilians, were injured. The bomb attack in Tel Aviv on
21 November, which the Secretary-General condemned
in the strongest terms, injured 23 people, three severely.

The Secretary-General has stressed that his
paramount immediate concern is for the safety and
well-being of all civilians, no matter where they are.
He has condemned the excessive use of force that
endangers Civilian lives. He has at the same time
consistently condemned indiscriminate rocket fire
against Israel, which is unacceptable and will only
trigger escalation. Put simply, all parties must respect
international humanitarian law to ensure the protection
of all civilians, at all times.

Distressed that conditions during his visit so
shockingly resembled the situation four years ago, the
Secretary-General has instructed me and the rest of the
United Nations system to urgently activate recovery
and humanitarian assistance in Gaza and to step up our
existing support. Ivisited Gaza on Sunday and witnessed
myself the destruction that resulted from the hostilities.
I have visited refugee families - beneficiaries of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) - and extended
my condolences as they lost several of their members
in an Israeli airstrike. I also saw a newly built UNRWA
school that had been badly damaged in the fighting,
and I spoke to Gazan fishermen of the local cooperative
whose office building was also affected by the fighting.

The conclusion of hostilities prevented a large-scale
humanitarian emergency. Nevertheless, there was a
sharp increase in Palestinians leaving their homes to
seek shelter in UNRWA and Government schools just
before the ceasefire agreement was reached. At its peak,
the number of internally displaced persons reached
nearly 12,000. The United Nations and its partners were
able to rapidly respond to the needs of these families
and on Saturday had already fully resumed pre-existing
humanitarian operations that were ongoing prior to
14 November. I am pleased to report that virtually all
families have now returned home. UNRWA and public
schools reopened on 24 November and municipalities
throughout the Gaza Strip have started to remove
rubble.

On the same day, I also visited Rishon Lezion,
a suburb of Tel Aviv where a rocket from Gaza had
destroyed large parts of an apartment building whose
residents were fortunately unharmed. On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I expressed my sympathies to the
Israelis affected. I held some discussions with young
residents that impressed on me how the recent escalation
had also placed the safety of millions ofIsraeIi civilians
at risk, reaching far into the centre of the country.

I would now like to turn to the stated Palestinian
intention to present a draft resolution to the General
Assembly related to the status of Palestine later this
week. The passion that this potential move has generated
is indicative of how far apart the parties remain.

The United Nations Charter is clear that issues
of recognition of a State and status in the General
Assembly are a responsibility for Member States and
the United Nations intergovernmental bodies, and
not the Secretariat, to decide. The Secretary-General
has said on numerous occasions that the Palestinians
should have an independent and viable State of their
own, living side by side with the State of Israel, in
peace and security. A Palestinian State is long overdue;
it is key to addressing the legitimate aspirations of both
peoples and paramount to the stability of the region.
The Secretary-General hopes that all concerned will
look at the consequences of any decision they make
responsibly.

However, regardless of the outcome of the move
in the General Assembly on 29 November, it is also
important to plan for the day after, including protecting
the crucial achievements of the Palestinian Authority
in building robust State institutions. These steps have
brought real security and economic improvements,
but both are dangerously at risk. President Abbas and
Prime Minister Fayyad must be commended for these
achievements, which must be protected.

The Secretary-General is also aware that the
effectiveness of the Quartet has been called into
question, including by members of the Council,
and I have also in the past warned that the Quartet's
credibility is at stake. In its recent meeting amid the
Gaza crisis on 17 November, the League of Arab
States cited the need to reconsider the Arab position
towards the Palestinian cause, the peace process and
other instruments, including the Quartet. The sense of
urgency is now all the greater, and Quartet members
must take stock of the events of the past months and
reassess their role in shaping the way forward.

I have also consistently warned about the threat
of a prolonged stalemate in the peace process to the
two-State solution and the viability of the Palestinian
Authority. There is no substitute to meaningful
negotiations to achieve this vision. This must remain
our collective priority. Unfortunately, that effort
continues to be undermined by actions on the ground,
including continued settlement activity, settler violence
and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security
forces, during which two Palestinian demonstrators
were killed. The spillover of violence from the Gaza
crisis into the West Bank was largely contained thanks
to the effectiveness of the Palestinian security forces.

Let me now turn briefly to the Syrian Arab Republic,
where the conflict, now in its twenty-first month, is
reaching new and appalling heights of brutality and
violence. I shall keep my remarks short, as Joint Special
Representative Brahimi will brief the Council in more
detail in private consultations later this week.
Destruction, death and suffering have become part
of daily life across Syria. The humanitarian crisis is
becoming more acute now that winter is upon us, and
the number of those in need is growing, potentially
reaching 4 million inside Syria by the end of 2012.
The flow of refugees also continues. The overall
number of registered and assisted Syrian refugees is
now approximately 450,000, with Turkey, Lebanon
and Jordan hosting over 100,000 each. Over 10,000
Palestinian refugees from Syria have also fled the
violence, mostly to Lebanon, but also to Jordan. We
continue to call on the donor community to support our
humanitarian assistance programmes.

Against this background, the Secretary-General
and Joint Special Representative Brahimi continue
their efforts aimed at reaching a political solution and
pulling the parties out of the military logic in which
they remain locked.

As a consequence of the internal conflict in Syria,
the situation in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force area of operation remains volatile.
Armed clashes between the Syrian Arab Armed Forces
and armed members of the opposition take place daily
inside the area of separation. Fire across the ceasefire
line has shown potential for escalation between Israel
and Syria. In several instances, mortar shells fired by
Syrian Government forces landed in the Israeli-occupied
Golan, with the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) retaliating
on three occasions. Syrian authorities reported that two
Syrian soldiers were killed on 18 November as a result of
the IDF fire across the ceasefire 1ine. Israeli authorities
also reported that small arms fire has affected IDF
patrols on a number of occasions. The situation clearly
jeopardizes regional stability and the ceasefire between
the two countries. We have repeatedly called on both
sides to respect the Disengagement Agreement.

The situation in Lebanon also remains vulnerable
to the ongoing conflict in Syria. Special Coordinator
Plumbly will also brief the Council in more detail
later this week, so I will just mention a few highlights.
There are continuing reports of cross-border shelling
and arms smuggling. Clashes between Salafists and
Hizbullah in a predominantly Shia neighbourhood in
the southern city of Sidon on 11 November reflected
ongoing tension between supporters and opponents
of the Syrian regime, causing three fatalities and a
number of injuries. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
were deployed to control the situation and prevent any
further escalation of the violence.

As for the general situation in Lebanon, the main
development since the last briefing was the terrorist
attack that killed Brigadier General Wissam al-Hassan,
Chief of the Information Branch of the Lebanese Internal
Security Forces, in Beirut on 19 October. Two others
were killed and dozens were injured as the explosion
occurred in the residential neighbourhood of Achrafieh.
That political assassination triggered violence across
the country that caused at least eight more deaths and
approximately 30 injured. The opposition has called for
the resignation of the Government of Prime Minister
Mikati and announced that it will not engage in dialogue
with the Government.

President Sleiman continues to hold consultations
with political leaders to find a path forward that is
met with broad support. His efforts deserve strong
support. The principles ofthe June Baabda Declaration,
including the disassociation policy, remain the
fundamental compact agreed by all Lebanese political
factions for the security and stability of Lebanon.
Meanwhile, it is essential for the institutions of the
State to continue to play their role in ensuring security,
stability and justice. A further session of the national
dialogue is scheduled to be held on 29 November. It is
in the interests of Lebanon's continued stability that all
parties continue to exercise restraint, avoid provocative
rhetoric and work cooperatively as preparations begin
for the 2013 elections.

The situation inside the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has
remained generally quiet. On 19 November, two Grad
rockets were discovered by members of the Lebanese
Armed Forces near the village of Mazraa al-Islamiya
in southern Lebanon. The rockets had reportedly been
prepared to be launched across the Blue Line into
Israel. UNIFIL and the LAF have increased their level
of alert and the number of coordinated operational
activities following the outbreak of violence in Gaza
and southern Israel. Efforts to ensure calm against the
backdrop of that violence have received broad political
backing, including from Hizbullah.

Let me conclude. This week alone, the Council will
hear three briefings on the Middle East, not to mention
the expected General Assembly proceedings, which are
testimony to the highly dynamic times the region is
experiencing. Last week, with the situation in Gaza we
came very close to the brink of a crisis that could have
engulfed the region. We should take this as a wake-up
call that challenges all of us to work together to restore
prospects for a durable regional peace.

The region is headed for an unpredictable future
with multiple sources of uncertainty. What is certain,
though, is that the Arab-Israeli conflict cannot be
ignored in constructively shaping that future. I remain
convinced that a solution of the Palestinian-Israeli
issue, in the form of a negotiated two-State solution,
is the best contribution we can make at this time to
regional stability.

