Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks you, Madame, for having convened this
meeting, offering us a further opportunity to consider
the situation in Haiti, and the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/540) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti,
Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, for his
informative briefing, and to reiterate my country's
support for his work leading cooperation in that
Caribbean nation and to help its authorities in their
efforts towards long-term development.

I further reiterate the commitment we made in
February 2004 to the stabilization and peacebuilding
processes in Haiti, and to MINUSTAH's work in
promoting security, stability and the strengthening of
institutions. Seven years after MINUSTAH began its
work, and despite last year's earthquake, we can see
some success and progress. At the same time, alarming
uncertainties and serious challenges have arisen in
various areas, including the establishment of the rule of
law and an effective and productive political and
judicial system.

We congratulate the people of Haiti on their
recent peaceful democratic elections and on the
progress that has been made in the area of security. We
call on the political authorities to reach the national
agreement necessary to ensuring that the international
force can adequately perform its tasks. We also
consider it essential to redouble efforts in the socio-
economic sphere in order to promote comprehensive
development in Haiti.

Political stability and security are crucial to
achieving that objective, and we therefore consider it
essential that programmes be implemented that can
help alleviate current levels of unemployment in Haiti.
Any progress made will be sterile if we are not able to
mitigate the country's unemployment problem. Chile's
contributions to Haiti's socio-economic development
are focused on police training, education, child care,
rural development, the environment, health and
housing. Chile attaches great importance to the training
of police in Haiti and reaffirms its commitment to
continuing to work with the Haitian authorities in that
area. In that respect, we consider it important to define
the police model that we wish to implement, as well as
the most urgent needs to be addressed. Similarly, as
noted by Ambassador Fernandez Amunategui, we
believe it important to favour quality over quantity in
police training.

We take this opportunity to highlight in particular
the ongoing commitment of Latin America to the future
of Haiti. Our countries have sought to work together on
sustainable and coherent strategies to optimize our
contribution to the peacekeeping Mission and to
training and cooperation programmes with the Haitian
National Police. Our experience has taught us the
importance of maintaining a fluid dialogue with the
Haitian authorities and to give priority to projects that
can be implemented by local administrations, despite
the difficulties encountered. Local participation in the
design, implementation and assessment of projects
allows the beneficiaries to assume ownership and helps
gradually to generate local capacity, consecrating the
concept of national ownership and, hence, sustainable
results.

Chile agrees with the Secretary-General's
recommendation concerning the reduction of troops
and police personnel to the levels authorized prior to
the earthquake, and concerning the renewal of
MINUSTAH'S mandate. We also agree that there is a
need to begin to develop Haiti's institutional capacities
so that it can gradually take over more national
reconstruction responsibilities.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Chile's
readiness to continue to cooperate with the
international community and Haitian authorities in the
search for lasting peace, including full respect for
human rights and strengthening the rule of law and
democracy, and genuine progress in the level of
development for its population.

