Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome you, Mr. Minister, and thank your country
for having convened this high-level open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I should also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

My statement will be focused mainly on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the situation in Syria.

Regarding the Palestinian question, we are of the
view that everything has been said at previous Security
Council meetings, open and closed, yet no significant
headway has been made in the political process. Indeed,
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians are at
a standstill, while Israeli settlement and occupation
activities continue, with near-daily arbitrary detentions
and attacks on Palestinian civilians by the occupying
Power.

Just two weeks ago, 107 Palestinians, including
children, were arrested. This was further compounded
by the ongoing seizure of land, the illegal expansion
of settlements, and the various collective-punishment
measures inflicted on the Palestinians, which make
their lives increasingly difficult and decreasing the
likelihood of a genuine peace in the region.

Thus the recent statements made by the Israeli
Prime Minister during the electoral campaign publicly
calling into question the two-State solution dangerously
undermine prospects for a viable peace, which could put
an end to the conflict and give Palestinians a sovereign
and independent State within pre-June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In the light of the situation, the Security Council
must assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations by clearly and effectively committing to
saving the solution of two States living side by side on
the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles - especially land for peace - the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is the
only realistic and feasible way for the Palestinians to
satisfy their aspirations to self-determination and for
the Israelis to meet their legitimate security needs.

In that regard, we believe that the Security Council
should identify a clear plan of action establishing the
framework and parametres of future negotiations,
pegged to a deadline so as to break the never-ending
cycle of negotiations. That will require synergy of
action and firm consistency in the international
community's approach. In that connection, the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and other stakeholders in the political process are
particularly called upon to act.

Regarding the Syrian crisis, Chad remains deeply
concerned over the ongoing deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situations in that country,
which is now in its fifth year of conflict with no
political solution on the horizon. According to recent
statistics issued by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 200,000 people have
been killed in the fighting, more than 7.6 million have
been internally displaced, and some 4 million have
taken refuge in neighbouring countries. This is without
a doubt a true humanitarian catastrophe that cries out to
our collective conscience.

We call on the international community as one
to mobilize additional resources so that United
Nations agencies and their partners can deliver the
necessary aid and assistance to besieged, displaced
and refugee civilian populations. Furthermore, given
the difficulties encountered by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, in
obtaining a cessation of hostilities in Aleppo in order
to establish conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, we believe that it is time to
seek specific and innovative ideas that could bring
the parties to the negotiating table on the basis of the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

In conclusion, it is our moral duty to intensify our
collective efforts to find an appropriate and lasting
political solution to the Syrian crisis. In that regard,
we call on States with influence on the parties to spare
no effort in persuading them to reject violence and
resume dialogue so as to put an end to that disastrous
war, which poses a genuine threat to peace and security
throughout the Middle East.

