Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
Lithuania on its successful presidency of the Council
this month. We would also like to thank Mr. Linkevicius,
Lithuania's Minister for Foreign Affairs, for personally
presiding over today's meeting.

I would like to take a moment to recognize that
we had Mariane Pearl in the Security Council with
us today. The brutal murder of Mariane's husband
Daniel in Pakistan in 2002 shocked the world, but her
tireless work ensures that his legacy lives on, and he is
remembered very fondly in Israel. May his memory be
blessed.

This discussion could not come at a more critical
time for journalists in conflict situations. Those brave
men and women serve as the eyes, ears and mouth
of the entire world in the very places where many
would prefer us to be blind, deaf and mute. Justice
Louis Brandeis famously said that sunlight is the best
disinfectant. Today, unfortunately, there are many
places that are under a total solar eclipse. Without the
work of courageous reporters, repressive regimes go
unchecked, atrocities go unrecorded and the public
remains unaware of the reality on the ground. Those
who work in places of conflict and strife ensure the free
flow of information from distant battlefields around the
globe to our iPads in the comfort of our homes.

There are places in the world where a camera is
considered a deadly weapon, a tweet is an act oftreason
and a microphone is grounds for arrest. Extremist
groups target journalists not only to silence them but to
declare war on the most fundamental values of the free
world - freedom of opinion and expression, freedom
to speak our minds and freedom to receive and impart
information. They seek to force their barbaric ideology
on us by dictating at the point of a gun what we can
and cannot say. We should make no mistake - such
groups recognize no borders, and their violence and
intimidation are not restricted to any particular region
of the world. The shots at the offices of Charlie
Hebdo in Paris were meant to silence the community
of journalists worldwide. However, as hundreds of
thousands of the citizens of France proclaimed in the
streets, we will not allow the enemies of a free press to
silence our freedoms.

In these times of instability, journalists are
compelled to report from nations ruled by fear and
repression and from lawless lands ruled by warlords.
Those whose duty it is to report on the horrific events in
such areas are at unprecedented risk of being abducted,
tortured or brutally murdered. The most dangerous place
in the world for journalists is the Middle East. From
Saudi Arabia to Iraq, and from Gaza to Iran, freedom
of the press is under siege. Hope for new freedoms has
shriveled under the harsh reality of Middle Eastern
autocrats and theocrats,who are determined to use any
means at their disposal to silence those who would
question their legitimacy.

Ten months ago in Iran, a Washington Post reporter,
Jason Rezaian, was arrested along with his wife. He
has been detained without bail, denied access to an
attorney and accused of espionage and propaganda
against the establishment. Just yesterday, his shadowy
trial opened. Not surprisingly, the hearing to decide his
fate will be conducted behind closed doors. In other
parts of the Middle East, terrorists have seized control
and journalists face an even more barbaric fate. Those
fanatical zealots mock the very idea of human rights
and prefer rule by the sword to rule by law. Their idea
of due process is a masked man beheading a helpless
kneeling human and posting the execution on YouTube.

The iron-fisted rule that Hamas exercises over
the Gaza Strip provides a powerful example of what
happens when the press is not free to report What it sees
and hears. Israeli families spent last summer racing to
bomb shelters, knowing they had only seconds to take
cover from Hamas rockets. Thousands of those rockets
were fired in broad daylight from hospitals, schools
and children's playgrounds. Yet those who turned on
their televisions or opened their newspapers did not see
reports of the obvious war crimes committed by Hamas.
When we ask why so few pictures of those rockets and
the Hamas terrorists who launched them ever saw the
light of day, the answer comes from the stories of the
journalists themselves. The Italian journalist Gabriele
Barbati did not dare to report that Hamas-launched
rockets killed Palestinian children in a refugee camp
until he was, in his own words, out of Gaza and far from
Hamas's retaliation. An Indian film crew videotaped
a Hamas missile launch just metres from their hotel
room, but waited until they were beyond Hamas's reach
to air the damning footage. Under such conditions,
missiles launches go unseen, the use of human shields
goes unreported and falsehoods are accepted as truths.

While Hamas routinely harasses and intimidates
journalists, the Palestinian Authority is no better.
According to a United States State Department human-
rights report, Palestinian Authority security forces
harass, detain and prosecute journalists for trying to do
their jobs. Furthermore, the Authority abuses the idea
ofa free press by using State-controlled media outlets to
broadcast hateful rhetoric and dangerous incitements.

There is only one exception to the rule in the
Middle East. According to Freedom House, an
organization that monitors the suppression of freedom
around the world, Israel is the only country in the
region with a free press. We in Israel understand that
a free press is the cornerstone of democracy. Those of
us fortunate enough to live in an open society know
that with a free press comes bad press, and in Israel we
know it all too well. The press is free to challenge the
strategic assessment of the head of our army, to debate
the reasoning of our Chief Justice and to give political
advice to the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. Israel is
a model for how a democratic nation, even while facing
immense challenges, can maintain a free and thriving
press.

Threats to journalists and a free press are threats
to our way of life. When a journalist cannot report
the truth and the public is left in the dark, tyranny,
dictatorship and the abuse of human rights will follow.
It is the responsibility of the international community
to work together to protect journalists across the
globe. The United Nations was founded on the basis
of allowing free and open debate in order to ensure a
peaceful world. Only a determined commitment on
the part of the Security Council to safeguarding a free
press can ensure the realization of the promise of that
vision for ourselves and for future generations.

