Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank our
briefers: Under-Secretary-General Feltman, for
his comprehensive presentation of the Secretary-
General's fourth report (S/2017/1030); Ms. Adamson,
for her update on the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); and Mr. Cardi,
for his summary as Facilitator of the format under
resolution 2231 (2016), as well as for his and his team's
excellent work.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is one of
the greatest diplomatic successes in recent memory. The
continued endorsement of the deal through resolution
2231 (2015) is another considerable achievement, and
also a responsibility for all ofus. We remain committed
to its full and equitable implementation by all parties.
As the Secretary-General's latest report demonstrates,
the nuclear components of the deal are working. Iran
is complying with its nuclear commitments. For our
part, we are committed to ensuring that the Iranian
people see tangible benefits, including from sanctions
relief. I encourage all Member States to uphold
their commitments.

We welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to promote further understanding of resolution
2231 (2015) and of the Procurement Channel. We are
committed to supporting those efforts. However,
despite that progress, four elements of the report are
of concern. They relate to provisions of annex B. They
hinder the full realization of the reciprocal benefits of
the deal and they undermine faith in Iran's long-term
commitment to regional stability.

First, we are deeply concerned by reported transfers
of Iranian ballistic missile parts and related technology
to the Houthis in Yemen. Such transfers would be a
violation of resolution 2231 (2015), which prohibits the
transfer to and from Iran of ballistic missile technology
and related material. Such transfers would also violate
resolution 2216 (2015), which prohibits the sale or
transfer of arms and related materiel to the Houthis.
The Houthi missile attack on Riyadh on 4 November
deliberately targeted a civilian area, and earlier today
we heard reports ofa further missile attack on Riyadh,
this time aimed at the Al-Yamama Palace. Both would
have caused suffering and chaos had they landed
as intended. That is clearly unacceptable, and risks
escalating the situation. The transfer of weapons to
the Houthis threatens regional security and stability.
Their use is prolonging the conflict in Yemen and
contributing to heightened regional tensions. It is
essential that the United Nations conduct a thorough
investigation and inform the Security Council of its
conclusions as soon as possible. We strongly support
the Secretary-General's call for a joint meeting of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) and the Council under the 2231
format. That will allow for a coherent discussion of the
use of ballistic missiles against the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, while also considering next steps to address
that threat.

Secondly, we are concerned by the continued
reported violations of restrictions on arms-related
provisions. Evidence of those activities is mounting.
The latest report indicates that the arms seized from
a dhow near the Gulf of Oman and an unmanned
surface vessel recovered in Yemeni waters are both of
Iranian origin. Those activities, which are contrary to
the resolution, give us further cause for concern about
Iran's involvement in that conflict.

Thirdly, we are concerned by evidence relating to
Iranian ballistic missile-related activities. Paragraph
3 of annex B calls on Iran not to undertake any
activity related to ballistic missiles that are designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using such technology. The launch of the
Simorgh space launch vehicle on 27 July made use of
such technology and, as such, was inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, we are concerned about reports of multiple
violations of the travel ban provisions, including new
infringements by Major General Qasem Soleimani.
That is particularly disturbing given the public nature
of the violation.

Putting all those issues together, it is clear that
such activities have a detrimental impact on regional
security and undermine Iran's integration with the
international community. We remain committed to
the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in
order to uphold the historic agreement and to working
with all parties to make that a reality. But we cannot
stand by and allow a Security Council resolution to be
ignored and the situation in the region to be further
destabilized. We urge Iran to respect all provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and we are prepared to work
with Council members to ensure that those responsible
are held accountable for any proven violations.
The JCPOA and its implementation through
resolution 2231 (2015) are important elements of
the international community's non-proliferation
architecture and are essential to supporting regional
and global security. We are all responsible for ensuring
its success. We must all honour our commitments. Iran
is no exception.

