Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation stresses that justice was and will always remain the cornerstone on which the founding fathers based the United Nations 75 years ago with a view to achieving the welfare, well- being and peace of the nations of the world, without discrimination or selectivity. In that regard, allow me to recall the provisions of resolution 2282 (2016) underpinning this meeting's concept note (S/2020/98, annex). That resolution reiterates that maintaining peace is both an objective and a process towards building a common social vision, including through efforts to prevent conflict and its escalation, continuation or relapse; address its root causes; achieve national reconciliation; and move towards recovery, reconstruction and development. The resolution stresses the primary responsibility of Governments and national authorities in determining the priorities, strategies and implementation activities required to maintain peace. However, the practical realities of today are in stark contrast to those guiding principles. Some Governments with political, economic and military influence habitually misinterpret and violate to an unprecedented extent the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and its working methods and procedure. in an attempt to impose a unilateral view on United Nations frameworks and take them in a direction that would help those Governments interfere in the affairs of other States. The same Governments are trying to introduce divisive concepts that will negatively affect the future of the Organization and itsstatus, entrench differences and generate discord and hostility in inter-State relations. The Syrian Arab Republic, along with a considerable number of Member States, warns against a historic turning point, whereby those Governments could use United Nations legal mechanisms as a tool to apply political pressure on some States by linking the principles of justice with divisive concepts such as universal jurisdiction and the responsibility to protect. We reject the policy of hypocrisy and double standards practised by the Governments of Member States that are negatively interfering in the political process in Syria and are trying to hamper genuine political reconciliation and impose an economic blockade against the Syrian people, thereby undermining reconstruction and recovery in my country. Those are all part and parcel of the provisions of resolution 2282 (2016). The practices of those Governments in the framework of the United Nations are dangerously underpinned by an unethical principle - the end justifies the means. With regard to the misleading remarks of some representatives about the so-called International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (IIIM), we reiterate, through legal evidence, that the so-called IIIM has been and will remain a stark example of a breach of the Charter of the United Nations, working methods and rules of procedure. The General Assembly has encroached on the mandate of the Security Council, violated Article 12 of the Charter and adopted resolution 71/248, in which it established the so-called HIM despite its full knowledge that the Security Council is the sole organ responsible for addressing the situation in my country, Syria. The General Assembly has even ignored the fact that its mandate, as provided in Articles 10, 11, 12 and 22 of the Charter, does not give it the right or authority to establish any investigative body, legislative body or a mechanism such as this one. Let me remind the Council that my country - the country concerned - did not request any technical assistance from the United Nations to establish that entity. I will conclude my remarks on the so-called IM by saying that, in my country, there are long-standing national legal and judicial bodies that are willing and able to achieve justice and provide accountability and reparations without the flagrant interference that seeks to achieve distorted justice and reprisals rather than a genuine transitional justice. We call on all members to adopt balanced policies in which principles are matched by action. We call on the Council to convene a meeting on holding accountable those Governments with direct or indirect responsibility for the flow of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) into my country, Syria, from more than 100 States that are members of this international organization, which promotes the peace and security of nations. All member States of the European Union are among those 100 States. We call on those same Governments to shoulder their responsibilities in taking back the FTFs who hold their nationalities. They have wreaked havoc and left a trail of killings and destruction in my country and in Iraq and Libya. As we talk about peace and justice, we call on the Council to seriously consider an extremely dangerous issue, namely, the attempt by some members of the Council to use the Council as a media platform for military coalitions, such as NATO, and for the purpose of levelling threats of using military force against States Members of the United Nations from the rostrum of the Security Council, which deals with maintaining international peace and security.
