Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to review the
efforts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past
90 days. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nishida for his first report as Chair of that critical
Committee.

Three months have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010) to respond to Iran's
ongoing refusal to comply with its international
obligations. I would like to make three points about the
situation today and where we go from here.

First, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the clear evidence that Iran is refusing to take any
step to begin resolving concerns that it is pursuing
nuclear weapons and that it continues to take actions
that in fact deepen those concerns. On 6 September, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) reported to the Council that Iran is
continuing and expanding its proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities in violation of its international
obligations (see S/20lO/465). Iran's enrichment of
uranium, including to nearly 20 per cent, continues
unabated. Additionally, the Director General provided
significant and troubling examples where Iran is
hampering the work of IAEA inspectors, refusing the
IAEA's legitimate requests for information about and
access to its nuclear facilities and continuing to reject
legitimate inquiries about a possible military
10-53435
dimension to its nuclear programme. I emphasize that
this report states that Iran is hampering the IAEA's
ability to monitor Iran's programme. Iran is not
cooperating fully with the IAEA.

The Security Council has clearly established in
its resolutions on Iran that cooperation with the IAEA
is a fundamental benchmark and test of Iran's peaceful
intentions. The IAEA's report is the clearest evidence
yet that Iran is refusing to address our proliferation
concerns and appears determined to acquire a nuclear
weapons capability.

Yet, Iran's disregard for its international
obligations extends beyond its nuclear activities. Iran
has repeatedly attempted to export arms in violation of
resolution 1747 (2007). We are also concerned that Iran
continues to engage in activities related to ballistic
missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons,
including conducting launches using ballistic missile
technology. These activities are prohibited under
resolution 1929 (2010) and undermine Iran's claims of
peaceful intentions at the very time that the
international community has offered Iran opportunities
to build trust and confidence. The Council and the
1737 Committee will need to consider an appropriate
response to Iran's serial violations of Security Council
resolutions.

My second point is that Iran's recent actions
remind us of the urgent need to redouble our efforts to
implement the United Nations sanctions, particularly
those new measures adopted in resolution 1929 (2010).
Already we have seen unprecedented efforts to respond
to Iran's defiance with pressure in line with the dual-
track approach. Member States should move quickly to
carry out their obligations to implement the new
sanctions and report on their national implementation
efforts to the Committee.

The 1737 Committee continues to play a critical
role in monitoring and improving the enforcement of
Security Council resolutions on Iran. We strongly
support that Committee, which is the principle
mechanism to help States fulfil their obligations, to
implement the measures and to respond when States
fail to enforce United Nations sanctions. The
Committee should move quickly to implement the
action items in its ambitious work programme,
especially to respond to Iran's well-documented
patterns of sanctions evasion.
3

Finally, the Committee should support the
Secretariat's efforts to establish a new panel of experts
to help monitor and improve sanctions implementation.
We are concerned by the delay in setting up the panel,
and we urge renewed focus to enable that body to
become operational as soon as possible. These steps
can improve sanctions implementation and limit the
risk posed by Iran's arms smuggling, its development
of nuclear-weapon delivery systems and the
proliferation of sensitive nuclear and ballistic missile-
re1ated items.

My final point is to underscore the continued
commitment of the United States and the international
community to a dialogue and a negotiated solution to
the Iranian nuclear issue. We nevertheless plan to
continue clarifying for Iran the consequences of its
actions, both positive and negative. Our goal remains
to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We
are committed to working closely with our partners in
the Security Council and the international community
towards that goal.

