Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We feel very honoured by your presence
among us, Mr. President, and extend to you our
warmest welcome. I would like to take this opportunity
to commend Ambassador J agdish Koonjul and his team
for the excellent way in which they have led the work
of the Security Council over the month. In addition, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Amara Essy, for
his participation and valuable presentation at the
beginning of this debate.

There is much wisdom and experience among the
leaders and representatives of Africa. No one knows
their problems better than they, and no one is in a
better position to determine the best solutions. Africa
does not need lessons; rather, it needs economic
development. What it requires are not recipes or
adjustment programmes, but rather financial resources,
official development assistance, debt forgiveness and
the support of the United Nations.

Debates such as the one we are holding today are
undoubtedly valuable. At the same time, it is clear that
the attention given to the situation in Africa goes well
beyond the exclusive jurisdiction of the Security
Council and extends to other bodies both inside and
outside the United Nations. The Presidents of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should be permanently invited to take part in
these debates, since both bodies include attention to the
situation in Africa as an important item on their
agendas. We would also like to welcome the presence
of Ambassador Ivan Simonovie, President of the
Economic and Social Council, at this meeting.

We appreciate the recent attempts of the Security
Council to gain a better understanding of conflicts in
Africa. More debates on this issue are taking place,
more missions are being sent to the field, and direct
contacts are being held more often with the main
protagonists of the conflicts, through private or public
meetings.

Furthermore, African conflict-settlement
mechanisms have been developing in recent years, and,
though it is still insufficient, cooperation has increased
among the United Nations, the OAU and subregional
organizations in Africa. However, much remains to be
done. It is a cause for concern that, despite what is
reiterated in debates and stated in resolutions, the
emphasis continues to be placed on reaction to
conflicts, not prevention.

The quest for peace and security requires
development and the elimination of poverty. There can
be no peace without development and no development
without peace. Nor do the current working methods
and composition of the Security Council - a body in
which the developing countries, including the African
nations, are severely underrepresented - contribute to
giving effective attention to the African problems. How
can it be explained that Africa, whose conflicts occupy
most of the Council's agenda, does not have a single
representative among its permanent members? That is
one of the reasons why we insist on a thorough and
urgent reform of the Security Council.

The report of the Secretary-General to the
Millennium Summit states that most of today's wars
take place in the developing world. It is an indisputable
fact that there are more armed conflicts in Africa than
in any other continent. Twenty per cent of Africans live
in countries severely affected by conflicts. More than a
half of the deaths caused by war in the world take place
in Africa, where there are also millions of refugees and
displaced persons.

The proportion of people living in extreme
poverty continues to grow in Africa, with nearly 50 per
cent of its population living on less than a dollar per
day. Thirty-four of the 49 least developed countries are
located on the continent. While Africa accounts for
18.5 per cent of the world's population and has vast
natural resources, its share of the world's gross national
product is merely 1 per cent, and its share of global
trade is only 2 per cent.

Africa has an illiteracy rate of 41 per cent - the
highest in the world. It has only 1.8 per cent of the
world's telephones, 1.3 per cent of its computers and
0.6 per cent of its Internet users- and half of the
latter are concentrated in a single country. How could
one expect that, in such a situation, the continent would
be able effectively to face the challenges posed by a
global economy which is increasingly knowledge-
based?

Africa is the only region in the world with
declining school attendance; 100 million African
children never go to school. In addition, Africa's debt
accounts for 110 per cent of its gross national product.
Indeed, since 1985 the International Monetary Fund
has received more funds from sub-Saharan Africa than
it has lent to it, and that trend continues to intensify.

Africa spends more money on debt servicing than
on health and education combined - this in a world in
which official development assistance represents only
0.22 per cent of gross national product, the lowest level
in the last 10 years.

We reiterate that the foreign debt of African
countries must be canceled, without conditions or
demands. That debt has already been paid off more
than once.

Another serious threat to sustainable development
in Africa is HIV/AIDS. Two out of three people
infected with HIV/AIDS, and nine out of 10 people
who die of AIDS in the world, live in Africa. There are
as many deaths due to AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa as
would result from the dropping in that region of more
than 70 nuclear bombs such as the ones used against
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

We cannot overlook the historical origins of the
African crises: the pernicious role played by the
colonial and neo-colonial powers, who engaged in
slavery, fostered division, drew arbitrary borders,
encouraged tribal conflicts, plundered natural resources
and sold all manner of weapons, among other things.

Today these powers have the moral obligation to
counteract the consequences of their actions. The
prevalence of an unjust and unsustainable international
economic order, which continues to use Africa as the
main source of wealth to serve the unsustainable
consumerism of industrialized countries, is also among
the factors that shape this situation.

Cuba is linked to Africa by very deep historical
bonds of friendship and solidarity. To a large extent, we
owe the formation of our nationality to the African
countries.

More than 80,000 Cuban civilian workers have
lent their assistance to Africa; almost 25,000 of them
have been medical doctors, dentists, nurses and health
practitioners. From 1961 to 2001, a total of 29,686
African youths graduated from intermediate and
higher-education programmes in Cuba, more than
1,100 of them in the area of health care. Today, 2,803
African students from almost 40 countries are
benefiting from education programmes in Cuba. The
cost of their studies is fully covered by our
Government.

The comprehensive plan for health in Africa,
Latin America and the Caribbean that Cuba began
some years ago already covers 11 African countries
and will be extended to others. This programme, under
which 831 Cuban health workers currently provide free
medical care in the beneficiary countries, has also been
supported by other countries, such as France, Japan,
Germany and South Africa, as well as by several non-
governmental organizations. In various African
countries, Cuba has also set up medical schools and
brought Cuban professors to several African
countries - also free of charge.

As a specific response to the spirit of cooperation
required by the complex situation existing in Africa,
Cuba reiterates today the offer made by President Fidel
Castro during the Millennium Summit to send 3,000
medical specialists to provide their services, free of
charge, in sub-Saharan Africa, and even to establish the
necessary infrastructure for the widespread
administration of anti-retroviral treatments, if the
industrialized countries provide the necessary drugs
and resources.

We emphasize the fact that these vital drugs are
required on a massive scale, including AIDS drugs, and
that they cannot continue to be protected by patents.
One cannot profit from the lives of human beings.

I would also like to reiterate here the offer made
by Cuba at the special session on AIDS. Cuba made a
commitment to place at the disposal of the poorest
countries, especially of those most affected by AIDS,
the following.

First, Cuba would provide 4,000 medical doctors
and health personnel to set up the necessary
infrastructure to provide the population with the
necessary drugs, prescriptions and follow-up. That
same staff could in turn train a large number of
specialists, nurses and health technicians in the
countries where they work.

Cuba would also provide professors to set up 20
medical schools to train 1,000 medical doctors every
year in the countries that require it the most. It would
also provide medical doctors, teachers, psychologists
and the other specialists required to advise and
cooperate with prevention programmes against AIDS
and other diseases; the necessary diagnostic equipment
and kits required for basic prevention programmes; and
anti-retroviral treatment for 30,000 patients.

Cuba would not profit at all from this and would
contribute the costliest part- that is, the salaries of
the staff and specialists willing to carry out this
mission.

It is now time to take action. We offer our
experience, in a spirit of modesty, and only as an
example of what can be done with true spirit of
cooperation on the part of all.

