Dr. Nabarro: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to be here this afternoon to talk about the
outbreak of Ebola virus disease in West Africa. I had
the honour to be appointed the Secretary-General's
Senior Coordinator for Ebola on 12 August, just over a
month ago. Since then, I have visited the countries most
affected twice, and I have also travelled to a number
of capitals to describe my findings. I have had many
meetings with the Secretary-General and his senior
team, and I have also had the opportunity to brief the
President of the World Bank and other agency chiefs,
particularly the President of the African Development
Bank. My findings are as follows.

This is a disease outbreak that is advancing in
an exponential fashion. To be precise, that means
it is doubling at a particular time interval. When the
incidence is plotted on a graph, it shows a curve ofrapid
upward acceleration. We heard from the Secretary-
General that most believe that the doubling speed is
about every three weeks. That means that the outbreak
has doubled in extent since I was appointed.

The response is also increasing, and we heard from
the Secretary-General that not only are Governments
themselves doing a great deal, but many excellent
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
are also putting in additional resources. But the response
is increasing at more like a linear speed; its graph would
look like a straight line. What that means is that the
outbreak is accelerating away from the control effort,
and the longer it does that, the harder it is to get it under
control and, most importantly, to enable the people of
the countries affected to return to the prosperity and
development they have been enjoying so much in the
past 10 years.

So, given the acceleration of the outbreak and the
difficulty in catching up with it, there is an increased
likelihood of societal and economic challenges for
the people affected. I estimate that to get ahead of
the outbreak, the level of the response has to be about
20 times greater than what it is at the moment. That
calculation is based on an assessment of the rate at
which it is extending, but also on the recognition that
any scale-up takes between one and two months to put
in place.

Increasing the scale-up at that rate would be
challenging enough if this were a straightforward
medical problem for which the solution involved were,
perhaps, a vaccine or the administration of a particular
therapy. But this disease is a bit more complicated, and
there are in fact about 12 different critical actions that
have to be put in place for control to be properly effected.
The Secretary-General outlined the five elements of the
strategy, and I do not want to waste time by repeating
them. But the medical part is one important element.
There is also a lot of work to be done to restore basic
services - health care for pregnant women, and food
for people who at the moment are finding it hard to
ensure that they and their families get nutrition, or
even income support, because so many households, as
a result of this outbreak, have experienced huge drops
in their income.

So an effective, efficient and massively scaled-up
response is vital for the affected countries. It is also
vital for the rest of Africa and, as I think Dr. Margaret
Chan will say in a minute, it is vital for the world. I
am convinced that if it is properly organized, the
massive scale-up can happen in the coming weeks and
could in fact achieve a rapid end to the outbreak. And
I am delighted that, since I returned from Conakry on
Sunday afternoon, there has been incredible progress.

First, there was a strong announcement on Monday
in Brussels by the European Union about its collective
commitment. On Tuesday, we heard the powerful
statement of support by the United States, along the
lines that the Secretary-General identified. A further
major set of commitments was outlined at an event
in Geneva chaired by Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos. On Wednesday, there was a strong
statement from the British Government. Offers began
coming in from Cuba, from China and from other
Governments.

But the challenge is to make sure that all those
different offers are coordinated effectively, with a very
powerful platform that enables everybody to work
safely in the region and not in turn become infected
with the virus. There needs to be a strong backbone
of support that enables all its different providers to
work in synergy and in a very clear direction so that the
assistance provided supports people, communities and
Governments to respond effectively. As one President
said to me on Saturday, "We want people to come work
with our nation and its citizens, and not just to come to
get rid of the virus". Lastly, a very big tent is absolutely
vital, because this requires the whole world to come in
behind the countries and behind their people to achieve
a rapid outcome.

