Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Ebrahim, the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, and thank
him for presiding over today's open debate. I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing. I have listened attentively to the
statements delivered by the observer of Palestine and
the representative of Israel.

The Middle East peace process is currently at an
impasse, which is a source of great concern to China.
We consistently advocate the settlement of disputes
through political negotiations on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map for peace in the Middle East, with a
view to ultimately realizing an independent Palestinian
State living in peace with Israel.

China welcomes and supports any and all
measures that would help to break the current deadlock
in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations and relaunch the
dialogue. We appreciate the recent efforts of Jordan
and the Middle East Quartet to facilitate direct contact
between the parties. We hope that the relevant efforts
to promote peace will help to ensure the early
resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations
and achieve substantive results. China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in resolving the
Middle East issue.

Israel's settlement activities are a major obstacle
to the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace
negotiations. China expresses its serious concern at
Israel's recent approval of plans to build new
settlements. China has always opposed Israel's
establishment of Jewish settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We urge
Israel to immediately cease settlement construction, to
act prudently and to actively align itself with
international efforts to promote peace so as to create
conditions for the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations.

The security and humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Gaza, remains
grim. China hopes that the relevant parties will
exercise restraint, avoid any escalation of tensions in
Gaza, effectively implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions and fully lift the blockade of Gaza.

China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people as they work to regain their
legitimate national rights. We have consistently held
that the building of an independent State is the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people and is a basis
for the implementation of the two-State solution. China
supports the establishment of a fully sovereign,
independent Palestinian State based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. China
supports Palestinian membership in the United
Nations.

The Syrian-Israeli and Lebanonese-Israeli tracks
are also important components of the Middle East
peace process. A comprehensive solution to the Middle
East issue is inextricably linked to peace negotiations
between Syria and Israel and between Lebanon and
Israel. China firmly supports the just cause of Lebanon
and Syria to maintain their sovereignty and territorial
integrity and recover their occupied territories. China
supports the Arab countries in their strategic choice in
seeking a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region.

