Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this meeting. I would also like to extend my
thanks to the Secretary-General for his preliminary
observations, as well as to welcome the participation of
the Prime Minister of Somalia's Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed. I thank him for his invaluable statement. We
would also like to draw attention to the statement made
by Ambassador Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia.

In a country where nearly a third of the
population needs humanitarian assistance because of
war, displacement, drought and the like, focusing only
on a military solution and on fighting a rebellion will
lead to no sustainable results. Somalia needs an
inclusive strategic solution that goes beyond the
security situation to buttressing Somali institutions and
economic development.

We reiterate our support for the Djibouti peace
process, in particular as it is currently the sole political
track to save Somalia. We call for reactivating and
energizing that process. Lebanon welcomes the Somali
Government's development of a political road map. We
hope that the Government will continue to carry out the
remaining transitional tasks, implement reconciliation
initiatives, reach out to opposition groups through
dialogue and finalize the draft constitution with the
participation of all parties. In that connection, we
express our regret that the Transitional Federal
Parliament had to extend its mandate without
accomplishing the requisite reforms.

With regard to security, we condemn the attacks
undertaken by anti-Government militias and at the
same time stress the need for all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians. We also emphasize the need to
lend expeditious support to the regular forces of
Somalia in order to allow the Government to extend its
authority. We welcome the fact that the TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have
made significant gains in Mogadishu. At the same time,
we express our concern over the fragility of the
security situation in southern and central Somalia,
which impedes most humanitarian activities.

Piracy and armed robbery constitute a threat to
international commercial navigation and impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We endorse the
African Union's call on the Security Council on
15 October 2010 to approach the issue of piracy in a
comprehensive manner in order to address its
underlying causes and other threats adversely affecting
the livelihoods of Somalis, particularly illegal fishing
and the dumping of toxic wastes off the shores of
Somalia.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, we
express our deep concern over the apparent recruitment
of child soldiers and reports of the coercive evacuation
of internally displaced persons and of threats to
humanitarian workers and assistance. In that regard, we
stress the need for humanitarian workers to reach out to
all Somali parties with a view to providing
humanitarian assistance to all those who need it,
particularly those who need it most and who reside in
areas under rebel control.

In the absence of an international peace force,
Lebanon agrees with the Secretary-General that the
elements of support for AMISOM. should conform with
support given to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we call on the Security
Council to enhance its support, including through the
possible funding of AMISOM. through assessed
contributions. We call on donors to increase their
reimbursements of AMISOM. through unconditional
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund. We
support the expeditious deployment of a United
Nations presence in Somalia with a view to sending a
message of support from the Security Council for the
Djibouti peace process.

In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of the meeting.

