Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The Security Council is meeting at the request
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the member States
of the Southern African Development Community. Their

 

timely request comes in the wake of the summit of the
Heads of State of the region, held on 2 October in Luanda,
which dealt with the situation in Angola. The delegation of
Guinea-Bissau welcomes the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe, while
emphasizing the validity of their collective endeavour and
the relevance of the statements they just made before the
Council.

The points of views expressed are legitimate ones. We
understand them because, in fact, we share the same
frustration. The situation in Angola remains difficult, and
characterized as it is by continued antagonism, which
contributes to its precariousness and to further delaying the
peace process set up by the signing of the Lusaka Protocol,
almost two years ago.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General is
clear in this regard. The report states that in the past three
months little progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the timetable agreed on by the two
parties. Scrupulous respect for this timetable should lead to
the creation of new structures allowing for the effective
participation of UNITA in the governance of Angola. The
facts as presented by the Secretary-General were broadly
corroborated yesterday morning by his Special
Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, before members of
the Council.

I should like at this juncture, on behalf of my country
to pay tribute to Maitre Blondin Beye for his determination
and effectiveness and his keen sense of duty. I should like
also to pay well-deserved tribute to all the military
observers, the staff officers, the civilian police and the
troops, as well as to all the non-governmental and
humanitarian organizations whose personnel are risking
their lives to contribute to the peace efforts in Angola.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
reporting on the situation, gave us a perfectly clear and
highly instructive picture of the circumstances prevailing
today in Angola. The solution to the Angolan conflict
certainly faces many obstacles.

The decades-old war in Angola has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of casualties and caused irreparable
harm. It has lasted so long that it is now time to put a
definite end to it. The many agreements reached along the
path of national reconciliation and peace, up to the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol in November 1994, must serve as a
reference in our common reflection and in charting the
course ahead.

 

These various stages have, unfortunately, only too
often been marked by unfulfilled commitments and set-
backs, which have today led to, and fuel, an
unprecedented climate of suspicion. Regrettably, mistrust
between the parties persists. We must try to overcome it
by pursuing a constructive dialogue, because without
dialogue there can be no national harmony. The path to
peace in Angola is no doubt a difficult one, but it can be
followed if taken with determination and open-
mindedness.

The higher interest of the Angolan people must
continue to be the final goal and to have primacy in the
peace process in Angola. It is this primacy that the
political parties must endeavour to acknowledge and
respect and which in the final analysis must be brought to
bear in negotiations and prevail in the end. The Angolan
people have suffered too much and are desperately
waiting for an end to be put to the procrastination and for
other obstacles to the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol to be removed.

The agreed-upon timetable must be complied with in
all of its aspects. We know that the proposed machinery
is not easy to set up and that its complexity is
compounded by political and psychological factors.
Nevertheless, the two parties, and UNITA in particular,
must continue to endeavour to work tirelessly within the
prescribed time-frame and through concrete, mutually
agreed action towards the achievement of peace in
Angola.

This notwithstanding, some stages, because they
were previously defined and agreed upon, are unavoidable
and must be dealt with quickly. In this connection, we
deplore the slowness in the implementation of the military
aspect of the Lusaka Protocol, which must be corrected.
The efforts at quartering, disarmament and demobilization
must continue to be pursued rigorously in an overall
effort at unifying the Angolan Armed Forces, which
necessarily requires the integration of high-ranking
UNITA officers. My country notes with satisfaction that
an important step has been taken in this regard, but the
fact remains that it is insufficient.

The peace effort in Angola cannot have any strings
attached to it other than those requirements provided for
in the Lusaka Protocol. It would be regrettable if, after all
the steps taken by the parties - which, we should recall,
were the result of lengthy and painstaking negotiations -
the peace process were jeopardized once again because of
partisan considerations that are unrelated to the previously

 

agreed framework. In fact, we must do away with all the
remaining obstacles, promote the free circulation of people
and goods throughout the national territory, and work
towards the strict implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

The international community certainly has an
important role to play in the affirmation and maintenance
of the irreversible nature of the peace process in Angola,
which should be completed, in accordance with the agreed-
upon framework, as quickly as possible. We are aware that
the United Nations presence in that country involves a
considerable financial effort in view of the budgetary
restrictions imposed on the functioning of our Organization.
The parties concerned are aware that the effort of the
international community can be justified and will continue
only if they show a genuine determination to work tirelessly
towards the establishment of a comprehensive and definitive
peace in Angola. We are convinced that once peace has
returned, the international community will make the
necessary contribution to rebuilding the country, which has
been laid to ruin by so many years of war.

The peace process in Angola is going through a
crucial phase. We must support it so that it might be
concluded as quickly as possible. The precariousness of the
situation calls for the good will of all the parties concerned,
which should act in a constructive manner, bearing in mind
the genuine interests of the Angolan people, who aspire,
and are entitled, to peace and well-being. My country has
high hopes that UNITA will take part with resolve in the
effort at national reconciliation.

The nations that we represent are duty-bound to
ensure, and to lend their assistance to, the peaceful and
final settlement of the conflict in Angola.

