Mr. McLay (New Zealand): In September 1999,
Asia-Pacific leaders gathered in Auckland, New
Zealand, for the annual Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) Summit. Less than two weeks
earlier, the people of Timor-Leste had overwhelmingly
chosen independence in a United Nations-supervised
popular referendum, following which the territory was
plunged into violent chaos. As the death toll mounted,
APEC leaders discussed options for ending the violence,
and, on 13 September, they agreed urgently to deploy
an international peacekeeping force to stabilize the
situation. So began a process that, three years later, saw
Timor-Leste's emergence as an independent country.

With this nation's birth playing out so
dramatically on my own country's soil, so also
began New Zealand's partnership with the
Timorese people. New Zealand participated in the
International Force for East Timor (INTERFET), which
was dispatched to Timor-Leste following that APEC
Summit. We have played a significant role in every
international force in the country since then, including,
most recently, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste.

Since 1999, more than 6,000 New Zealand military
personnel have served there. Indeed, at INTERFET's
peak in 2001, approximately half of New Zealand's
land forces were involved in some way in servicing
that deployment. That was in addition to the hundreds
of police and civilian personnel from our diplomatic,
overseas development, customs, corrections and other
agencies who, over the past decade or so, have also
contributed towards building this young country.

In short, New Zealand was proud to be one of
the first countries to commit to supporting the post-
referendum transition to independence. Since then, we
have been privileged to walk with the Timorese people
on their journey out of conflict and fragility. We have
gained a lot from that engagement ourselves. It has
taught us about the nature and demands of complex
peace operations and of post-conflict peacebuilding,
not least in our own region. Opportunities to live, work
and serve in Timor-Leste have enriched the lives of
many of our people.

Firm bonds have been forged between our peoples.
I will give just one example, which is all the more
touching as it is an example of triumph transcending
tragedy. The parents of a New Zealand soldier killed
in Timor-Leste in 2000 established, in his honour, a
charity to educate Timorese children - a charity that
has changed more than 40 lives in just one village.

Timor-Leste and its partners have encountered
setbacks in this journey. But today we have the
opportunity to acknowledge and celebrate its many
achievements. Great strides have been made since 1999
in healing the wounds of the independence struggle.
Former combatants have been demobilized and
reintegrated. Displaced populations have returned, and
communities reconciled. Core Government institutions
and conventions of democratic governance have been
steadily built and consolidated. We also commend all of
Timor-Leste's neighbours, most particularly Indonesia,
for the readiness with which they have welcomed it into
their regional community.

In 10 short years, we have seen Timor-Leste move
from being conflict-ravaged to itself being a contributor
to United Nations peace operations. We have watched
as it has provided inspiration and voice for fragile States
seeking more focused and accountable international
assistance.

The orderly conduct of this year's elections was a
tribute to Timor-Leste's political maturity. It stands as
a testament to what post-conflict countries can achieve
through vision, leadership and determination. New
Zealand is one of many countries that supported those
efforts, most recently by sending election observers.

Over the past four years, Timor-Leste has also
enjoyed impressive levels of economic growth, which,
together with careful stewardship of oil and gas
revenues, has enabled progress in tackling poverty and
laying foundations for a for a more prosperous future.
Remarkable progress has been made in confronting
other challenges, such as domestic violence and
women's political empowerment.

Overall, today Timor-Leste is more stable, more
peaceful and more prosperous and its future appears
brighter than at any other time in its history. Timor-
Leste can take pride in those achievements. Its friends
can also take pride and, indeed, the Council should take
pride, in what has been achieved under its mandate.

As ofl November, leadership and responsibility for
Timor-Leste's security is now in the hands of Timorese
national police, supported by the nation's defence
force. Given that both the United Nations police and
the International Stabilisation Force have ceased their
residual security roles, and that the reconstitution of
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste has now been
fully certified, with UNMIT scheduled to withdraw
by the end of the year, Timor-Leste will enter a new
phase, including in terms of its relationship with the
international community.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(S/2012/765), the process will entail many daunting
challenges. Access to health and education services
must be enhanced. Greater inroads are needed to
counter malnutrition, and the benefits of development
must be felt beyond Dili. Above all, jobs are urgently
needed for Timor-Leste's young and rapidly growing
population, which will require support for an emerging
vibrant sector in the non-oil economy.

Recent gains in the areas of security and democratic
governance must also be consolidated and extended.
And further progress is needed so that all of the gains
are anchored in strong and wise leadership, as well as in
effective, resilient and sustainable institutions.

Particular priority is needed to strengthen core
institutions of the security and justice sectors, and
among those responsible for Government oversight and
accountability.

The challenges are common to many countries
and we believe that Timor-Leste has the vision and the
determination to meet them successfully. In all of those
endeavours, it will have the support of its many loyal
friends, and New Zealand is just one of the friends.

We will remain a reliable partner to Timor-Leste
as it writes the next chapter in its history, through
our $22 million bilateral development assistance
programme. Over the next three years we will
contribute to the construction of a stable, democratic
and prosperous country by fostering private sector
investment, strengthening the security and justice
sectors, including through our recently launched
bilateral community policing programme, and by
supporting education and training.

Support from the United Nations system will also
be vital. The new Timorese Government has articulated
what it regards as the most appropriate form, scope and
focus for its post-UNMIT relationship with the United
Nations. We support efforts by both sides to develop
the modalities for that more fully nuanced relationship.

Finally, in what we expect to be the last meeting
of the Council on the situation in Timor-Leste, I pay
tribute to the United Nations personnel, from the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on down, and
to the men and women from many nations who have
worked over the past 13 years to provide Timor-Leste
with a more peaceful and prosperous future.

Above all, I pay tribute to the courage and
determination of the people of Timor-Leste itself, which
has carried that young country such an extraordinary
distance since the dark and dramatic days of 1999.

We truly wish the Minister's country well. We
wish it well as it begins the next phase of its remarkable
journey. I assure the people of Timor-Leste that we will
walk with them on that journey.

