Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We are alarmed at the situation which
prevails in the autonomous Palestinian territory as a result
of actions by the Israeli authorities, including steps to
effect the administrative closure of those territories, which
has led to a serious deterioration of the situation of the
Palestinian population. This dangerous turn of events
threatens the further development of the peace process,
which has now reached a particularly crucial and delicate
stage.

We decisively condemn acts of terrorism perpetrated
in Israel by extremist groups, as a result of which dozens
of peaceful inhabitants have been killed.

Russia was an active participant in the recent
Summit of Peacemakers in Sharm El Sheikh and fully
supports the statement adopted there, aimed at
strengthening international cooperation in combatting
terrorism, including terrorism in the Middle East. As we
see it, the main task is to maintain the momentum of the
peace process, since this has a decisive impact on
resolving the problems that give rise, inter alia, to
manifestations of extremism. We call upon the parties to
refrain from any action which would exacerbate the
situation and destroy the atmosphere of businesslike
cooperation between them.

The sponsors of the peace process, together with
other influential members of the international community,
including donor countries, have been making strenuous
efforts to normalize the situation and to promote the
resumption of the process of Palestinian-Israeli
reconciliation, taking into account the interests and
concerns of both sides. We attach high priority to
improving the socio-economic conditions in the
Palestinian territories and the implementation of the
Interim Agreement.
It has been the constant policy of the Russian
Federation to promote progress in the Middle East peace
process. We made considerable efforts to get the parties
to reach the agreements that made it possible for the

 

Madrid Conference to be organized and for direct talks to
be launched. At the same time, we would like to recall that
an understanding was reached at the time that the most
difficult and delicate issues relating to the Arab-Israeli
settlement, including the matter of Jerusalem, would be
taken up at a somewhat later stage in the talks. In this
context, we believe it is important that Israel should give up
its tough position on the question of Palestinian autonomy.
At the same time, we would like once again to make it
abundantly clear that nothing can justify terrorism.

Experience indicates that the problems in the way of
a peace settlement cannot be resolved through unilateral
actions which affect the most sensitive aspects of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. For its part, the Russian Federation intends
to continue its efforts to normalize the situation and to
bring about prompt Arab-Israeli reconciliation.

