Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like, in my national capacity, to add a few comments to
the statement that the Permanent Representative of
Sweden will make on behalf of the European Union.

I wish at the outset to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, who is on his first visit to New York in his
new capacity. From the moment he arrived in Pristina,
Mr. Haekkerup plunged into the important mission
entrusted to him to continue the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) in all its aspects. We would
assure him of our encouragement and full support in
the discharge of his mandate.

As the Special Representative emphasized,
combating violence, particularly that motivated by
ethnic hatred, remains a central concern of the
international community in Kosovo. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), working
together, have mobilized to take up the challenge laid
down by the extremists. They are carrying out their
mission with courage and perseverance.

However, in order to stamp out violence, UNMIK
and KFOR also need the involvement of all of Kosovar
society. It is essential that all political leaders of the
province support them actively and unambiguously. It
is by ending ethnic confrontation, guaranteeing the
right of all to security and safety and opening
themselves to peaceful dialogue that Kosovars will
succeed in join democratic Europe.

We welcome the process begun by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to define the
institutions of self-government in Kosovo, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999). We expect in-depth discussions
to be held with the Kosovars. The objective is to
engage them and to get them thinking about the
meaning of autonomy, including matters relating to the
protection and rights of minorities. This process must
also involve a clear commitment from them to respect
and implement all the elements of that autonomy. The
representatives of all communities must participate in
this process, including the Kosovo Serbs. At the same
time, Belgrade must be kept informed.
With respect to Kosovo-wide elections, we
continue to believe that they will be useful to the
democratic process and to the substantial autonomy
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999), provided the
following conditions are met: first, the competences
and mandates of the bodies to be elected must be
precisely defined; secondly, satisfactory security
conditions must be ensured; and thirdly, all minorities,
including the Serbs, must participate in the voting. In
this regard, we welcome recent statements made by
Belgrade authorities - Mr. Djindjic and Mr.
Svilanovic in particular - on the participation of Serbs
in the voting. Those statements represent the right
direction.

The elections can be held once these conditions
are met. Setting a date a priori would be risky. We have
every confidence in the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and will support him in taking the
appropriate decisions.

The destabilizing activities that are being
orchestrated by armed Albanian extremist groups
around Kosovo cannot be tolerated. We very strongly
condemn acts of violence on the northern border of
Macedonia and in the Tetovo region. The integrity of
Macedonia must be respected. We cannot accept the
extremists' desire to alter by force the borders between
Yugoslavia and Macedonia, particularly those between
Kosovo and Macedonia. The policy of moderation
adopted by the Skopje authorities must be supported.
The Macedonian Albanians must also be offered every
political prospect possible within the current
constitutional framework.

As to Presevo, we welcome the ceasefire
agreement concluded on 12 March between the
Yugoslav armed forces and the armed Albanian groups.
We call on the parties to respect that agreement and to
move quickly to dialogue on a comprehensive and
lasting political settlement of the crisis. The
international community must support that process, in
particular by enhancing its humanitarian, economic and
social assistance to the region. Humanitarian projects
are already being undertaken by the European Union.

On 9 March, the North Atlantic Council adopted
a decision authorizing a phased and conditional return
of Yugoslav forces to the ground safety zone, with the
ultimate aim of eliminating it. This is a step in the right
direction. We welcome the authorization by the
Commander of KFOR, pursuant to that decision, of
deployment of Yugoslav forces in Zone 1 of the ground
safety zone. We are gratified that the deployment has
proceeded without incident.
We must thwart the extremists who, in and around
Kosovo, are seeking to undermine prospects for
reconciliation, peace and development. This is a shared
objective of the international community. Whatever the
causes advocated by these isolated groups, their acts of
violence will not be tolerated in the Council. The
presidential statement to be read out later will make
this very clear. Mr. Haekkerup can convey to all of the
democrats in the region our message of solidarity with
them.

