Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate the Angolan presidency for
organizing this debate, as well as for the concept note
that has been distributed (S/2016/223, annex). Allow me
as well to say how pleased we are at the participation
of many other ministers and deputy ministers present
today, as well as of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union, and the
Adviser from the Office of the Vice President of the
World Bank. Uruguay also welcomes the participation
of the Secretary-General at the beginning of our
meeting and is pleased to note its satisfaction with and
support for the work he is doing in the different areas
of his activity.

At this stage in the debate, many of my remarks
have already been said by speakers that preceded me,
so I will deliver a shortened version.

My country joins others that have expressed
their satisfaction at positive developments in various
elements the Great Lakes region, in particular those
due to the intense effort carried out by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the excellent
level of work and partnership with the United Nations
in this entire matter. We also emphasize, as other
delegations have, the fundamental importance that
we attach to development and the protection of human
rights and peace and security in the area, and we stress
the need to address the structural causes underpinning
all the conflicts in the area. Our country has a long-
standing commitment to the Great Lakes region,
which is especially reflected in our commitment to the
stability and pacification of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo through our contribution of troops to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

We agree with what was said a few minutes ago
in this Chamber with respect to the importance of the
peacekeeping operations in the Great Lakes region
and their continuity. We also agree, in particular, in
the light of the threats to the ongoing peacekeeping
operations as a result of unilateral actions that have
been developed in certain contexts during the last few
days. With regard to MONUSCO, Uruguay wishes
to express its satisfaction with the recent agreement
signed between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, in order to
resume cooperation between the Mission and the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, convinced that strengthening cooperation between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations is essential to fulfilling
the mandate of the Mission, hopes that the agreement
will be fully implemented.

Similarly, Uruguay is closely monitoring the
evolution of the political process and is looking forward
to democratic elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo taking place in a transparent and inclusive
manner. In that context, Uruguay would like to express
its support for the work that is being done by African
Union facilitator, former Prime Minister of Togo,
Mr. Edem Kodjo, with a view to supporting a transparent
and inclusive dialogue between all political actors. It
is crucial that the authorities ensure respect for human
rights and avoid outbreaks of violence before, during
and after the elections.

Uruguay is concerned about the current political
situation in Burundi and the growing human rights
violations committed within its territory and expects
the parties to reach a peaceful and negotiated resolution
to the conflict. It also believes that the thousands of
refugees from Burundi who have been displaced to
neighbouring countries should be a matter of concern
and priority for the international community. In this
context, Uruguay wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts during his recent visit to Burundi, which
followed the visit made by the members of the Security
Council, hoping that President Pierre Nkurunziza will
honour his commitments and allow the development of
a transparent and inclusive process of dialogue for the
parties involved.

For Uruguay, of particular concern are the possible
repercussions that the situation in Burundi may have
at the regional level and for the tension that has arisen
between the Government of Burundi and Rwanda. In
this regard, we urge the Governments of both countries
to resolve their differences through dialogue because
the revitalization of their good-neighbourly relations
and spirit of cooperation will help to ensure that peace
and stability take substantial root.

We cannot end our statement without calling
the Governments of the region and the international
community as a whole to unite their efforts aimed at
achieving political and social stability in the Great Lakes
region. These efforts must be based on strict respect for
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of neighbouring countries and in a renewed agreement
not to tolerate or lend assistance or support of any kind
to armed groups operating in the region, nor to shelter
or protect any person accused of serious crimes, and
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court
in arresting people accused of these crimes where
appropriate so that impunity does not prevail, so as to
put an end to the very serious humanitarian situation and
ensure the protection of civilians and the strict respect
for human rights of all people without distinction.

