Mr. Strommen (Norway): The conflict in the
Middle East can never be resolved by military means.
We understand the Israeli desire for security. But the
Palestinians too have a right to security and
development. The only way for the Israelis and the
Palestinians to ensure the security they both want is to
embark on the road to peace. This road will be hard
and painful, but at the end of the day, there will have to
be a solution to the conflict based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Norway condemns terrorism in all its forms. We
must not let the actions of extremists dictate the
agenda. The perpetrators of violence must be brought
to justice in accordance with the law. Any other
approach will only be an incitement to further violence.
And while violence is being reduced, confidence has to
be built.

As a member of the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-finding
Committee, my minister has worked with the parties
and the United States to break the present impasse. We
were pleased to note that both the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority endorsed the
recommendations in the Mitchell report. However,
implementation has been hampered by new acts of
violence and the new conditions that have been set.

Norway understands that Israeli leaders do not
wish to be perceived as "rewarding terrorism". We also
understand that Palestinian leaders do not wish to be
perceived as "rewarding occupation". But if the cycle
is to be broken, political risks must be taken. Norway
urges the leaders in the Middle East to carry out a very
hard task in political terms: to lead without knowing
how many will follow.

The Committee described the road back to
negotiations very clearly. The principal message to the
Middle East leaders was that they must end the
violence, rebuild confidence and resume negotiations.

Both Israel and the Palestinians must follow up
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and
implement them as they are. Both parties must also do
their utmost to show maximum restraint and de-
escalate the situation. In particular, it is important to
avoid and rectify all unilateral acts that have a negative
impact on agreements previously entered into by the
parties.

Norway supports the idea of establishing a third-
party presence that can monitor and facilitate the
implementation of the Mitchell report
recommendations, and Norway calls on the parties to
avail themselves of such a mechanism.

Norway also strongly supports the Tenet security
arrangements, which aim at securing a comprehensive
ceasefire and re-establishing serious cooperation on
security issues. However, a ceasefire cannot be
sustained unless there is also a political process leading
to the resumption of negotiations.

Nine months of violence and recurrent closures
have had a very severe impact on the Palestinian
economy. In its capacity as chairman of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, Norway has, together with the
World Bank and the United Nations Special
Coordinator in the Occupied Territories (UNSCO),
initiated a study to assess the present situation. The
findings of the study will guide the international donor
community in its future actions.

The principal task facing the international
community today must be to encourage the parties to
end the violence, implement the ceasefire and start
rebuilding trust. We must stand united in this approach.
Agreement within the Security Council is essential.

