Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi and extend our good wishes to the Colombian people. We thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his presentation and Ms. Carabali Rodallega for sharing her experiences with us. Regarding the impact of coronavirus disease in the sister country of Colombia, we see in a positive light the prevention measures adopted by the Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comutn and encourage them to continue to move forward with the implementation of the peace agreement despite the challenges arising from the pandemic. We reiterate the support of the Dominican Republic for the peace process in Colombia and encourage all parties to continue to cooperate in a constructive spirit until the peace and national reconciliation to which Colombians aspire are achieved. The support and protection of women human rights defenders and social leaders must remain a priority as a path towards national reconciliation. Many of them continue to be murdered or, like Ms. Carabali Rodallega, threatened. We remain concerned about violence against former combatants and community leaders. We support any action to ensure that human rights violations are properly investigated and that perpetrators are brought to justice. Therefore, we encourage the Government to take advantage of existing bodies, mechanisms and institutions, such as the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, to guarantee the security of those individuals and their communities, particularly given the effects of the pandemic on their security. We hope that efforts will be made to implement the programme. We believe that it is important that more resources be allocated to protection services and justice for the victims of gender-based violence, primarily for Afro-descendent and indigenous communities, in line with the peace agreement and resolution 2366 (2017). That includes promoting the meaningful participation of those communities' officials and of women's organizations. To meet the expectations of the victims, it is important that all actors contribute fully to the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. The Dominican Republic welcomes the progress made in the cases initiated by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We also see as positive the possibility of adding the monitoring of transitional justice sanctions to the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to be renewed in September. It is important that all efforts be victim-centred. In addition, we would like to congratulate the Government of Colombia, whose illicit crop substitution programme has enabled approximately 99,000 families, of which 35,304 are led by women, to move towards legal livelihoods. The fact that 96 per cent of the families enrolled in the programme have fulfilled their commitment to substitute the coca leaf and move into the legal economy speaks to the success of the Government's initiative. The Dominican Republic condemns all serious violations against children, in particular sexual violence and the recruitment and use of children, including Venezuelan children. We commend Government for its efforts to address that situation and ensure that the release and reintegration of children be conducted in line with international standards and with a community and family approach, while always ensuring the best interests of the child. Finally, we are concerned that, since the short ceasefire declared by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional (ELN) expired, violence and clashes have resumed in areas where the ELN and other illegal armed groups have a presence. We stress that the ELN must release all kidnapped persons and end all illegal activities as a gesture of goodwill and a demonstration of its determination for peace. We reiterate our strong support for the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and its efforts to build lasting peace.
