Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Let me begin by
thanking Foreign Minister Rassoul for his presence
today with us and for his statement to the Security
Council this morning. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing today and for
the continued good work being done by him and his
team in Afghanistan.

As we near the end of 2011, representatives from
the Afghan Government, its neighbouring countries and
all their international partners will take part in a series
of regional and international meetings that will
culminate with the Bonn Conference on 5 December.
These meetings will allow us to work together towards
achieving tangible results for the transition of
responsibilities for governance and security to the
Afghan government. The new Bonn Conference will
also be an opportunity to strengthen our common
vision of a better-governed and more stable
Afghanistan that will never again serve as a refuge for
terrorists.

A sustainable transition of responsibilities for
governance and security to the Afghan Government is
central to this vision and will remain at the forefront of
our efforts. With this objective in mind, we need to rely
strongly on the progress that has been made since 2001
in order to continue to support Afghan efforts towards
political reconciliation, increased regional cooperation,
and strong and more autonomous Afghan institutions
that are able to provide essential services to the people
of Afghanistan.

Through its renewed engagement in Afghanistan,
Canada maintains its fundamental objective of
contributing to the country's reconstruction as a
complement to the priorities identified by the Afghan
Government and the international community in the
context of the Kabul process in 2010. In this regard, we
are satisfied with the work that the standing
committees of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board accomplished over the summer, and look
forward to the Board meeting scheduled to take place
next month. Canada's new engagement until 2014 will
build on our significant experience and investments in
Afghanistan to date, and sustain progress in key areas
that are essential to a better future, such as the future of
Afghan children and youth, security, the rule of law
and respect for human rights, regional diplomacy and
the delivery of humanitarian aid.

Children and youth are the country's future.
Using effective and accountable development
assistance, Canada will continue to invest in education
and health, building on our significant contribution to
date in these areas. Canada will continue to support the
Afghan Government in improving access to quality
primary and secondary education, especially for girls
and young women. We will also continue working on
the transparency and accountability of the Afghan
national educational sector to help foster a secure
learning environment for all children. Today, over
2.2 million Afghan girls go to school. This is a
dramatic increase over the number in 2001, when girls
were forbidden to attend school. Moreover, 29 per cent
of the 158,000 teachers in Afghanistan are women, a
significant increase to the 21,000 there were in 2002.
In the health sector, Canada will help the Afghan

Government in its work to improve maternal, newborn
and child health.

Canada is also renewing its commitment to the
Afghan Government and its international partners to
supporting the Kabul process and meet the objectives
of the national priority programmes in terms of
education, health and human rights, especially for
Afghan women and girls. Particular attention must be
paid to the rights of Afghan women in particular. They
are at the forefront of Canada's development efforts in
Afghanistan. Canada has committed to providing peace
and security to all through its Action Plan for the
Implementation of United Nations Security Council
Resolutions on Women, Peace and Security.

(spoke in French)

The violent incidents that took place over the
summer, including a number of political assassinations
and attacks on civilian targets, as well as the recent
attacks on the International Security Assistance Force,
the American embassy and Afghan security in Kabul,
remind us of the importance of tirelessly continuing
our efforts to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan. To that end, it is essential that we increase
the capacities of the Afghan National Security Forces,
which will assume responsibility for security in
Afghanistan in 2014.

The Afghan forces will soon have reached the
required number of personnel under the objectives of
the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan. The
continued development of professional skills and
institutional capabilities will therefore be at the
forefront of the continued mission until 2014. By
contributing to the efforts of the NATO Training
Mission Afghanistan, Canada will help to implement a
security force with the discipline, professionalism and
efficiency required to ensure the country's stability and
to promote peace and economic development for the
population.

Moreover, the credibility and professionalism of
the Afghan National Police are essential to the
country's stability, to the people's and communities'
sense of security, and to strengthening the rule of law
in Afghanistan and respect for human rights. Canada
will therefore support the training of the Afghan
National Security Forces by providing up to
950 instructors and support staff to the NATO Training
Mission for the next three years. In addition, the
deployment of 45 police officers who will help train
members of the Afghan National Police will contribute
to these same objectives. It is essential that the
continued support of Canada and the international
community to Afghan transition be based on the
implementation of credible reforms by the Afghan
Government that will strengthen the confidence of
donors, investors and the Afghan people.

Canada is pleased that the transition of
responsibilities for governance and security is already
well under way in a number of districts in Afghanistan.
According to the joint assessment of the Afghan
Government and the NATO mission, the first tranche of
Afghan districts studied have now successfully
assumed responsibility for their governance and for
their security.

That said, stability in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved by military force alone. We strongly condemn
the assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani, head of the Afghanistan High Peace Council.
That cowardly and brutal act must not slow the efforts
of the Afghan people towards reconciliation. The
political reconciliation efforts led by Afghans must
include dialogue with all stakeholders in society,
including women and vulnerable persons.

Canada supports the efforts being made by
Afghanistan to establish a dialogue with those who
have renounced violence, respect the Constitution, and
have no ties with Al-Qaida or other terrorist groups.

(spoke in English)

It is also by relying on lessons learned that
Afghanistan can continue its progress towards a
transparent democracy that listens to its people. In this
regard, we have noted the great efforts made by the
Afghan Government and all parliamentarians to resolve
the parliamentary election deadlock, and we hope that
these recent developments will finally allow
Parliament to fully assume its role in the governance of
the Afghan State. We encourage the Afghan
Government, the Parliament and all stakeholders
involved to continue their efforts to promote the
electoral reforms needed to further develop democracy
in Afghanistan. Strong, transparent and democratic
institutions must be the basis for the reconstruction of a
strong Afghan Government that is willing to serve all
ofits citizens.

Canada also believes that the prospect of a
prosperous and stable Afghanistan is conceivable only

in the context of increased regional cooperation and
integration. In this regard, Canada welcomes the New
Silk Road initiative. We are very pleased by the
prospect of helping to further develop this project,
which will be an important element of the Bonn
conference, and this in close collaboration with the
Afghan Government and other international partners.
Moreover, the Canadian Government will continue its
efforts to promote dialogue and propose concrete
measures to improve cooperation between countries in
the region, especially Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Since 2001, substantial progress has been made in
establishing and coordinating regional cooperation and
planning mechanisms. Canada will continue to make
the most of those gains to create a sustainable regional
engagement strategy, notably by supporting efficient
methods of managing the border between Afghanistan
and Pakistan so as to promote legitimate trade.
Regional diplomacy is one of our key priorities for
engagement between now and 2014.

In conclusion, over the past 10 years Afghanistan
and its partners have endeavoured to create an
Afghanistan that is more democratic and more
responsible for its own security and governance. Since
the fall of the Taliban in 2001, 157 members of the
Canadian armed forces, as well as a diplomat, a
journalist and three humanitarian workers from
Canada, have all been killed. It is now up to all of us to
maintain a strong engagement in Afghanistan in order
to honour these sacrifices and those of the Afghan
people, who have fought for peace in the country to
ensure the sustainability of the progress made to date. I
can assure the Council that Canada will not renounce
its efforts to work with Afghanistan so that it can
become a peaceful, secure and stable country that will
never again serve as a refuge for terrorists.

