Mr. Katti (Algeria) (spoke in French): We have
very closely and attentively listened to the briefings by
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We note that, since their presentations to the
Council on 29 June 2004, progress has been made to
end impunity by bringing to justice persons suspected
of committing serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We also note that the Tribunals'
completion strategies, which were adopted by the
Security Council in 2003, have met with great
difficulty. That situation has not improved since the
Council last considered the matter, given that the
Tribunals continue to face serious financial problems
due to the non-payment of financial contributions by
Member States. The expenditures of the two Tribunals
have been kept to a minimum, recruitment has been
frozen and the capacity of the Tribunals to carry out
their mandates has been seriously compromised. That
is an unacceptable situation, and it is important that the
States concerned make their financial contributions as
soon as possible.

The General Assembly's election of 14 judges to
the ICTY on 19 November 2004 was an encouraging
development that we hope will have a positive impact
on the functioning of the Tribunal. Similarly, and
despite the Tribunal's heavy workload, the changes
made to the rules of procedure and the efforts
undertaken to establish a special chamber in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to prosecute war crimes are positive
developments. We hope that will help the Tribunal to

complete its work within the time frame that has been
specified.

It is important that persons accused by both
Tribunals of committing low- and mid-level crimes be
brought before the competent national jurisdictions. It
is also important that the States concerned cooperate
with the Tribunals with regard to access to documents,
arrests and bringing accused persons to justice. The
Security Council must ensure that happens, as the
authority and very credibility of the two Tribunals is at
stake. In that regard, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to the Government of Rwanda
for its cooperation with the Rwanda Tribunal.

Moreover, Republika Srpska's arrest on
15 November of a high-level accused is, in this regard,
a welcome development. The other criminals at large,
such as Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante
Gotovina, as well as those still at large in Rwanda,
must be apprehended.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals in carrying out their
responsibilities and in their efforts to fight impunity.

