Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for
introducing their quarterly reports (see S/2010/574 and S/2010/588).

If we want the Tribunals to have lasting impact in
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and other regions of
the world where political and military leaders still
believe that they can gain or remain in power through
Violence, then we must enable the Tribunals to
appropriately and fully discharge their mandates. First
of all, this means that the Council's vigilance must not
waver, in particular with respect to the cooperation of
States in arresting accused persons. The arrest and
transfer of fugitives to the Tribunals remains a priority.
Cooperation in this area is not only a bilateral matter
between the Prosecutors and the States concerned; the
international community and the Council, which
established the two Tribunals, have a direct interest.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the President and Prosecutor
Jallow have provided nuanced assessments to the
Council. Ten accused persons - among them three
high-profile accused - remain at large. But Kenya's
cooperation, where the Council expressed some
questions in June, could now materialize with respect
to the Felicien Kabuga file. We welcome Kenya's
open-mindedness and we hope, as does the Prosecutor,
that the ongoing dialogue will result in the rapid arrest
of Felicien Kabuga. We also hope for progress with
respect to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where most of the fugitives reside, as well as in
Zimbabwe. On behalf of France, I would like to thank
Prosecutor Jallow and his entire team for their tireless
efforts towards dialogue with countries of the region to
ensure that the last of the fugitives are arrested.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the arrest by
Serbian authorities of Mr. Radovan Karadzie
constituted considerable progress. We also await the
arrests of Mr. Mladic' and Mr. Hadiie. As the Council
of the European Union reiterated in its decision of
25 October, both the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and the Interim Agreement require Serbia's
full cooperation with the ICTY, which is an essential
precondition to joining the European Union. In that
regard, the Council of the European Union will
attentively follow the reports of the Office of the
Prosecutor on progress in that area. The European
Union has urged Serbia to implement the
recommendations made by the Office of the Prosecutor
to the Security Council in June with respect to Serbia's
assistance, especially on the critical issue of the arrest
of the last two accused at large, namely, Ratko Mladic'
and Goran Hadzie. That would constitute the most
convincing evidence of Serbia's efforts in that area.

We must be very clear. Arrest warrants will not
disappear. The question of fugitives will not disappear
from the Council's agenda. If they are not arrested in
the next few months, the ability to look for and arrest
them will depend on the residual mechanism, which
will, at the appropriate time, have to take over
responsibility from the Tribunals. That is the goal of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
which, under the effective leadership of Austria, has
developed a draft resolution on the statute for the
mechanism. I would therefore like to thank our
Austrian colleague for his leadership on this matter.

The briefing that we have just heard confirms the
trial timetables as well as the difficulties that the
Tribunals will have in keeping to the timetables if we
do not give them the wherewithal to conduct the trials
and appeals while fully respecting the rules of fairness.
We must find pragmatic solutions for the problems of
retaining staff and the length of the judges' mandates
so that the Tribunals will step up the effectiveness and
the pace of their work.

