Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): Regional
cooperation has always been at the heart of Thailand's
foreign policy. That is why we take pleasure today in
joining this open debate of the Security Council on the
role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We wish to congratulate Indonesia, a fellow
family member in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council and for initiating and organizing this
vital and timely debate.

We would also like to associate ourselves with
the statements made earlier by my other ASEAN
colleagues, including of course the representative of
Singapore, who spoke in that country's capacity as
Chair ofASEAN.

The founders of the United Nations foresaw the
indispensable role of regional and subregional
organizations in the pursuit of the purposes and
principles of multilateralism that are enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. That wisdom is clearly
reflected in Chapter VIII of the Charter. We hold that
wisdom to be more pertinent than ever in this
increasingly complex and interdependent world.

Thailand has consistently advocated for closer
regional integration in South-East Asia for decades,
starting with an arrangement such as the former
Association of South-East Asia, which later evolved
into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Since
its establishment, in 1967, with the adoption of the
Bangkok Declaration, ASEAN has been a cornerstone
of Thai foreign policy, and will continue to be so in the
future. It is on the basis of being a founding member of
ASEAN, and out of a sense of ownership in that
organization, that my delegation would like to share
with the Council its views in four areas, with ASEAN
as its focus.

First, regionalism can turn enmity into amity by
managing differences and emphasizing commonalities.
That is most evident in South Asia. Before the
establishment of ASEAN, in 1967, South Asia was a
zone of disputes and conflicts. Today, South Asia has
transformed itself into a zone of relative peace and
stability. With that peace and stability, South Asia has
emerged as one of the fastest growing regions in the
world. The peace, stability and prosperity that all of us
in the region cherish would not be possible without
ASEAN as an anchor and a common framework for
working together.

Thailand believes that ASEAN has a lot to offer
to the international community, not least its working
methods and its gradual institution-building processes.
For example, the ASEAN culture of sincere
consultation and consensus-making - the so-called
ASEAN way - has been instrumental in ensuring the
collective growth and cohesiveness of all its diverse
members.

ASEAN's approach towards the subject of peace
and security is most notable. While the United Nations
prides itself of its 60 years without a great war,
ASEAN is also proud of its 40 years of the absence of
major conflicts among its members. As a
confidence-building process, ASEAN members have
been strong practitioners of a comprehensive security
that does not focus solely on the military aspect of
security but emphasizes common challenges in the area
of economic cooperation. Through closer economic
linkages comes the realization of a common stake in
joint prosperity, which ultimately underpins common
peace and security.

Secondly, for each regional organization to
flourish and be sustainable, it is vital that a sense of
community is cultivated and nurtured among its
members. It is in this spirit that Thailand has been a
strong advocate of the ASEAN community-building
process. We believe that it is important for ASEAN
members to spare no effort to develop a sense of
community and a "we" and "us" feeling in the region
- a mutual sentiment that will propel the region to
look to the future together as one community.

In that conviction, we are pleased that the 10
members of the ASEAN family, including Thailand,
will celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the
organization by adopting the ASEAN Charter, which
will pave the way for a closer and stronger ASEAN
with a great advantage. By signing the Charter, every
ASEAN member will be committed to transforming the
organization into a rules-based organization based on
the three pillars of the ASEAN security community, the
ASEAN economic community and the ASEAN socio-
economic community, thus taking a vital step forward
in the regional integration process. Thailand strongly
believes that a stronger ASEAN will be an effective
partner of the international community in the pursuit of
international peace and security.

Thirdly, no region is an island onto itself in this
interconnected world. ASEAN therefore needs to
engage and work with other regional partners on the
basis of mutual benefits. It is upon that realization that
Thailand has consistently supported an outward-
looking ASEAN through such initiatives as ASEAN+3,
the ASEAN Regional Forum, the ASEAN post-
ministerial conferences and the East Asia Summit.
Through that network of regional cooperative
arrangements, ASEAN has successfully played a
central role in managing regional differences in the
larger Asia-Pacific peace and stability architecture, and
has been instrumental in cultivating a culture of
dialogue and consensus among its diverse players.

But the horizon of ASEAN is not limited to Asia
and the Pacific. In this interconnected world, many
problems are transnational in nature and require
concerted efforts not only within each region, but also
between regions. As peace and security could well be
augmented through cross-regional cooperation,
Thailand has been a staunch supporter of interregional
efforts. We have played a central role in establishing
the Asia-Europe Meeting and the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue, which to date is the only Asia-wide
cooperative framework. Thailand, along with our
fellow ASEAN members, has also been actively
participating in the Forum for East Asia-Latin America
Cooperation and has been promoting closer
cooperation between ASEAN and the African Union,
and between ASEAN and the Gulf Cooperation
Council, for example. All those cooperative
arrangements, when put together, constitute building
blocks for the stronger and more effective
multilateralism that the United Nations embodies.

Fourthly, greater capacity is needed to ensure that
each and every regional arrangement can bring out its
best potential. The United Nations has a vital role to
play in that regard. Thailand would also like to see the
United Nations placing greater emphasis on
encouraging and strengthening those burgeoning
subregional, regional and cross-regional building
blocks. There is much that each region can learn from
the others and there is much that, together, cross-
regional efforts could contribute to the enhancement of
peace and stability in respective regions. As an
observer to the United Nations, ASEAN has made clear
our intention to bring our cooperation with the United
Nations to a higher level.

As a founding member of the ASEAN family,
Thailand is cognizant of the collective responsibility of
the family and the common challenges it is facing in
the integration process in this interdependent world.
Like all other regional organizations, there is no other
way for ASEAN to head but up. A strong, healthy and
united ASEAN, with the firm determination to strive
forward and a reasonably profound optimism, is
essential to the maintenance of peace and security not
only in the region, but also in the world at large.

