Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first of all thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
briefing and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for being here with
us and sharing her stories. We applaud Ms. Mustapha's
optimism and strong efforts in advocating in favour
of refugees and people with disabilities. I share the
conviction of many of my colleagues who have spoken
before me that she has displayed great courage and
should be assured that her message does not fall on
deaf ears.

Indonesia is deeply concerned about the ongoing
humanitarian situation and hostilities in various parts
of Syria, which have severely affected civilians,
including women and children. As laid out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/321), there are nearly
12 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
in Syria, around 6.2 million within the country are
displaced, some 2 million children are out of school,
and there are also millions of Syrian refugees. We
know these numbers by heart, and we have high hopes
that they will decrease in time.

But hope alone cannot improve the current situation.
Along with the ongoing humanitarian responses by the
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners,
we also need the full commitment of all parties to the
conflict to respecting international law and international
humanitarian law. In this context, Indonesia is of the
view that we must focus on two priorities.

First, civilians and civilian infrastructures must
be protected. Indonesia urges all parties to the conflict
to do everything in their power to protect civilians. It
is indeed heartbreaking to learn that, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report, civilians continue to
be killed and injured within the demilitarized zone in
Idlib. It is also disturbing to learn that people - mainly
women and children - continue to be killed as a result
of the increased use of improvised explosive device,
especially when they are used to target civilians. With
regard to the protection of civilian infrastructure,
Indonesia stresses that it is urgent to stop the heinous
attacks on schools and medical facilities, and that all
necessary measures must be taken to ensure this basic
infrastructure is not being targeted.

The second priority is that all parties must allow
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to
all in need in all parts of Syria. This also means that all
parties to the Syrian conflict shall enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations and its partners directly to people
throughout Syria on the basis of the United Nations
assessments of need, without any political prejudices
and purposes.

In Al-Hol camp, there are already 73,000 people,
92 per cent of whom are women and children, living
under extremely severe conditions, without access
to health care and other limited basic needs. We can
only imagine the situation. The camp is exceeding its
capacity of around 41,000 people, with thousands of
people arriving at the camp with illness and trauma
caused by violence. There is great fear for their safety.
That is a grim picture.

With regard to Rukban, we are pleased with the
ongoing efforts to find durable solutions for people
there. However, it is also necessary to ensure access
for sustained humanitarian assistance for people who
choose to remain. Indonesia shares the Secretary-
General's important call for a carefully planned and
principle approach to the situation in Rukban that does
not create additional harm to the already traumatized
and displaced people. In addition, I would be remiss if
I did not mention the situation in Hajin as well as the
severe flooding in north-west and north-east Syria that
damaged 14 camps for internally displaced persons,
40 villages in Hassakeh, including the Areesha camp.

All of foregoing are challenging situations, and the
humanitarian needs in Syria must be addressed as a
matter of priority. And we in the Security Council need
to consistently urge all parties to ensure principled,
sustained and improved humanitarian assistance to Syria.

In conclusion, it is the collective obligation of the
Council that the story of Nujeen or any similar story
does not remain buried in the archives of the United

Nations so as to ensure that the history of humanitarian
calamities is not repeated.

