Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to begin by thanking Special Representative Jean
Arnault for his insightful and comprehensive briefing
and for the important work that the United Nations
Verification Mission is doing in support of the Peace
Agreement in Colombia. He may be assured of our
continued full support for his efforts. I would also like
to welcome Vice-President Naranjo to the Security
Council. We are grateful for his personal efforts
and those of his Government to establish peace in
Colombia. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is fully
committed to supporting peace in Colombia, which is
also the message that my Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Stephanus Blok, conveyed during his recent visit
to the country. We follow developments in Colombia
with particular interest. Our Kingdom is made up of
four countries, of which Aruba and Curacao are close
maritime neighbours of Colombia.

The recently held presidential elections mark an
important and commendable milestone in Colombia.
The elections were fair, inclusive and peaceful, and saw
the highest turnout in the country's recent history. We
congratulate President-elect Ivan Duque on winning
the election and welcome his expressed commitment
to seeking unity. The Prime Minister of Curacao,
Mr. Eugene Rhuggenaath, looks forward to attending
the upcoming inauguration on behalf of our Kingdom.
We also look forward to working closely with the
new Government, based on the close friendship and
interconnectedness between our two peoples.

The change of Governments in Colombia provides
us with an occasion to take stock of what has been
achieved so far and the opportunities and challenges that
lie ahead. The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, which ended
the 50-year conflict, is historic by any standard. We
pay tribute to the Administration of President Santos
Calderon and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) for their courage and leadership in
advancing the peace process. We hope that Colombia
will now seize the opportunity to further consolidate
peace. In that context, I would like to touch on three
points - our concern about the security situation, the
need for the inclusive reintegration of former FARC
members and the importance of transitional justice.

With respect to my first point, the security
situation, we are deeply concerned about the high
levels of insecurity in the zones most affected by the
armed conflict. In these areas, social leaders, human
rights defenders and journalists are increasingly being
threatened and sometimes even killed. This often
happens in areas where armed groups proliferate and
continue to resist peacebuilding efforts. The Colombian
people, State institutions and political parties alike
have recently expressed themselves on this point in a
so-called pact of repudiation of violence against social
leaders, to which Mr. Arnault referred. The pact sends a
strong signal that Colombians are not willing to accept
the possibility that those who speak out are too often
made to pay the highest price.

We are also concerned about the continued violence
against former FARC combatants. Their security
guarantees are central to the Peace Agreement and form
the bedrock of a durable peace. The Government has
taken initiatives to address the violence, strengthening
mechanisms to prevent, protect and hold the perpetrators
to account. But in order to make these mechanisms
work, a thorough analysis of the patterns behind the
violence, including identifying the intellectual authors,
would be useful. We look forward to a comprehensive
stabilization approach that effectively asserts the
presence of the State in the most vulnerable regions
and communities. It should include institutions for
security, infrastructure, education, health care and the
rule of law.

That brings me to my second point, concerning the
inclusive reintegration of former combatants, which
remains a core component of the Peace Agreement.
The stimulation of income-generating activities and
the provision of social services are important tools
for addressing the root causes of the conflict and
ultimately promoting self-reliance. We encourage the
Government, the former FARC combatants, the private
sector and the local authorities to jointly design a
comprehensive strategy aimed at fully reintegrating
the former combatants into society, as foreseen in the
Peace Agreement. It is essential that women and youth
have a voice in this process.

My third point concerns transitionaljustice, which is
an essential aspect ofconflict resolution. Accountability
and reconciliation are two sides of the same coin on the
road to sustainable peace. This is why my Government is
actively supporting the transitional-justice institutions,
as well as victims' organizations in Colombia, with
a contribution of €2.5 million. We underscore the
need for the swift, effective and properly resourced
implementation of the different transitional-justice
institutions. In this regard, we express our full support
for the workings of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
and welcome the fact that public hearings have started.
In this way, transitional justice offers the opportunity to
address past grievances, putting the 8 million victims
of the armed conflict at the centre of our peacebuilding
efforts. We hope this will turn the page in Colombia.

I will conclude in Spanish.
(spoke in Spanish)

The peace dividends I have just mentioned,
especially security, inclusive reintegration and
transitional justice, are intimately connected. A
sustained commitment to implementing the agreements
in a comprehensive manner can ensure that peace
in Colombia is stable and lasting. We call on all
stakeholders to work together to this end and to continue
to build on the great achievements that have been made.
The international community is with Colombia, and
Colombia can count on the continued support of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.

