Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Solana for his briefing to the Council,
which shows once again the attention that the Council
rightly pays to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Belgium welcomes Operation EUFOR RD
Congo, in which we took an active part, particularly by
providing the Force with information capacities. The
EUFOR mission, in support of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), has made a vital contribution,
especially through its deterrent effect in establishing
the conditions necessary for the smooth conduct of the
electoral process, as well as respect for the election
results. Its intervention during the August events in
Kinshasa demonstrated both its credibility and its
impartiality.

Therefore, as we have stated, the EUFOR mission
is a good example of the commitment undertaken by
the European Union (EU) and the United Nations to
cooperate in crisis management, in accordance with the
2003 declaration. A lessons-learned exercise is proving
useful and will be carried out at both the European
level and the United Nations level. The conclusions of
such an assessment - Mr. Guehenno has already
referred to a number of elements - could foster the
development of the framework for the relations
between the EU and the United Nations.

Belgium believes that the EU's commitment in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should continue
in this post-transition period through a strengthened
commitment to reform of the security sector. During
the European Council meeting held on 15 December
2006, the EU confirmed its readiness to assume a
coordinating role in international efforts in the security
sector, in close cooperation with the United Nations
and with the support of the Congolese authorities.

Belgium duly appreciates the crucial role played
by MONUC in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council should soon take up the question of
revising and extending its mandate. Belgium will take
an active part in the discussion to redefine the mandate
in the new, post-electoral context.

Finally, my delegation remains extremely
concerned at the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially the
continuing fighting in North Kivu. MONUC should
intensify its efforts with a view to a lasting
stabilization of that fragile part of the country. Those
efforts should, we believe, be further based on a
political approach.
