Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and other briefers for their
important contributions.
While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
I would also like to make some observations in my
national capacity.

We take positive note of the Afghan National Unity
Government's recent accomplishments in addressing
the country's challenges.

First, the Government has prioritized the Afghan-
1ed and -owned national peace and reconciliation
efforts involving regional stakeholders. We regard the
Kabul process, launched this June under the initiative
of President Ghani, as a unique forum for Afghanistan,
its neighbours and the international community to
discuss ways for achieving peace in this country.

Secondly, the Government has taken concrete
measures to move forward the national reform agenda
throughtheNationalPeaceandDevelopmentFramework.
We stress the importance of focusing particularly on
promoting good governance, anti-corruption measures
and security-sector reform. The Government's efforts
to create an environment conducive to holding
future parliamentary and presidential elections, by
strengthening electoral institutions and improving the
relevant legislation, are encouraging.

Thirdly, the Government is determined to take
effective measures to fulfil its obligations under
international human rights law in connection with its
election to the United Nations Human Rights Council.
We congratulate Afghanistan on its achievement and
are ready to work side by side with their delegation to
advance common objectives.

Fourthly, the Government is devoting considerable
efforts to implementing the national action plan on
women, peace and security throughout Afghanistan,
which is crucial to creating a stable future for the
country by eradicating gender-based violence and
elevating women as full and equal partners. The
upcoming 2018 elections should be taken advantage of
as a perfect occasion to increase women's leadership
and participation in Afghanistan's political life.

Fifthly, the Government has strengthened effective
regional cooperation aimed at stabilizing Afghanistan,
with initiatives designed to shape the country as a trade,
transit and transport hub and promote investment and
infrastructure projects aimed at improving its economic
capacities. These are welcome steps.

The other side of the coin is the importance of
confronting the threat posed by terrorism, which remains
a major destabilizing factor for the security situation,
especially with the Taliban gaining strength and the
affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
affiliates expanding their presence in Afghanistan.
We encourage Afghanistan's regional partners to
continue to redouble their efforts to suppress terrorist
organizations and activities, especially with help of the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission. A key aspect of
those efforts will be to continue improving the overall
capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces.

Eradicating terrorists' sanctuaries and depriving
them of sources of financing, especially from the
narcotics trade, is vital. With regard to the latter, the
recent findings of the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
are extremely alarming, since poppy cultivation and
opiate production have skyrocketed this year. The
revenue boost allows the Taliban to spend more on the
insurgency and to hire fighters and equip them better.
Without concerted counter-efforts and with demand on
the rise worldwide, poppy cultivation will remain an
attractive source of income for Afghans.

Another related complex challenge in Afghanistan
continues to be the protection of civilians, among whom
casualties continue to be extremely high. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to effectively implement
its recently approved national policy on the prevention
and mitigation of civilian casualties in order to prevent
indiscriminate shelling and bombing from creating
collateral victims, especially among women and
children. Moreover, with the deepening displacement
crisis in Afghanistan, the national authorities and
humanitarian aid donors should address the needs of
internally displaced persons and returnees in order
to provide access to basic services and support their
sustainable reintegration.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Ukraine's
full support to Afghanistan's unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and to its endeavours to combat
the scourge of international terrorism. Ukraine
also greatly values the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
helping Afghanistan to cope with its security, economic
and development challenges and enact national reforms
aimed at creating a sound foundation for peace, security
and prosperity, both in the country and the wider region.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate our strong
support to the Secretary-General's efforts to strengthen
the Mission's mandate, in line with UNAMA's strategic
review (S/2017/696), so as to enable it to carry out its
responsibilities effectively.

