Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to extend to your delegation, Mr. President,
our gratitude for having organized this meeting.
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Mr. Riad Malki, at today's meeting. We
would like express our thanks for the statements made
by Mr. Malki, Special Coordinator Serry and the
Permanent Representative of Israel.

The situation in the Middle East continues to
occupy our minds and to challenge our efforts to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the persistent security
issues in the region. Deeply rooted and often recurring
conflicts in the Middle East, together with the new
challenges brought about by the wave of transition and
changes, require greater involvement and assistance
on the part of the international community. Beyond
conflict-resolution efforts, helping States to overcome
the hardships of transformation processes is another
crucial task associated with the region nowadays.

There is no shortcut to success; the road is long and
bumpy. However, one should never underestimate the
power of faith, allegiance and commitment, which are
the staunchest allies to help overcome the trials of history
and accomplish hard missions ahead. Nevertheless,
however vibrant the discussions, whatever mediation
efforts are needed or whatever tailored assistance might
be provided by the international community, the key
to solving the region's predicament lies in the political
will of the leadership of the States of the region and in
the cohesion within society. But that in no way absolves
the international community, including the Council, of
its own responsibility to protect international peace and
security and to facilitate the achievement of solutions
to conflict situations based on the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law.

The state of the Middle East peace process
remains worrisome, with no improvement. After the
21 November 2012 ceasefire there was some hope that
the parties would make an attempt to move forward to
solidify the existing truce and revive the peace process.
We lament that that has not happened. It is clear that the
longer the phase of no negotiations lasts, the further the
parties will drift apart in achieving a solution. Needless
to say, the achievement of peace is impossible in the
absence of consistent commitment by the parties. It is
also obvious that among the necessary prerequisites
for success is the need to ensure that the process and
efforts are guided by the normative standards set by
the Charter of the United Nations and by the objective
of achieving a comprehensive settlement based on
international law.

We have repeatedly stated that a lack of agreement
on political issues in a situation of armed conflict
and military occupation cannot be used as a pretext
for disrespecting international law and human rights.
Having said that, we want to express our deep concern
over the continuing settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, in violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The construction of thousands of settlement
units throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is inhibiting a negotiated and
peaceful solution to the conflict, as well as constituting
an infringement on the rights and freedoms of the
Palestinians. The recently announced settlement plan
envisaging building thousands of homes in the E-l area
will, if implemented, deal a serious blow to hopes to
revive the peace process and, ultimately, to achieve
lasting peace in the region.

Illegal activities in the occupied territories should
not be recognized under any circumstances. It is
important that the international community express
its strong and unified opposition to the settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory and
reiterate that such activity must stop immediately and
unconditionally. It is essential to underline once again
that in assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must take all the necessary measures to ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected at all times and
without preconditions. Regional and international
efforts directed towards finding a solution to this
conflict, particularly those of the League of Arab
States, should be commended and supported. In that
regard, we welcome the convening on 9 December of
the ministerial meeting of the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee in Doha, which also called for resuming
negotiations between the parties.

It is also important to take full advantage of
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity by promoting
inter-communal dialogue and reconciliation,
while categorically rejecting and invalidating any
manifestation of ethnic or religious intolerance. The
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza demands
continued international attention, particularly in order
to ensure the unimpeded provision of humanitarian
aid throughout the region for alleviating the suffering
of people in need. In that regard, we would like to
announce a recent financial contribution made by the
Government of Azerbaijan to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East for the purposes of emergency assistance in Gaza.

In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our firm conviction that peace and security in the
Middle East is achievable with greater political will,
rigorous work and the concerted efforts of the nation,
the region and the international community.

