Mr. Dileita (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to present to the Council my Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mahamoud Ali Youssouf, who
has travelled here with me today.

At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the manner in which you have been
leading the work of the Council and for your
delegation's efforts last week throughout the
consultation process, designed to draw the attention of
the members of the Security Council to the great
urgency of the conflict between Djibouti and Eritrea. I
would also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Joao
Honwana for his briefing to the Council today.
3

I am pleased to meet again with members of the
Council whom I met during their visit to Djibouti
within the framework of inter-Somali peace talks,
which produced the peace accord that has given rise
within the international community to great hope and
that is a solid basis for a lasting peace in Somalia. I
would also like to state how pleased we have been, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and myself, to have
spoken with most of members of the Council in a
climate of confidence and brotherhood since our arrival
here in the New York.

May I remind members of the Council of the
origins of this latest crisis in the Horn of Africa, which
has had more than its share of war, destruction and
regression of all types, and which we could have, in
our view, done well without. The relations between
Djibouti and Eritrea since the independence of Eritrea
in 1993 have encountered difficulties that, thus far,
have been overcome thanks to a determination to settle
any misunderstanding through dialogue. The conflict
which today has already caused many casualties since
Eritrean troops attacked positions of the Djibouti army
on 10 June, forcing it to defend its territory, is
deserving of the attention of the members of this
important United Nations body, the mandate of which
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
pursuant to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I am not here simply to make unfounded
allegations against Eritrea; it would not be a good idea
to make such a long trip with the intention of
discrediting Eritrean leaders. We have never and will
never be part of an anti-Eritrean front. Quite the
contrary, we have always tried to maintain pragmatic
relations with that country. We believe that the
international community should be well informed of
the ins and outs of this conflict because the situation on
the ground remains of great concern.

The current crisis is very different from the
preceding ones for several reasons. First of all, it is
different in its form because, for the first time, Eritrean
troops have not only violated Djiboutian territory, but
they have occupied it and have even begun
construction work on our soil. Furthermore, it is
different as to substance because while all previous
attempts were more or less avowed claims of an
important part of our Djiboutian territory, the current
motivations are still obscure and suspect in the eyes of
Djiboutian authorities.
In the absence of a clear explanation on the part
of the Eritrean leaders, our Government has strong
suspicions that they are guided by greed caused by the
avowed ambition of Djibouti to become a regional
cross-border maritime hub with the construction of a
new modern port and infrastructure projects. Thanks to
the confidence of investors and our position in this area
of the Red Sea which is highly strategic for world
navigation, Djibouti has embarked upon the path of
growth and development in order to become a regional
trading centre.

But also we think that the Asmara authorities are
pursuing their confrontation with Ethiopia through a
conflict with Djibouti, through which transits most of
the merchandise headed for Ethiopia. Thus, it is
without question an attempt to regionalize the conflict.

The Council is not at all ignorant of how much
the impasse in the conflict between Ethiopia and
Eritrea constitutes a major source of instability in the
Horn of Africa, in particular for peace in Somalia. The
international community must therefore bring all its
weight to bear until Eritrea begins to take into account
the minimum international standards involved in
relations between nations.

Finally, we cannot pass over in silence the fact
that the attack of the Eritrean army took place
immediately following the signing in Djibouti of an
agreement between part of the opposition in Somalia
and the Somali Transitional Government under the
aegis of the United Nations. At this stage, we are
entitled to ask legitimate questions about the role
supposedly played by the Asmara authorities and the
use that they have made of the Somali conflict which,
in our view, should not be used as a tool.

As for the Eritrean authorities, they are indeed
remaining mysterious as to their true objectives and are
hiding behind a total denial of the dispute, or when
they implicitly deign to admit the existence of the
dispute that they make unfounded and unreasonable
allegations by referring to external interference that
would supposedly be the cause of all the tensions in the
region. Of course, we believe that this attitude of
denying reality is irresponsible since the media
throughout the world have reported an outbreak of
hostilities, and armed conflict has in fact been initiated
by the Eritrean armed forces.

But any arguments from the Eritrean authorities
fall short when one examines the situation on the
ground because the Djibouti military forces have
indeed been attacked solely by Eritrean forces; we have
not seen any other force involved on the field of battle.
Moreover, all the reasons given remain inadmissible to
our Government and for our entire country, which is
prepared to defend in every way possible its political
and territory integrity.

Our country is not, in principle, a country with an
aggressive culture; even less so are our people
bellicose. However, we should not be seen as being
weak, hesitant, or capable of intimidation. The
Republic of Djibouti will not at all hesitate once again,
if necessary, to exercise its right to legitimate self-
defence accorded under the Charter to any country in
order to guarantee its national sovereignty.

The basic pillars and principles of Djiboutian
diplomacy in the region and throughout the world are
no longer a secret. As a long-standing haven a peace in
a troubled region, our country has been a refuge for all
the victims of fratricidal wars in the region and is in a
good position to assess the value of peace and the
practice of tolerance. More particularly, our regional
policy is fundamentally based on respect for good
neighbourly relations and non-interference in the
internal affairs of the countries of the region as well as
neutrality, friendship and cooperation with a View to
economic development for the benefit of all the
peoples in the region.

Guided by these values, we have taken all
necessary steps in order to find a diplomatic way out of
the current crisis with Eritrea in order to avoid being
drawn again into a conflict that we found and still find
to be useless.

Djiboutian diplomacy has been very active
bilaterally as well as multilaterally. Mediation has been
proposed by friendly countries and by regional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
League of Arab States. Finally, we have come before
the Security Council through our letters dated
respectively the 5 and 9 May and 11 June 2008.

While all of our attention and all of our efforts
have been devoted to a quest for a diplomatic solution
to the crisis, Eritrea has rejected all mediation and has
persisted in denying the existence of any problem. Of
course, at the same time, it has taken advantage of this
situation to make further territorial gains and to
strengthen the positions of its army. All of these
manoeuvres were clearly designed to unleash a war
that we would like to avoid until the last minute, as is
proven by the attack of 10 June. My country was
precipitously forced into a fratricidal war which we
detest.

In this regard, I would like to thank the members
of the Council, who have heeded our appeal and have
acted in an expeditious way, as required by the urgency
and seriousness of the situation. The preservation of
human life and the cessation of the unjustified
hostilities - which are also unjust for the peoples of
Djibouti and Eritrea - are and remain an absolute
priority for my Government. My country cannot
conceive of a scenario of indefinite impasse. That
would surely try our patience, our morale and our
resources.

We welcome the Council's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) unequivocally condemning Eritrea's
military action against Djibouti in Ras Doumeira and
Doumeira Island, as well as the statements issued by
all regional and subregional organizations. They
confirm our initial View of a settlement of the crisis,
that the use of force cannot, in any way, be an
alternative to dialogue or diplomacy.

We reaffirm our confidence in the capacity of the
Council, consistent with its functions and power under
the Charter, and we express the hope that a settlement
of the dispute with Eritrea will come about by peaceful
means in accordance with the principles of justice and
international law.

The failure of the authorities of that country to
honour all of the obligations they have undertaken
under the Charter is clear, because the use of force and
the violation of our territory are a reality. No pretext
can exempt Eritrea from its obligations to the
international community. Furthermore, we note the
persistent defiance with regard to all the good offices
missions that have been undertaken, including the
attempt at mediation with the head of State of Eritrea
by Mr. Louis Michel, European Commissioner for
development and humanitarian aid, following the
summit meeting of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which yielded no better result
than previous initiatives.

For its part, the Republic of Djibouti is entirely
ready to honour its responsibilities, as it has always
done, and will continue tirelessly its efforts to engage
in dialogue with a view to establishing lasting peace
5
and stability throughout the region and throughout the
world.

Peace and the security of shipping throughout the
region are the key stakes in this conflict. As the
Council is already aware, the Bab al-Mandab Strait at
the southern part of the Red Sea is a strategic strait
separating the Arab peninsula from East Africa and is a
key passage for international trade and for bringing oil
to Europe and Asia. Moreover, analysts today agree
that control of the strait will be vital in this conflict.
All of our initiatives to prevent conflict have been in
vain. Although military hostilities have ceased since
12 June, the consequences would be disastrous if there
were to be no reasonable and proportionate response
from the Security Council and the international
community in the face of this explosive and dangerous
situation, which is developing rapidly.

Indeed, since the Council's 12 June
condemnation, there have been no positive
developments, and there has been no sign of goodwill
regarding a peaceful settlement of the dispute from the
Eritrean authorities. Quite the contrary: as I address the
Council, whereas our army has withdrawn several
kilometres since 12 June, Eritrean troops have once
again infiltrated the territory of Djibouti. This massive
incursion into our country by Eritrean troops, who are
present all along our common border without any valid
justification should not be taken lightly by the Council;
it must be given the importance it deserves.

For lack of any strong international intervention
based on dialogue and the disengagement of forces, we
are faced with a dilemma: choosing between the status
quo and war. Clearly, neither of these two options can
be contemplated by our Government. The Security
Council, in a word, must be aware of the danger of
inaction, which would be appeasing a bellicose and
unpredictable leader. It would be, in fact, ill-advised,
through negligence or lack of attention, to let this
situation remain as it is. Action by the Council to
prevent a resumption of fighting between the armed
forces, which are now within firing range of each
other, would be, we feel, wiser and more realistic. That
would prevent an escalation of violence and
widespread conflagration, the results of which could
not at all be predicted.

Unfortunately, this scenario is well known to the
peoples of our region. The only certainty would be a
spiral of war and tragedy with great loss of human life.

I would add that, if the situation of extreme tension
were to continue because of the disdainful attitude of
the Eritrean authorities, who have turned a deaf ear to
all expressions of goodwill, the latest being a proposal
for mediation by the President of the Republic of
Yemen, His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Ali Sallah, which
was rejected by the Eritrean authorities, for who the
only option remains war. We truly hope that Eritrea
does not misjudge the determination of Djibouti and
the indignation and growing impatience in the face of
its tactics and its aggressive behaviour.

In conclusion, my Government is prepared to
cooperate with the Security Council and the Secretary-
General in their efforts to resolve this unfortunate
unilateral military adventure, which merits the
Council's urgent, serious and great attention.

