Mr. Lucas (Angola): Ijoin previous speakers in
expressing the condolences of my delegation to the
United Nations and to the families of the victims of
today's accident in Sierra Leone.

My delegation welcomes and thanks the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their reports on the work of the Tribunals
and on the implementation of the completion strategy
set out in resolution 1503 (2003). We view the work of
the Tribunals as an important contribution to
addressing the challenges of justice by ending
impunity, to the process of healing the bitter divisions
of the past, to the strengthening of national
reconciliation and to the restoration of peace and
security in the Balkans and in the Great Lakes region.

We are pleased that the two Tribunals are now
fully operational, providing fair and impartial trials to
the indicted and rendering justice to the victims and
protection to the witnesses. Notwithstanding the efforts
and progress accomplished, the time frame set for the
completion of trials seems to be difficult to meet unless
further measures are taken. In this regard, we consider
international cooperation to be a vital element for the
successful conduct of the Tribunals' work with respect
to the execution of the arrest warrants, provisional
detention and the transfer of suspects and accused
persons to the Tribunals' seats.

We stress the importance of the provisions of
resolution 1503 (2003) relating to the cooperation to be
extended to the ICTY and the ICTR by the States in
their respective regions. This is an important factor in
the investigation process in bringing to the dock all
indictees still at large and for the full implementation
of the completion strategy.

As far as Angola is concerned, the case of
General Agustin Bizimungo, former Chief of Staff of
the Rwandan Army, arrested in Angola and transferred
to the custody of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, demonstrates how Angola is committed to
the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially those related to the required
international cooperation with the Tribunals.

The transfer of cases to national jurisdictions for
trial is also a critical element to the success of the
completion strategy, as the Security Council noted in
its resolution 1503 (2003). We are encouraged by the
arrangements for the transfer of cases from the ICTY
and the ICTR to national courts.

Specifically regarding ICTR, we are encouraged
by the progress achieved by the Tribunal over the past
few years, as illustrated by the 15 condemnations
involving 21 accused, rendered since the start of trials
in 1997. In that regard, we stress the importance of
resolution 1512 (2003). The reinforcement of the
Tribunal's capacity with the increase in the number of
ad litem judges, which, coupled with the appointment
of its own Prosecutor and the establishment of an
independent appeals unit, facilitates the efforts of the
Tribunal to meet its targets set by the Security Council
for the completion of trials. Nevertheless, if the
completion strategy is to achieve its purpose, we think
that the international community has a collective
responsibility to ensure that the ICTR receives all the
required financial and administrative resources in order
to successfully fulfil its mandate.

To conclude, we hope that the completion
strategy of the ICTR will continue to focus on its
overall purpose of contributing to peace and stability in
the region. Therefore, we stress the importance of
allocating enough resources for activities that will
complement long-term reconciliation efforts
undertaken by the Government of Rwanda. It is our
belief that the international community will continue
assisting the people of Rwanda by rendering justice
and fighting impunity to overcome the bitter legacy of
genocide.

