Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her informative briefing. We would also
like to commend Lithuania for initiating the important
resolution 2220 (2015) during its Council presidency
in May 2015, and which Ukraine had the honour of
co-sponsoring.

Ukraine remains gravely concerned over the fact
that the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons continue to
pose threats to international peace and security, causing
significant loss oflife and contributing to instability and
insecurity in many regions of the world. In addition to
fuelling armed conflicts, illicit small arms have myriad
adverse effects on human rights and lead to negative
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences, in
particular for the security of civilians. Armed conflicts
driven by such arms are the main reason people flee
their homes in the quest for a better life and a more
secure environment. Ukraine fully subscribes to the
view that there are ever increasing links between
transnational organized crime, illicit arms trafficking
and terrorism.

At the national level, Ukraine attaches particular
importance to ensuring effective export control
procedures in the sphere of conventional arms. We
strictly adhere to the respective resolutions and
decisions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the international export
control regime Wassenaar Arrangement. We continue
to believe that the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is an important and universal tool in global
efforts to combat the threat posed by such weapons.
We also believe that the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms continues to be an instrumental
transparency and confidence-building measure in the
field of the conventional arms trade. Ukraine is one
of the countries that voluntarily report on small arms
imports and exports in their yearly submissions.

I must mention the current unprecedented twenty-
first century challenges in Europe posed by the use
of illicit conventional weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, as a result of Russia's ongoing
military aggression and occupation of Crimea and
part of the Donbas region of Ukraine. Time and again,
we have drawn the attention of the Council to the
continuing illicit supplies - both hidden and in plain
sight - of deadly weapons, ammunition and gunmen
to our territory by the Russian Federation through
the uncontrolled sections of the Ukrainian-Russian
State border.

Just a few moments ago, the Russian delegation
bragged about its experience in the area of small arms
and expressed its readiness to share its so-called best
practices. The following quote could be quite telling in
that regard.

"I am particularly concerned about the situation
on and around the border between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation. This remains a key obstacle to
the de-escalation of the situation on the ground as
arms and heavy weaponry reportedly continue to
flow unabated into Ukraine from Russia. There is
an urgent need to ensure a secure border between
the two countries, with international verification,
as discussed in the Minsk talks".

The Russian Federation will be disappointed to
learn that that statement was not made by Ukraine
officials; it was made by the previous Secretary-
General. He clearly articulated those points at a press
conference held on 29 August 2014. We wonder if the
delegation of the Russian Federation would now like to
apply its propaganda cliche about anti-Russian hysteria
to the institution of the Secretary-General. We might
also wonder which country would be willing to adopt
Russian best practices, including in the area of small
arms. Such deliberate criminal activity undermines
not only subregional security, but European and
international security as well, and is therefore the
responsibility of the Council. In that regard, we urge the
Secretary-General to include the relevant information
in his next report on small arms.

In conclusion, let me stress that we fully support
the United Nations efforts, in cooperation with host
Governments, to address the issues of weapons and
ammunition management in conflict-affected areas,
including stockpile management, physical security,
marking, tracing, record-keeping and awareness-
raising. We also reiterate our support for more frequent
consideration of the small arms issue by the Council.

