Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I wish to join my
colleagues in thanking Mr. Michael Williams for his
informative briefing and, even more, for his
commitment and dedication to his important and
challenging mission. His dedication and service have
been exemplary and have truly made a difference. We
thank him for all he has done and wish him well in the
future.

Let me briefly share with the Council a number

of positive developments on the Israeli-Palestinian

front. Those developments, it should be understood,

occurred against the backdrop of, and in spite of, the

continuing danger - now acknowledged by all -

posed by the extremists in our region, Hamas and

Hizbullah, which are backed and supported by their
evil patrons in Tehran and Damascus.

Just yesterday, Prime Minister Olmert met again
at length with President Abbas to discuss the
development of Palestinian institutions and mutual
issues concerning Israel and the Palestinians living side
by side. At least two more meetings will be held in the
near future to promote and advance the bilateral track.
A day earlier, Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni had a
meeting with Prime Minister Fayyad, at which the two
discussed enhanced economic and civilian cooperation.
They also agreed to hold direct talks between Israeli
and Palestinian heads of local authorities and
representatives of organizations to advance cooperative
projects.

Israel has also undertaken additional steps to
bolster the Palestinian Authority, including releasing
tax funds, freeing more than 250 Palestinian prisoners
and granting amnesty to those who renounce terror and
violence.

As we can see, Israel and the Palestinian
Authority are actively speaking, engaging with each
other and working together. That is due to the many
crucial choices made by the Palestinians. As just one
example, the action taken by the Palestinian security
forces this past Monday morning in Jenin, when they
assisted an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) officer who
had mistakenly entered the city, demonstrates the
strengthening of the Palestinian Government in its
efforts to combat terrorism and its commitment to
working with Israel to enhance security.

It is in that context that I must express my
sadness at witnessing once again the dichotomy
between the positive developments on the ground and
the repetitive Palestinian narrative. I can only express
my hope that, eventually, reality and common sense
will prevail and bridge the void between an age-old
ritual and the real world in which we live. Yes, there
are problems on the ground on both sides, but it is our
duty to build on the positive and promote hope, rather
than to continue the futile process of doom and
recriminations. Our hope lies in the promise of
tomorrow, not in being hostage to yesterday.

Yes, the Palestinian people have made some
important choices, but unfortunately the right choices
are not being made by everyone. While the moderates
have chosen an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, the
extremists have chosen violence and instability,
threatening both Israeli and Palestinian security. In
Hamastan, in the Gaza Strip, we see the exact opposite
of the positive choices made in the West Bank.

In Gaza, Hamas hurriedly constructs positions
and fortifications, building tunnels for fighting and
smuggling explosives, antitank weapons and rockets
through the desert. Hamas has even sent its terrorists
for training in Iran so that they can attack Israel.

Iran, the world's terror haven, is continuing to
destabilize our region. On the morning of 25 August,
IDF forces foiled a terrorist attack on the town of Netiv
Ha'asara north of the Gaza Strip. Imagine the blood,
death and carnage if the attack had not been prevented.
Lives were saved this time, but who knows when the
next attempt will be.

Since 1 August, Hamas has smuggled more than
13 tons of explosives and 150 rocket-propelled
grenades into Gaza. Some 40 tons of explosives were
smuggled in the past three months. Moreover, 56 terror
attacks, among them the firing of 20 Qassam rockets
occurred last week alone. Close to 70 rockets were
fired by Palestinian terrorists during August, marking a
sharp increase in rocket terror activity.

Two days ago, Corporal Gilad Shalit, the Israeli
soldier kidnapped by Hamas on 25 June last year,
celebrated his twenty-first birthday, but not at home
with friends and family as most of us do. Gilad Shalit
celebrated his birthday for the second year now in
captivity, alone in an undoubtedly dark and cold place,
devoid of the warmth and life he deserves. Hamas still
holds Gilad, creating a severe humanitarian situation. I
ask you to consider the shattering darkness Gilad
experienced on his twenty-first birthday and what must
be done to secure his immediate release and safe
return.

In spite of the volatile security situation in the
Gaza Strip, Israel continues to respond to humanitarian
needs there. Since 19 June, more than 60,000 tons of
humanitarian aid was transferred from Israel to the
Gaza Strip in cooperation with the Gaza District
Coordination and Liaison Office. Israel remains
committed to ensuring the timely and safe passage of
aid through the appropriate channels.

If we consider all this, we see that important
choices are being made on the ground. A huge
difference can be seen in the moderate and pragmatic
choices being made in the West Bank and the extremist
and violent choices being made in Gaza. The masks
have now been removed. Hamas is not just choosing
extremism over moderation; it wishes to forcefully
convert the world to its hateful, violent and venomous
ideology and instil terror and fear in the hearts of those
who do not share its evil world View. Israel for its part,
will work with those that make the right choices, under
the direction and guidance of the Road Map, to
advance the political and economic horizons that sow
the seeds of peace.

With regard to the situation along the Blue Line,
Israel welcomes the extension of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) mandate for
another year. The unanimous adoption of resolution
1773 (2007) last week, was an important step in
maintaining regional security. Israel expresses its
appreciation to the troop-contributing countries, the
UNIFIL command, the strategic cell in New York and
the troops on the ground. Israel appreciates the
difficulty of their task and values their dedication.
They are undertaking a most significant and crucial
responsibility while faced with the challenges of
peacekeeping in our region.

Israel also wishes to join the Council in
expressing its condemnation of the recent attacks on
UNIFIL forces and to offer condolences to the families
of the victims and their countries of origin.

Although it has been over a year since the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), the situation in
southern Lebanon remains precarious, fragile and
unsettling. Here I wish to stress three main areas that
demand the Council's vigilant attention and immediate
action. The continued detention of our boys, IDF
soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped
by Hizbollah terrorists on 12 June 2006 and the
absence of any sign of life pose grave humanitarian
concerns. I reiterate my call to the members of the
Council to make the utmost effort for their immediate
and unconditional release.

In that context, I wish to express my
disappointment at the statement made by Indonesia

referring to what it termed, "Israel's invasion into
Lebanon a year ago". Ignorance is not always bliss.
Re-writing history is an affront to the intelligence of
the Council. Indeed, a year has passed, but that period
should not obliterate the real roots of last summer's
conflict. Indonesia itself voted only last year for
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which called
for the immediate release of our two boys, whose
abduction and brutal holding sparked the conflict.
There is an alarming degree of hypocrisy in voting for
the resolution last year and ignoring it today.
Membership in the Council should carry with it more
responsibility.

The presence of armed Hizbollah elements south
of the Litani river, and the transfer of weapons from
Iran and Syria to Hizbollah in Lebanon, in blatant
violation of the arms embargo, is also a cause for grave
alarm. Some of those weapons are destined for
southern Lebanon and have undoubtedly found their
way there. Israel has watched with great concern as
Hizbollah reverts to its previous capabilities. In that
respect, the passages over the Litani river are crucial.

Lastly, Iran and Syria - the State sponsors of
terror in the region and in Lebanon - are re-arming
Hizbollah in defiance of resolution 1701 (2006) and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1747 (2007). The
international community must see to it that those forces
of extremism no longer threaten the well-being and
security of the region.

It is not enough for the moderates to merely shun
the extremists and shut out their darkness. We must
also usher in light and do so through the choices we
make and courses we chart. The region must transform
gloom into hope. That can only be accomplished
through responsible and sensible choices. The
international community has made its choice on who to
engage and the Palestinians and the Lebanese are
making their choices as well. Choosing the right
options means choosing a peaceful alternative, the
alternative of hope, which is more promising, more
secure and more dignified for all. The alternative of
peace begins with the people and their choices, and the
people of the Middle East, particularly their leaders,
must have the wisdom and courage to choose wisely.

