Mr. Elyounsi (Libyan Arab J amahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting to
consider the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem,
notably Israel's ongoing and accelerating settlement
activities and its construction of the illegal separation
wall.

The Israeli occupation authorities continue their
acts of aggression and repression against the unarmed
Palestinian people. The occupation continues to
exacerbate the economic and social suffering of the
Palestinian people. Israel's illegal activities, including
its ongoing construction of settlements and the
separation wall, continue despite the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) and General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of
20 July 2004. That is in addition to the restrictions
imposed on the movement of people and goods, the
destruction of houses, the confiscation of land, the
uprooting of trees and extrajudicial executions -
which have resulted in the death of 3,670 Palestinians,
of whom a third were children killed in cold blood
either in their classrooms or on their way to school.

The Israeli occupation's practices against the
Palestinian people prove beyond any doubt that the
Government of Israel is not serious about achieving a
just peace in the Middle East. That is evidenced by its
outright rejection of the international community's
resolutions, its violations of international law and its
disregard of the will of the international community.
The Israeli occupation has ignored every peace
initiative that the Palestinian people have accepted
despite the fact that they provided for just a minimum
of their inalienable rights. The last of those initiatives
is the so-called road map. Instead, Israel has continued
to annex land, build settlements, erect the separation
wall and bring in more immigrants while forcing the
displacement of the Palestinian people by creating
hardships as part of its policy of imposing a de facto
situation.

Despite the ICJ's advisory opinion, which
declared the separation wall illegal and called upon
Israel to cease its construction, dismantle what had
already been built, nullify all laws and regulations
adopted in connection with it and make reparation for
damage caused by it, the Israeli Government decided
that the wall would be completed by 1 September
2005. On 10 July, Israel decided to re-route the
separation wall through East Jerusalem proper, which
constitutes a grave challenge to the will of the
international community and a rejection of the advisory
opinion.

Israel's unilateral disengagement and withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip is merely a manoeuvre to divert
the international community's attention from its plans
to annex more land and complete the separation wall.
More dangerous yet is Israel's effort to isolate East
Jerusalem and all its Islamic Holy Places in order to
implement its plans to destroy the Al-Aqsa mosque.
That poses a threat not only to peace in the Palestinian
territories, but throughout the region and the world at
large. Any aggression against East Jerusalem will
intensify the conflict in the region, destroy any hopes
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict and plunge the
world into new depths of conflict, thereby increasing
terrorism and fundamentalism and opening up the door
to more bloodshed.

If peace is to prevail in the Middle East and its
people are to enjoy security, the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
should assume its full responsibility to exert pressure
upon the occupying Power to put an end to its practices
and violations against the Palestinian people and to
comply with the will of the international community,
implement all resolutions calling upon it to end its
practices and expedite its withdrawal from the
Palestinian territories.

