The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing today.

We commend Haiti for its recent peaceful
transition in power. It was an important step towards
stability and democracy in Haiti. Peacekeeping has
made a great contribution to Haiti. Its support of the
Government has been essential to ensuring a secure
and stable environment. It has also provided invaluable
assistance in aiding the Haitian people in recovering
from a number of natural disasters, including the 2010
earthquake and Hurricane Matthew.

However, as I have said before in the Council,
the real measure of progress in Haiti or any country
where we have a peacekeeping mission is not dollars
spent but our impact on the lives of the people we seek
to help. Have we lifted them up, both as individuals
and as a nation? Have we fostered independence?
Have we made their lives better? It is in that spirit that
we welcome the results of the strategic assessment
mission, which recommend that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti close in its current form
by 15 October. The military component of the mission
will withdraw, and what will follow will be a more
focused, police-only mission.

MINUSTAH has never been a traditional
peacekeeping effort. There is no civil conflict or peace
agreement to monitor. The new mission of the United
Nations for justice support in Haiti will devote its
efforts to where they are most needed - in support of
the rule of law, developing the Haitian police force and
protecting human rights.

At our debate last Thursday (S/PV.7918) on
peacekeeping operations review, we asked Council
members to focus on the political foundations necessary
for the success of peacekeeping missions, including
whether the mandated tasks and overall concept of
the mission are consistent with political realities on
the ground. We regard the transformation of the Haiti
Mission, including the withdrawal of the military, as a
strong example of how peacekeeping missions can and
should change as a country's political situation changes.

We believe that the new Haiti embodies the core
principles of success we have developed as part of our
peacekeeping review. Thanks to the recent elections
in Haiti, the political context is right for this Mission,
and the Haitian authorities are working hard to improve
their capabilities. The new Mission will foster the
independence and self-sufficiency of the Haitian people
and will continue to support the Haitian National
Police. The Mission also has defined the exit strategy
established from the very beginning. That will help
ensure a smooth transition of tasks and responsibilities
in the future.

Looking beyond the transition of the Mission,
the Government of Haiti must focus on strengthening
its judicial system and human rights institutions to
help ensure long-term stability. It bears the primary
responsibility for coming through on this; but it
can count on support from the United Nations, the
international community and the United States.

As the Mission in Haiti undergoes this transition,
we thank the men and women of MINUSTAH for
their service, and the Haitian Government for their
cooperation. We also thank the troop and police
contributors to the Mission and the Group of Friends
of Haiti for their work to promote stability and
development. The United States is a long-standing
friend and partner of Haiti. We remain committed to
working with the Haitian Government to ensure the
country's long-term security, democratic development
and economic growth. We look forward to a new
chapter of growth and independence, and the unfolding
story of the Haitian people.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

