Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegationjoins other
Security Council members in thanking the Russian
Federation for convening this debate. Enhancing
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is indeed a
relevant and worthwhile objective. I believe that our
discussions today will contribute to that end.

In that connection, I thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for providing an
overview on the state of cooperation between the United
Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). I
also thank Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Secretary-General
of the CSTO, Mr. Rashid Alimov, Secretary-General
of the SCO, and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair of the
Executive Committee of the CIS, for their respective
briefings and insights on this topic. I also take this
opportunity to commend the work undertaken by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Petko
Draganov and the entire team at the Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia since its
inception in 2008.

States members of the CSTO, the SCO and the
CIS collectively encompass a massive swath of land,
stretching from the borders of Eastern Europe to the
Far East and, as of last year, to South Asia. From the
political, economic or development standpoints alone,
the dividends that could be reaped from a stable and
prosperous region covered by these organizations
are immeasurable. The significant changes to the
international environment in recent years, with new and
increasingly complex challenges to international peace
security, all demand more robust, and even proactive,
responses, especially at the regional level.

Given the intricate linkages between political,
security, economic and development factors,
which necessitate both comprehensive and targeted
approaches, regional organizations have a critical role
to play by bringing to bear the collective weight of
their membership on regional-level issues or situations.
Traditional crisis responses based solely on narrow
conceptions of security may no longer be sufficient or
sustainable. We note that, since their establishment,
each of these organizations has developed a niche area
of expertise intended to better contribute to the needs
of the populations in their respective regions. In that
regard, we urge the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia to continue to
support these organizations to the extent possible.
Efforts to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the CSTO, the SCO and the CIS
by deepening collaboration with agencies such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and
bodies of the Security Council should be supported, as
they have yielded noteworthy success in areas such as
combating trafficking in illicit drugs and terrorism in
the Eurasian and Central Asian regions. In that regard,
my delegation supports the draft resolutions expected
to be adopted during the current session of the General
Assembly aimed at further strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations.
They are important steps towards consolidating the
gains achieved thus far and providing fresh impetus in
exploring new avenues for cooperation.

At the same time, for these organizations to realize
their full potential in addressing the myriad challenges
faced at the regional level, differences must be cast aside.
We should work together to further enhance the
effectiveness and integrity of those regional structures,
while members should be encouraged to deploy their

respective comparative advantages and unique local
expertise for the benefit of the region.

The increasingly complex and intertwined
challenges that threaten our world today cannot be
addressed by any country alone or by the United
Nations itself. Those challenges can be effectively
addressed only by our collective and coordinated
efforts through the establishment of strong and
regionally owned frameworks for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
hope that the discussions today will generate more
ideas and strategies to foster, expand and enhance
comprehensive cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations with a view to strengthening
our collective capacity to respond effectively to threats
to international peace and security.

