Mr. Licharz (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing. At the outset, I would like to commend you for the visit that you conducted to Somalia in January. I would also like to thank the Somali representative for the support in coordinating and facilitating the visit. Germany reiterates that sanctions are an indispensable instrument, contributing to stabilization and State- and peacebuilding in Somalia, thereby also to enhancing regional stability. In that regard, the visit on which we were just briefed was very important, including with regard to an understanding by all sides of the sanctions regime in place. To make one point very clear, the purpose of the arms embargo is to support the Government and to strengthen its ability to provide security. The focus of the sanctions is on the fight against Al-Shabaab. The newly imposed ban on improvised explosive device components in particular will degrade Al-Shabaab's ability tomanufacture home-made explosives. It is now of paramount importance that that provision be effectively implemented, particularly by neighbouring States. We often hear it said that sanctions are not an end in themselves. At the same time, it remains true that sanctions have been adopted for a particular purpose. As long as that purpose has not been fulfilled, the sanctions must be maintained. At the same time, Germany remains ready to support the Somali Government in capacity-building, for example, to better register and monitor the use of small arms and light weapons. We are also ready to continue to support security sector reform. In that regard, I believe that much progress has been achieved. An example is the biometric registration of almost all members of the security forces, which is an ongoing process. Such developments can help towards later considering lifting some of the sanctions in that respect. We continue to fully support the work of the Panel of Experts. The first meetings between the new Coordinator and the Somali authorities are encouraging but cooperation must now be fully re-established. All the experts need access in order to accomplish their mandate. The cooperation of the Somali authorities without preconditions is crucial to the effectiveness of the sanctions instrument, which contributes to the stability of Somalia and beyond. As the Council, we must stand up for the Panel to ensure that it can do its mandated work. We are concerned about attacks against civilians and the persistent sexual and gender-based violence in Somalia. We therefore again call on all forces in Somalia to strictly adhere to international humanitarian law.
