Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Commissioner Chergui for his briefing and for
the work of the African Union (AU) to bring peace and
security to Africa. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zewde to her

new role and thank her for her briefing, presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/678) and
efforts and those of her Office to the African Union.

I would also like to join other speakers, including
the representative of Bolivia and others, who have
taken this opportunity to pay tribute to the remarkable
efforts of Ethiopia and Eritrea in advancing peace and
stability between the two countries in recent weeks.
That is truly positive news for the region, the African
Union and the Council.

The United Kingdom believes that the African
Union is a crucial partner for the United Nations across
many different strands of work, including peace and
security. The AU's deep understanding of the issues
that the continent is facing makes it uniquely placed
to lead efforts in this area. The United Kingdom
strongly welcomes the intention of the African Union
and the United Nations to coordinate more on peace
and security, including on conflict prevention and
peacekeeping matters. Combining the knowledge and
skills of both organizations will mean that resources
can be deployed more effectively and efficiently.

As set out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/678), regional economic communities, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
have positively contributed to peace and security in
the region, and as such must be considered as part of
the AU's reform process. To ensure that resources are
coordinated effectively, we agree that the AU must retain
oversight over these regional economic communities.

The United Kingdom believes that the AU's peace
support operations can play a crucial role in achieving
long-term peace. It is therefore important that the
long-term financial sustainability and predictability
of current and future missions be considered so that
they can keep doing their good work. As Commissioner
Chergui has already highlighted today, resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) outline the principles of
United Nations-assessed funding for AU-led peace
support operations. Resolution 2320 (2016) agreed that
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
on peace-support operations is key to delivering and
maintaining peace in Africa. As set out in the resolution,
we look forward to progress towards a United Nations-
AU decision-making process that respects Security
Council primacy on mandating and deploying missions.

We support the AU's efforts to ensure robust
standards that are comparable to the United Nations and
are adhered to across the organization. In that regard,
we welcome the close work between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission on compliance
frameworks and that a conduct and discipline policy and
a sexual exploitation and abuse policy have been agreed.
We eagerly await the completion of the accountability
and oversight frameworks so that we can move forward
in considering the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions to partially fund AU-led peace-support
operations on a case-by-case basis. In that regard, we
warmly welcome the AU's commitment to funding
25 per cent of peace-support operation costs by 2020,
and I also welcome the detail set out by Commissioner
Chergui earlier in this meeting.

In particular, with respect to the Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note the
report of the Secretary-General's Special Envoys on AU
financing, future financing and the recommendation
for the AU to lead on funding and for non-traditional
donors to contribute. As the report concluded, United
Nations assessed contributions are not an option in the
short term. Therefore, we need to see the international
community step up and provide vital contributions to
AMISOM. in the short and medium terms.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations, as demonstrated by the joint field visits of the
United Nations Secretary-General, Chairperson Faki
and others. We encourage more joint United Nations-
AU field visits, as well as increased coordination
between United Nations Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and AU Special Envoys, particularly
ahead of decision points on mandates or sanctions
regimes and ahead ofthe issuing ofreports. The African
Union's knowledge of the region is invaluable. With
that in mind, we encourage more interaction between
the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
including on reporting, so that we can consider the
views of the African Union.

The challenges that Africa faces remain significant.
Only last year, 15,000 people were displaced every
day, 75 per cent of them due to conflict. We must work
together to ensure that our efforts are complementary
so that we maximize the impact they can have to give
us the best chance to address the enormous challenge of
achieving peace and security in Africa and in silencing
the guns.

