Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(sp0ke in Chinese): First of
all, we would like to thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for preparing the draft resolution before us. In
recent years, international terrorist activities have become
increasingly rampant, taking a heavy toll on the life and
property of innocent civilians and posing a grave threat to
international peace and security.
Intensifying efforts to combat international terrorism
is therefore in the general interest of the international
community. In this context, the relevant United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, should give full
attention to this issue and play their respective parts as
and when appropriate.

More often than not, terrorist activities in recent
years have assumed a transnational character; accordingly,
intensified international cooperation in this area and
multidimensional actions targeting the various
manifestations of international terrorism have now
become indispensable conditions for an effective
crackdown on terrorism. Therefore, we call upon
countries around the world to offer meaningful, speedy
and effective cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

 

Under the auspices of the United Nations, a number of
international anti-terrorist conventions have been concluded.
These should be earnestly and effectively implemented. We
understand that the Ad Hoc Committee established by
General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996
has completed work on the draft international convention
for the suppression of terrorist financing put forward by
France. We hope that all sides will step up their efforts in
a pragmatic and cooperative spirit to ensure the early
adoption by the General Assembly of this convention and
the international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism.

We believe that the draft resolution before us
comprehensively reflects the various aspects of the fight
against terrorism and is of great relevance for enhancing
international cooperation in anti-terrorist activities. In view
of all this, China supports the draft resolution.

