Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
the delegation of Uruguay and its Foreign Minister
for its successful stewardship and energetic spirit
with which the entire Uruguayan team is leading the
work of the Security Council. I wish to convey special
congratulations to my friend, Cristina.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as with the statement to be made by
the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.

The year 2016 may be a new year, but the same
unjust, inhumane and unacceptable situation continues
for the Palestinian people, who continue to be the
victims of an occupation that triggered the massive
Palestinian exodus of 1948. Today, there are over
5.5 million Palestinian refugees, representing the
greatest refugee crisis in the world, characterized by
enormous suffering, desperation and uncertainty.
Seventy years have passed since we committed to world
peace and signed the Charter of the United Nations.
However, unfortunately, today there are still Member
States that continue to tolerate and protect that illegal
and brutal occupation on the part of Israel. For nearly
70 years, this organ has allowed bombings, attacks,
invasions and the Israeli occupation. I ask the members
of the Council how much longer that will continue.
The Security Council has been unable to protect the
Palestinian population, thereby manifesting a complete
disdain for Palestinian suffering and a double standard
as compared to other situations with which we are all
familiar. It is shameful that, at this point, Palestine
continues to face a criminal economic blockade that
continues to suffocate its people and to condemn
them to live in subhuman and extreme conditions,
where there is no respect for their rights and where the
population is deprived of its basic needs, such as health
care, education and adequate housing with a roof over
their heads.

On its seventieth anniversary, the United Nations
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (General Assembly resolution 70/1), which is an effort to eradicate
miserly and poverty and to create decent conditions for
the common welfare of all peoples. We ask ourselves,
however: Will it be possible for the Palestinian people
to exercise the same right to development? What is
more, we continue to wonder whether they will be able
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals without
their being afforded the political space currently
occupied by Israel. What indicators will this people have
to gauge the fulfilment of those targets? The answer is
clear: the Palestinian economy is an economy shaped
by the occupation, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
infiltrates all aspects of the Palestinian people's lives,
including, inter alia, the illegal occupation of their
land and natural resources, the denial of their right to
free movement and the return of their refugees, the
detainment of their citizens and the daily destruction of
their infrastructure.

We regret to have to meet again in this debate.
Instead of celebrating the seventieth anniversary of
our Organization with a free Palestine as a full-fledged
State Member seated alongside us, the year 2015 left us
with thousands of dead, wounded and displaced persons

and destroyed homes. The prevailing situation in East
Jerusalem is more precarious with every passing day.

The Security Council must demand that Israel
completely end its occupation of Palestine and all
Arab territories, lift the criminal blockade of Gaza and
release all political prisoners and detainees, with whom
we are in full solidarity. Our Government calls for the
United Nations to fulfil its historical responsibilities by
urgently adopting a resolution that includes a definitive
time frame for the creation of the State of Palestine,
respecting the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital and living side-by-side with Israel, thereby
laying the foundation for a just and lasting peace in the
region, which is the only solution to the conflict in the
Middle East.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need for dialogue
and negotiation, as opposed to the imposition of war,
foreign intervention and regime change in all of the
conflicts in the Middle East, including the situation
in all of the occupied Arab territories, such as Syria
and others, while taking into account the legitimate
interests of all States and peoples of the region without
foreign interference.

