Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on the situation in Bougainville,
Papua New Guinea. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Sir Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing this
morning on the evolution of the peace process in
Bougainville and on the role played by the United
Nations in that regard. We also welcome among us the
new Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea,
who will later shed more light on the peace process.

Undoubtedly, over a year after the signing of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, that territory has begun
to move slowly towards building genuine peace, as
envisioned in the Agreement of 30 August 2001, which
was based on the three pillars of autonomy, referendum
and weapons disposal. All of these tracks are
intertwined. In this respect, we must recognize the
great impact of two factors for success in the
Bougainville peace process.

The first factor is the sincere efforts made by the
Government of Papua New Guinea and its commitment
to pursue the peace process. We must also acknowledge
its achievements in completing all constitutional and
legal measures in order to give the Bougainville Peace
Agreement its legal status within the constitution of
Papua New Guinea. This is a commendable
achievement, and it should be supported.

The second factor is the important role played by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and the Peace Monitoring Group in their
efforts to facilitate the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. This role merits our appreciation and
support.

In view of the role played by UNPOB at this
critical stage, and because of its active involvement in
coordinating the implementation and consolidation of
the responsibilities agreed upon - especially as the
weapons disposal plan is reaching its second stage, to
be completed on 24 December 2002 - Syria strongly
supports the request of the Papua New Guinea
Government that UNPOB's mandate be extended for a
further 12 months, until the end of 2003.

The information given to us this morning on the
peace process in Bougainville, the note from the
Government of Papua New Guinea dated 26 August
2002, the ministerial statement by that country's Inter-
Government Relations Minister before the Parliament,
and the last memorandum of 20 November, which we
just received, all clearly show the progress made
towards restoring normalcy in Bougainville. This is the
prevailing situation, despite some references to
challenges, mainly by some parties such as Francis Ona
outside the peace process, on the one hand, and the
rehabilitation and development of the infrastructure,
provision of services and attainment of economic
development, on the other. In this regard, we think it is
essential that international assistance by the donor
States be continued and that the international
community continue to fulfill its obligations.

In conclusion, we call for the redoubling of peace
and rehabilitation efforts in Bougainville. We think that
UNPOB still has contributions to make in the post-
conflict phase, and therefore we feel that the 12-month
extension is justified and should be supported. Thus,
we must support and maintain UNPOB's work until the
completion of its mandate.

