With regard to the political process and benchmarks in Mali, we are pleased that the democratic process in the country is making headway. The first round of parliamentary elections was an important step. However, we must note that a negative shadow was cast over the first round by low voter turnout, the closing of many polling stations, particularly in the centre of the country, threats against voters, the destruction of election materials and the kidnapping of opposition leader Soumaila Cisse. We welcome the tangible steps forward that have been taken in the implementation of the peace process and are pleased that some prior blockages have been overcome. The redeployment of the first units of the reconstituted Malian armed forces to the north of the country is an essential element in this respect. It is also a positive step that a high-level workshop on the participation of women in the peace process was held. These positive trends need to be continued and accelerated so that the Security Council benchmarks set last year can be reached. A renewed effort by both the Government and the signatory parties is necessary if the upward trajectory is to continue. With regard to the security situation, we are shocked and saddened by the killing of at least 20 members of the Malian security forces in the north of Mali on Monday, 6 April. This attack once again underlines both the enormity of the challenges facing the Malian security forces face and the utmost importance of international support in bringing safety and security to Mali and the Sahel region as a whole. The most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/223) underscores the fact that the security situation in Mali continues to deteriorate. Malian authorities are called upon to respond to this situation and protect civilians from violence. As the report refers to human rights violations by Malian State actors as well, let me be clear - when fighting terrorism and insurgencies, State actors also have the obligation to respect human rights. Malian authorities are taking the lead and they can continue to count on international support. I offer a case in point. Concrete European Union (EU) support will be strengthened through the renewal of the EU Training Mission mandate until May 2024. Assistance to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) and the G-5 nations will be extended through military advice, training and mentoring. In terms of the support being provided by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), we are convinced that the Mission's ongoing political and integrated civil-military support is critical for the stabilization of Mali. We support efforts to make MINUSMA even more operational, including through the Mission adaptation plan. However, there is a limit to what MINUSMA can do. Giving more and broader tasks to the Mission will backfire if we do not collectively ensure that the Mission has the right amount and kind of personnel and resources. Efficiency gains go hand in hand with a realistic mandate scope; doing more with less is not feasible. We also need the countries of the Sahel, partner nations and organizations, and other missions in the area to engage in complementary efforts. With regard to the coronavirus disease pandemic, we are concerned about the pandemic's impact on the situation in Mali, including on the political process, particularly with the disease's potential for disrupting the second round of legislative elections. Germany calls on MINUSMA and the United Nations Secretariat to closely monitor the situation and keep the Security Council informed - outside the usual reporting cycle, if necessary. As to the Mission itself, the safety and security of all MINUSMA personnel is of utmost importance. We welcome the procedures announced by the United Nations. For them to be effective, however, they must be followed and reviewed. At the same time, the Mission - with all its parts, both civilian and uniformed - needs to remain operational so as to implement the mandate. In terms of the German military and police contingents in MINUSMA, we will maintain our deployments and follow all relevant regulations set by the Malian authorities and the Mission in order to ensure the safety and security of all concerned.
