The Secretary-General: The news from the
Middle East is grim. Day by day, the toll of dead and
wounded on both sides mounts. Day by day, the
bitterness and mutual distrust between Israelis and
Palestinians intensifies. Increasingly, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict risks sliding towards full-fledged
war. Truly, we are nearing the edge of the abyss.

During the past seven days there have been more
than 60 deaths on both sides. Unless something
happens to change the dynamic, it is all too likely that
violence will escalate still further. Particularly

S/PVA474

 

alarming is the growing belief, among both
Palestinians and Israelis, that there can be no
negotiated solution to the conflict. As we all know,
hopelessness and despair tend to lead to more extreme
measures, with tragic consequences for the region.

Eighteen months after the beginning of the
second intifada, the cost to both Israelis and
Palestinians grows ever higher in terms of human
suffering, bitterness, disillusion and mistrust. The key
problems remain occupation; security - the need to
end Violence, including terrorism; and economic
deprivation and suffering. These are interlinked
problems, encompassing the political, security and
economic domains.

Yet even at this darkest of hours, there is still
room for hope. In the midst of the bitterness and the
despair, with clamour on both sides for revenge and for
ever more desperate and reckless measures, there is a
path back to the negotiating table - if the parties
choose to take it.

Let us not forget that the parties have agreed, in
principle, that there is a way out - namely, the Tenet
understandings and the Mitchell recommendations.
Taken together, these documents defined an array of
security, economic and political measures that would
have moved the parties back to the table to negotiate
the fundamental issues that divide them.

However, "in principle" is not "in practice". In
fact, as we know, the parties have not implemented
either of these plans. If Tenet and Mitchell have not
failed, they can certainly not be said to have
succeeded. Clearly, the situation that is now unfolding
requires urgent steps, moving beyond a discussion
focused on how to pursue Tenet and Mitchell.

New thinking and imaginative new ideas are now
being proposed from several quarters. This is to be
welcomed, and such ideas should be considered
promptly and thoroughly, both by the parties and by the
international community. A reduction in the violence is
the most immediate priority. But I have become more
and more convinced that trying to resolve the security
problem on its own cannot work. Security cannot be
dealt with in isolation; it has to have a context. It has to
be addressed alongside key political issues, particularly
the question of land, and economic and social issues,
including the increasingly critical, desperate conditions
of the Palestinians.

Failure to address these issues together will only
spawn new and perhaps deadlier exchanges of
reciprocal violence. Unless both parties have a political
horizon on which their hopes for peace and an
improved livelihood can be based, there will be no
enduring ceasefire. It is imperative that both parties
exercise maximum restraint, particularly with regard to
attacks against civilians. It cannot be overemphasized
that both parties must adhere to their obligations under
international law to protect the basic rights of civilians,
including the right to security.

The lack of mutual confidence between the two
sides makes a third party role essential. The breakdown
of trust is so total that neither side will believe the
other when it comes to the implementation of
agreements. I truly believe that it is imperative for the
Security Council and the wider international
community to work in a concerted manner with the
parties towards a just, lasting and comprehensive
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.

As the Council knows, I and my representative
have throughout been in very close contact with
leaders on both sides, in the region and among the
international community. However, in light of the
gravity of the situation, I have asked my Special
Coordinator, Terje Roed-Larsen, to intensify his
consultations with the parties and with members of the
"Quartet", as well as with regional and international
actors.

The outlook is bleak. But the present course of
events is not irreversible. There is a high road - which
the parties themselves were on not so long ago - as
well as a low road. Let us do everything in our power
to persuade the parties to pull back from the brink and
return to the high road.

