Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for
her excellent briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the positive developments
in the sociopolitical situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular with regard to the
appointment of the Prime Minister, the formation of the
new Government and the National Assembly's approval
of the Government programme on 6 September. The
programme represents a framework for concerted
action that will enable the Government to undertake
political, economic, social, defence and security
reforms. My country therefore urges international
financial institutions, development assistance agencies
and bilateral partners to provide further support for the
Congolese Government in order to consolidate peace
and stability.
My delegation notes that, despite the efforts of
the Congolese authorities, supported by MONUSCO,
the security situation in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a matter
of concern. Activities involving the illicit exploitation
of natural resources carried out by foreign and local
armed groups unfortunately continue to destabilize
the provinces of North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri.
Albeit the primary responsibility of the Congolese
Government, the neutralization of those negative forces
cannot be achieved without the involvement of all
regional actors, in particular neighbouring countries.

In that regard, my delegation commends the holding
of the quadripartite presidential summit held in Luanda
on 12 July among the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Uganda and Rwanda,
the outcome of which underlines the importance of
economic integration and enhanced cooperation on
peace and security in regional efforts to combat armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. My country also encourages the Congolese
Government to redouble efforts to complete the
process of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration, as part of the implementation of its
programme of action.

The humanitarian situation, which has been
exacerbated by the persistence ofthe Ebola epidemic in
the eastern part ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
is also a matter of great concern for my delegation. The
humanitarian crisis is compounded by the difficulties
faced by humanitarian agencies in accessing people in
need owing to the precarious security situation. Added
to that is the low level of funding that has been secured
to meet the amount required to finance the humanitarian
response plan, which is estimated at $1.65 billion.

In that regard, my country expresses its
appreciation to the members of the response team, who
are on the front line in combating the Ebola epidemic,
and to the humanitarian workers for their exemplary
work in particularly challenging security and health
environments. My country also urges all donors to
honour their commitments, which is key to maintaining
and stepping up humanitarian assistance to refugees
and displaced persons.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the
commitment of the international community in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
specialized United Nations agencies operating on the
ground. We view the recent visit by the Secretary-
General to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
from 30 August to 1 September, as a sign of his
willingness to reaffirm international support for the
Congolese authorities and of his solidarity with, and
support for, the victims of violence by armed groups
and the populations living in the areas affected by the
Ebola epidemic.

