Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I should like at the outset
to compliment you, Mr. President, on having convened
this important meeting today. I am speaking on behalf
of my Permanent Representative who, unfortunately,
could not be here today.

September 2002 marks the second anniversary of
violence in Palestine - violence triggered by
enormous provocation at the Al Aqsa Mosque in 2000.
The past two years have witnessed the loss of innocent
lives and indiscriminate violation of the human rights
of the Palestinian people. The latest in a long series of
unabated provocations is the demolition of the
Ramallah compound that housed important symbols
and elements of the anticipated Palestinian State. It is
regrettable that that attack was carried out at a time
when the Middle East Quartet had just declared its
agreement on a three-phase plan of action for achieving
a two-State solution within three years. The Israeli
assault - the third since March 2002 - and the
decision to completely isolate President Arafat
constitute a blatant violation of all norms of
international law and further aggravates the tense
situation.

Attacks, occupation, re-occupation, humiliation,
human rights abuses and the consequent decline in
Palestinian living conditions have further darkened the
prospects for peace in the Holy Land. The genuine
endeavours of the Palestinian people to introduce
reforms and political stability in the occupied
territories have been met with unabated curfews and
closures, which have further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories. Ms.
Catherine Bertini, the Personal Humanitarian Envoy of
the Secretary-General, has reported that the crisis
might spiral out of control within months, as about 50
per cent of the Palestinian population is unemployed,
while malnutrition and disease are spreading.

Such a situation is likely to cast a dark shadow on
international efforts, including those of the Middle East
Quartet, to bring peace and security to the Middle East.
The occupation forces, it appears, want to submerge
even the traces of the derailed peace process in the dust
of demolished Palestinian settlements.

Peace is not just the absence of war at the
expense of the inalienable rights of the weak. Real and
durable peace flows from a state in which people see
preserved their fundamental rights, based on justice
and equity, and are assured a secure economic and
political future. Unfortunately, by failing adequately to
address the root cause of the Palestinian problem -
that is, the preservation and realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people - peace in
the Middle East has been held hostage to an uneasy
situation that even a mild trigger could cause to erupt.

The Security Council must be able to ensure an
immediate end to the siege of President Arafat's
headquarters; the non-negotiability of the fundamental
rights of the occupied people, including their right to
self-determination; respect for and urgent
implementation of Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002); a permanent end to the
provocative construction of illegal settlements in the
Palestinian territories; and the establishment of a
mechanism to assign responsibility for the violation of
humanitarian law by the occupation forces.

In Palestine as elsewhere, the resolutions of the
Security Council must be implemented. Time has come
for this Council to reaffirm the Charter obligations of
all Member States and ensure the implementation of its
own resolutions with out further delay or
discrimination.

