The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Buku
for her statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

I would like to thank the briefers for their very
informative statements.

The Charter of the United Nations, which entrusts
the Council with the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, has for many years
driven it to devote regular attention to all aspects of the
fight against terrorism. Indeed, it is the objective of a
concerted, coherent and effective fight against terrorism
that brings us together today to adopt resolution
2462 (2019) on the fight against new modalities for
financing terrorism.

For many years, we have been acting decisively
in the face of the terrorist threat by confronting our
enemies directly on the ground. I would like to pay

a warm tribute here to those - first and foremost
the Iraqi security forces and the Syrian democratic
forces - who fought Da'esh and recovered from the

so-called Caliphate all the territory it had conquered in
2014. They have defended and continue to defend our
security and our model of collective existence.

Yet the biggest mistake would be to believe that
terrorism is defeated once its territorial claims have
been destroyed. Al-Qaida and Da'esh, even if they
are in retreat, have not disappeared. On the contrary,
they are adapting. If we have driven them out of
the territories in which they had settled, they are
reorganizing themselves into clandestine networks.
While we have prevented them from crossing borders,
they are using cyberspace to remotely direct or inspire,
at the very heart of our societies, the architects of their
criminal projects.

As Governments, our first responsibility is to
ensure the safety of our fellow citizens. We are therefore
obliged to persist in our fight against terrorism, while
anticipating every shift in the threat we face and
adapting our response accordingly. Our enemies seek
to relocate in new territorial franchises - we will fight
them. They wish to contaminate our youth with their
deadly ideology - we will protect our societies. They
wish to project fighters, publicize their ideas, transfer
funds 4 we will isolate them.

As I said a moment ago, we must deal with the
root causes of the problem and intensify our efforts to
isolate terrorists by drying up their sources of funding.
Because, in this area too, our enemies have confirmed
their formidable capacity to adapt. They have long
been able to direct trafficking, banditry and even some
conventional economic flows to their benefit. Today,
driven out of their territories, they have learned to
invest in the new virtual financial spaces, Where they
exploit the possibilities offered by new technologies.

Terror networks know how to raise funds by
opening online jackpot accounts. They do not hesitate
to pervert the practice of hawala to transfer funds
to the other side of the world. They are learning to
transform their resources into cryptocurrency in order
to acquire drones in cyberspace. The challenge is great.
Our determination must be just as strong so that we do
not leave out any aspect of the fight against financing
terrorism. This is the ambition that led France to
organize the high-level International Conference on
Combating the Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
held in Paris last year on the theme "No money for
terror", and to promote the adoption of an ambitious
agenda and the formation of the Paris coalition against
financing terrorism.

That will also be Australia's ambition, which will
follow in the footsteps of France and bring together the
Paris coalition in Melbourne in November 2019. In that
regard, I warmly thank the representative of Australia.
That is also the ambition that led us to bring the issue
to the Council by proposing the adoption of a reference
doctrine to guide the international community's action
in the fight against financing terrorism.

The adoption of a Security Council resolution
is a strong political act. We thank all our Security
Council partners for their active contribution to the
negotiations. However, the adoption of a resolution is
not an end in itself. It is the beginning of the process of
implementation, which must mobilize us just as much
and in which we must demonstrate that we are equal to
our responsibilities.

In the face of the protean and constantly changing
threat I described a few moments ago, we need to build
the broadest possible partnership. Such a partnership, by
involving all the actors concerned - States, the private
sector, multilateral institutions and civil society - is
the only one capable of providing an adequate response
to the challenge.

I would like to appeal to all members of this
partnership to take up the resolution we have just
adopted and commit themselves to implementing it in
all its aspects. In particular, I call on States to fight,
through their legal systems, against the individuals,
groups and entities that finance terrorism; strengthen
their cooperation and commitment to assist the countries
that need help the most in this fight; and implement
the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force, whose role in creating norms and standards in
the fight against terrorist financing is recognized by
the resolution. In that regard, I would like to thank its
President, Marshall Billingslea, for being here with us
this morning.

I also call on the United Nations, in particular the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the work of which
is so important, particularly in providing countries in
need with the necessary technical assistance to develop
their capacity to combat terrorist financing. I especially
welcome the remarks made by Mr. Voronkov, Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and assure him of France's full
support. We further call on the private sector, whose
involvement and participation in the fight against
terrorist financing are more essential than ever.

Lastly, I welcome the balance struck in the text
between our objective of better combating the financing
of terrorism and the ability of humanitarian actors to
carry out their mission in proper conditions, without
hindrance to their activities.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.

