Mr. Laro (Nigeria): 1 thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/30, annex) provided to guide our discussion. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Feltman
for sharing his thoughts on this topic.

The first sentence in the preamble of the Charter
of the United Nations highlights the need to save
successive generations from the scourge of war. Yet
that remains a daunting task. While the number of wars
between States has been reduced significantly since
the end of the Second World War, the number of wars
within States have increased considerably. The quest
for a permanent peace was the primary reason for the
establishment of the United Nations. The costs of war
in human and material terms leave us with unsavoury
legacies. The search for a permanent peace should
therefore lead us to question why past approaches have
not been successful. It is no longer remains an argument
of nations arming themselves to defend sovereignty or
territorial integrity, but a conscious act of preparation
for war. We remain tied to the dictum that if you want
peace you must prepare for war.

To its credit, the United Nations has acted to
prevent outbreaks of conflict, but it can do only so much
in that respect. States' interests may diverge from the
principles of the United Nations, and sometimes they
come into open conflict, leading inevitably to violations
of the Charter and an outbreak of one form of conflict or
another. Showing its resilience and undaunted interest
in keeping the peace and on separating combatants, the
United Nations has often been called upon to provide
troops to play those roles, which it has admirably done
during the past six decades. In fulfilling its mandate to
maintain international peace and security, the Security
Council has played a pivotal role in the prevention of
wars.

As the representatives of our countries, we must
unequivocally state our commitment to peace and
abjuration of war as a means of settling disputes and
disagreements, especially between and within States.
In abjuring war, we should not merely wish for a state
of absence of conflict, but we should strive to establish
a state ofjust peace in the world, where oppression no
longer tramples the dignity of peoples or denies them
their rights and freedoms. Where such rights are denied
and where impunity is allowed to prevail, there the
seeds of conflicts and wars are planted and nurtured by
hatred, extremism and intolerance. In proclaiming the
need for a just peace, we must also demand an end to
all wars as extensions of politics and means of settling
human affairs.

Wars are manifestations of human folly, and
therefore cannot be defended by either reason or
wisdom. As rational beings conscious of right and
wrong, we must know that war is wrong and peace - a
just peace - is right. We must aspire to end wars and
usher in the reign of peace across the globe.

Upholding the Charter of the United Nations
faithfully would mean, first of all, renouncing once
and for all the prerogative to take recourse in war
and accepting the spirit of peaceful settlement of all
disputes, including by mediation, arbitration and
juridical means. Secondly, it means exerting all the
powers of the Member States towards ensuring that
threats to international peace and security are not
allowed to remain unchallenged. In that scenario, the
responsibility to protect becomes the responsibility to
prevent.

There are feasible alternatives to a world
characterized by conflicts. It is up to us to consciously
make the choices that would prevent war. We need,
therefore, to revisit the philosophical underpinnings and
assumptions of our foreign policies. We need to ensure
that foreign policies are not designed to be instruments
of war and conflict. Indeed, we need to rethink
beyond narrow, so-called national interests within and
between States. Inclusion rather than exclusion and
compassion rather than oppression should be the basis
of our relations. That can be achieved only when we
emphasize what unites us rather than what divides us.

Despite what may appear as daunting challenges
to the elimination of the scourge of war, there is no
alternative but to sustain our efforts in the search for
a permanent peace. We therefore firmly believe that
the use of preventive diplomacy tools presents the
most viable option for the attainment of that objective.
Across the street from United Nations Headquarters
there is monument erected to promote the cause of
peace. On it are inscribed the words "to beat swords
into ploughshares and spears into pruning hooks". It is
a reminder of the need for us to end wars and embrace
peace.

