Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
Special Envoy and wish him every success in carrying
out his mandate.

I will make just a few remarks. I will not speak
at length, so as not to derail the discussion. Today, we
are discussing the political track, not the humanitarian
track. I will therefore not comment at length on some
remarks that pertain to a previous meeting that was
held on the humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8561).
Nonetheless, my country strongly believes in
multilateral diplomacy. That is why we were one of
the founding States of this international Organization.
We emerged victorious over those who would violate
international law. Accordingly, when we speak from a
political and diplomatic perspective, we speak out of
our belief in international law.

The Security Council is not a private-sector
entity owned by one Member State. It is not a store
where the owner selects its clientele. The Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security - nothing more, nothing less. We are not
here to personalize or politicize issues according to
our whims. It is normal not to agree sometimes, but
disagreement has to be expressed according to norms,
and, as they say in English, we go by the book. I would
remind my dear friend, the representative of the United
States of America, that our book is the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law.

How would the Council react if some country
were to establish the Mexican-American Syrian-Iraqi
Medical Society - call it whatever you wish - and
send it to the border between the United States and
Mexico, without the approval of or coordination with the
United States Government, to care for the Guatemalan
refugees who are drowning in the river there on a daily
basis? We have read that story in the New York Times. Is
that international law? Is that respect for the Charter?
Humanitarian work requires that the law be respected.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is working in Syria with the approval of the
Syrian Government. Its work is purely humanitarian.
There are 27 international non-governmental
organizations operating in Syria with the approval
of the Syrian Government, but it is unacceptable for
certain countries to send intelligence groups to Syria
across the border with Turkey under the pretext of doing
humanitarian work. We need to draw the attention of
the Council to this particular fact.

We objected to our dear colleague the representative
of Britain when she interrupted me while delivering
my statement because her act was not in line with the
rules and procedures. Any representative who wishes
to interrupt another representative has to go through
the presidency. We do not keep interrupting each other
as if we were in a circus. We have to show some respect
for each other, even if we disagree politically. I did not
object to the fact that my British colleague wanted to
take the floor to make a point of order, but she should
have done so in accordance with the proper procedures
by asking the President to give her the floor.

The utter silence of the Security Council after
Israel's more than 50 years of occupation of the Syrian
Golan - and I thank you, Mr. President, for concluding
your statement with a reference to the Golan - has
encouraged the United States Administration to attempt
to backtrack on the provisions of resolution 497 (1981),
which declared the decision of Israel, as the occupying
Power, according to the description commonly used at
the United Nations, to impose its laws, administration
and authority on the Golan to be null and void and
without international legal effect. This attempted
backtracking is embodied in the recognition by Donald
Trump, the President of the United States of America,
of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan,
ignoring the commitment of all previous United
States Administrations to upholding the provisions of
resolution 497 (1981).

Naturally, this utter silence has encouraged the
Israeli occupying entity to continue its occupation for
decades with impunity, protected and encouraged by
the United States of America and a number of other
Member States. Israel has continued to occupy Arab
territories, confiscate our lands, expand settlements
and reverse itself on its commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace, pushing the region towards war
in an unprecedented manner. The Israeli occupation
has formed an alliance with the takfiri terrorist herds,
providing multifaceted support to these takfiri terrorist
gangs in the area of separation and committing various
aggressions against my country to boost the morale of
these terrorist groups.

In this context, I would like to briefly comment
on the remarks of my colleague the representative
of Germany, in which he said that we accuse those
humanitarian workers of terrorism. Yes, we do. When
his country and other Western countries smuggled
White Helmets from the Syrian occupied Golan into
Jordan and then to Western capitals, this reaffirms
that those groups are terrorists. What were they doing
in the area of separation in the Golan? That area has
troops belonging to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and terrorists are prohibited from
being there. Why did those Governments, including
the Government of Germany, receive those terrorists
who were smuggled from the area of separation in the
Golan? Why did they not go through Turkey, Jordan or
Lebanon? They are terrorists.

The United States-Israeli position, which disregards
international law and United Nations resolutions,
does not stop there. Israel has escalated tensions by
announcing recently the creation of a new settlement
in the occupied Syrian Golan, named Trump Heights.
That is how Israel has rewarded the President of the
United States for violating the Security Council's
resolutions and the provisions of international law by
recognizing Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan.
In order to complete the series of provocations, which
have been repeatedly condemned by the Council, of
continued violations of international law and of illegal
settlements by the occupying Power, the American
President responded to the Israeli announcement by
saying, "Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for this great
honour". It is a great honour that Israel announces the
creation of a settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan
called Trump Heights. The United States President
responds by expressing his thanks for that great honour.
It is as if he were expressing his happiness that a
residential compound had been added to his worldwide
real estate collection, while ignoring the fact that the
settlement will be established on Syrian occupied land,
of which neither Trump nor anyone else has the right
to dispose.

The Council's silence has encouraged senior United
Nations officials to shirk their obligations pursuant to
their mandate, which we, the Member States, conferred
upon them. United Nations officials are supposed to only
follow the United Nations agenda. They are responsible
before us for fully undertaking their functions. Some
members of the Council might say that the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic is unjustly
accusing senior United Nations officials and that this is
not allowed in this Chamber.

No, I am not falsely accusing anyone. I have the best
proof, which is the fact that the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov,
continues to act beyond the limits of his mission and
mandate. In his briefings, he continues to provocatively
avoid, in a manner that can no longer be tolerated,
discussing the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan,
while he fails to point out the position of the United
Nations with regard to the occupation, despite dozens
of relevant resolutions adopted by the international
Organization, in particular the Security Council. In
his periodic briefings to the Council, he deliberately
does not discuss Israel's continued illegal practices and
violations in the occupied Syrian Golan.

I will provide the Council with the following
example. In his most recent briefing on the situation in
the Middle East, on 20 June (see S/PV.8557), Mladenov
failed to note that the Government of the Israeli
occupation held a meeting in the Golan on 16 June and
that on the same day it announced the establishment
of a new settlement in the Golan, to be named Trump
Heights. However, he was quite forthcoming with
regard to the details concerning a goat that had crossed
the separation line into part of the occupied Syrian
Golan. In addition, his colleagues, senior United
Nations officials, were quite forthcoming with regard
to raising the issue of the Syrian authorities granting
one visa entry here and denying another one there. That
is all they talk about when discussing the situation in
the Middle East 4 a goat crossing the separation line
from the Syrian side and the issue of entry visas. But
Mladenov never heard of the establishment of Trump
Heights in the Golan.

Attempts to perpetuate the Israeli occupation
throughout the past years have coincided with the
sponsorship by major Western States of terrorism,
extremist ideologies and attempts to replace spiritual
with political Islam, which has nothing to do with
sacred Islam. After having been abandoned by
Europe and seen his dream of joining the European
Union vanish, Erdogan now looks to his neighbours
to the east and south so as to enhance the illusions of
reviving the Ottoman Sultanate and colonial ambitions
that will never come to fruition. Erdogan believed
that his illusion of reviving the caliphate could come
true, especially after a number of political Islamic
leaders took power in certain Arab States and much
blood was shed with unprecedented destruction,
which some people praised as the advent of the Arab
Spring. He therefore got involved with a major terrorist
project targeting the destruction of Syria, opening his
country's borders with us and facilitating the passage of
thousands of foreign terrorists into Syria, after having
provided them with training camps and all kinds of
weapons and logistical support. Subsequently, he even
launched a direct military offensive against my country
and occupied part of our territory.

All of this could be described as an assassination,
masterminded by certain countries, of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law. As members know, this was preceded by scores
of other assassinations committed by the same
countries, resulting in the disasters in Viet Nam, the
former Yugoslavia, Somalia, Iraq, Libya, Yemen and
many other countries in Africa and Latin America,
witnessed by all humankind. Those disasters have led
to the killing and displacement of tens of millions of
people, while those countries incurred trillions of
dollars in economic losses. Therefore, the only way
for our Organization to avoid meeting the same fate
as the League of Nations is to ensure that countries
abide by the Council's resolutions and the provisions
of the Charter, in particular paragraphs 1, 4 and 7 of
Article 2, which provide for the principle of sovereign
equality of all States and for all Members to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. In addition, the Charter
has no provision allowing countries to intervene in the
internal affairs of other countries.

An awakening, an acknowledgment of guilt - or
mea culpa, as they say in English - and a return to
those noble principles would guarantee the unity of the
Council and its defence of the provisions of the Charter
and give the necessary impetus and support to the work
of the Special Envoy and to serious parties that have
sought to reach a political settlement to the crisis in
my country, Syria, and have coordinated efforts to
combat terrorism.

My country's Government affirms that it stands
ready to cooperate with the Special Envoy to make his
mission a success as he facilitates the Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned intra-Syrian dialogue to move forward
on the political track. That is first and foremost in
the interest of Syria rather than any other party. My
country also emphasizes that what is happening in
Syria cannot be reduced to a mere disagreement on
names and procedures in the context of the formation
of the constitutional committee, despite its importance.
There is a much larger picture at stake, as the issue of
the constitutional committee is just the tip of an iceberg
that is kilometres-deep.

In conclusion, without the concerted efforts of all,
without support for the Syrian Government to eradicate
terrorism, without ending the illegal foreign presence
throughout Syria and unilateral economic measures, and
without effectively maintaining the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria, any political track that
does not take all of that into account would remain
an unrealistic and hopeless solution. When we speak
of effectively maintaining the unity, sovereignty and
independence of Syria, as I and many other colleagues
have said, that is part of the Council's function and
mandate. These concepts are in line with the provisions
of the Charter and the Council's resolutions pertaining
to Syria.

