The Secretary-General: We have all been following
recent developments in Yemen with the deepest
concern. As the Security Council knows, I have just
returned from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Preventing civil war in Yemen was the main
political subject of my discussions with the leaders of
the two countries.

I met with the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
His Majesty King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud; the
Vice-President and Prime Minister of the United Arab
Emirates, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashed
Al Maktoum; Gulf Cooperation Council Secretary-
General Abdul Latif A1 Zayani, and many other
leaders. They all expressed to me their serious concern
that the situation in Yemen may get significantly worse
unless we take more determined and concerted action.
In particular they called for a strong and unmistakable
signal to be sent to all parties that further acts aimed
at undermining the transition would not be allowed to
stand. I briefed them on the latest efforts by my Special
Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar. We agreed to
work together even more closely going forward. I take
this opportunity to highly commend Special Adviser
Benomar for his leadership, hard work and commitment
to facilitating the political negotiation under very
dangerous circumstances.
Let me be clear: Yemen is collapsing before our
eyes. We cannot stand by and watch. The country is
facing multiple challenges. A dangerous political crisis
continues in Sana'a. President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi, Prime Minister Khaled Bahah and Government
ministers and other State officials must be granted the
freedom of movement.

I am concerned by reports of excessive use of force
to disperse peaceful demonstrators and of the use of
arbitrary arrest and detention of civil society activists
andjournalists. I call for the protection of human rights,
especially the rights to peaceful assembly and to the
freedom of expression.

There have been more widespread and lethal attacks
by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, with increasing
hostilities between that groups and the Houthis in
various provinces south of Sana'a, such as Damar and
Al Baydah.

There are increasing secessionist tendencies in the
south, and an acute humanitarian crisis. An astounding
61 per cent of the population - almost 16 million
people _ now need humanitarian assistance in Yemen.
These developments threaten regional and international
peace and security.

Given these troubling circumstances, we all have
a solemn obligation to live up to our commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations. We must do
everything possible to help Yemen step back from the
brink and get the political process back on track.

Yemen's transition has an agreed road map. All
parties must abide by the common framework as set
forth in the Implementation Mechanism of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement. I expect them to
refrain from any further provocations and to implement
these agreements in full and without any further
delays. To that end, my Special Adviser is facilitating
negotiations with all sides on a consensual and
peaceful way forward, under very difficult operational
circumstances. All Yemeni parties must engage in the
negotiations and cooperate in good faith.

I also call on the members of the Security Council
to provide their continued unified support to the
facilitation efforts ofmy Special Adviser. I also urge all
members to work closely with the members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and other international partners to
take confidence-building steps with the Yemeni sides
to de-escalate tensions and pave the way for a peaceful
way forward through political negotiations.

First and foremost, our focus must be on helping the
Yemeni people to re-establish legitimate Government
authority as soon as possible. At this time of crisis, I
also call on Member States to increase their funding for
the 2015 humanitarian response plan. Such support will
be more urgently needed than ever before. This will be
essential for preventing an escalation of the conflict
and creating the basis for reverting to a peaceful
political transition, which I firmly believe is the only
way forward.

