Mr. Mamabolo: lam grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council once again on the situation in Darfur.

Per resolution 2363 (2017), the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
proceeded with its reconfiguration while continuing
to implement its strategic priorities on the protection
of civilians, mediation between the Government of
the Sudan and armed movements, and support for the
mediation of intercommunal conflicts.

UNAMID has started phase one of the
reconfiguration, namely, the closure of 11 team sites and
a reduction of military personnel strength from 15,845
to 11,395 and police personnel strength from 3,403 to
2,888. Since June, UNAMID has closed four team sites
in North and East Darfur, and the remaining seven will
be closed by the end of September. The Mission has
developed plans to deploy the Jebel Marra Task Force
and requested the Government for land to establish
a temporary operating base in Golo. The protection
strategy for Jebel Marra is also being developed to
ensure coordination with humanitarian partners and
tailor military and police activities to the area. The
review of the civilian personnel, commensurate with
the new troop ceiling and configuration, has been
completed and will be reflected in the submission of
the revised UNAMID 2017/18 budget.

Regarding the situation in Darfur, after the brief
clashes in East and North Darfur in May and June
between the Government of the Sudan Armed Forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/ MM), supported by the Sudan Liberation Army/
Transitional Council and the Justice and Equality
Movement, Darfur largely remained calm. The clashes
are a reminder of the need for a commitment by all
parties to cease hostilities and to take major strides
towards a permanent and lasting peace.

With the exception of the Violent clashes
between the Rezeigat and the Ma'alia in East Darfur,
which resulted in significant casualties, there has
been a reduction in the number of intercommunal
incidents, owing partly to the intervention of the
native administration, community leaders and local
committees supported by the Government, the United
Nations country team and UNAMID. Violence against
civilians, banditry and criminal activities continued,
albeit on a smaller scale, with the majority of the cases
occurring against internally displaced persons (lDPs),
farmers and women. On the human rights situation,
there has been some progress. The President pardoned
six human rights defenders on 29 August. Efforts are
being made at the local level to extend judicial services
beyond urban centres, and the perpetrators of criminal
incidents, in some instances, have been apprehended.
However, much still needs to be done to improve the
overall human rights situation.

Most of the insecurity currently experienced in
Darfur can be attributed to the tensions originating
from the underlying causes of the conflict, exacerbated
by the proliferation of arms in the hands of civilians
and militia groups. lntercommunal disputes, usually
triggered by competition over land, water, livestock and
mineral resources, have become increasingly violent
owing to the availability of weapons. On 6 August,
the Government of the Sudan launched the third phase
of the arms-control campaign, reiterating that only
members of the regular forces were to be allowed to
carry, acquire or stockpile weapons or ammunition.

Subsequently, the Second Vice-President conducted
a sensitization tour of Darfur followed by initiatives in
the various states led by the Walis. Reactions to the
arms-collection campaign in Darfur vary, with the
opposition and non-signatory movements, some tribes
and militia groups critical of Government intentions,
with others such as the Arab militia leader Musa Hilal
opposed outright to the process.

Meanwhile, progress in the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur remains limited,
particularly on those outstanding issues that are
fundamental to sustainable peace in Darfur, such as
durable solutions to displacement, the administration
of land, water and other scarce resources, and the
issue of armed militias. UNAMID continues to engage
the remaining Commissions and Fund of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, but their lack of capacity
and presence in Darfur continues to pose a challenge.

Efforts by the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, with the support of UNAMID, for a cessation-of-
hostilities agreement and the resumption of direct
negotiations towards an inclusive peace agreement to
end the conflict, have remained inconclusive. Further
to my engagement in Paris with Abdul Wahid, Minni
Minawi and Gibril Ibrahim, I have sent a report to the
parties detailing the current status of the mediation
process, especially the stalemate in the negotiations on
cessation of hostilities.

The movements insist on a sequencing of the
negotiations from the cessation of hostilities to
discussions on the controversial issue of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The Government, on the
other hand, insists on a commitment to the Document
as a basis for negotiations and Doha as the venue for
the talks. Abdul Wahid maintains his refusal to join the
peace process. While we will continue to engage both
parties to break this stalemate, we call upon the Council
and those with influence on the parties to stress the
importance of a political settlement and desist from
bringing more suffering to the very people that they
profess to represent.

Displacements were reported following the clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the SLA/
MM. in North Darfur in May and June, although the
figures could not be confirmed. IDPs continue to
require protection and humanitarian assistance on a
daily basis. There is an urgent need for the Government
of the Sudan, with the support of the international
community, to find sustainable solutions that would
enable the IDPs to return to their homes voluntarily.

Cooperation with the Government of the Sudan
has noticeably improved. The humanitarian operating
environment continued to improve, with partners
reporting faster approval for movements within Darfur
and fewer denials of access. UNAMID also continues
to experience decreased movement restrictions.
UNAMID remains committed to working with the
Government authorities to overcome the remaining
access challenges.

The issuance of visas and the clearance of essential
equipment continue to improve. However, the Mission
is still awaiting the issuance of visas for human rights
staff. The shipments currently being held represent a
fifth of the number held this time last year.

The cooperation of the Government for the
reconfiguration of UNAMID, particularly for the
establishment of a temporary operating base in G010, is
a matter of priority.

In conclusion, I would like to express UNAMID's
appreciation to the Council for the support that we
continue to receive.

