Mr. F aaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I should like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his briefing and
President Gusmao for his important statement and for
his presence here today.

Denmark associates itself fully with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.

The situation in Timor-Leste has improved much
in recent years. The security situation remains
generally calm and stable. Local elections have
recently been held in a peaceful manner and with a
high voter turnout. The capacity of the Timorese
Government institutions and security forces has
improved. In addition, the stage is being set for the
smooth transfer from the United Nations Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to a sustainable development
framework. The next major step will be the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections.

However, the situation in Timor-Leste, a nascent
democracy, remains fragile, and the country continues
to rely on international support. As a result, we support
Timor-Leste's request for a continued political United
Nations presence - although the presence should be
small, so as to leave the Timorese in the driver's seat.

We welcome the presentation by President
Gusmao of the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation to the Secretary-
General last Friday. It is our hope that the report will
soon be officially published so as to help the Timorese
people to gain clarity about their past. The scars of the
past will not completely heal until the truth has been
revealed and all of those responsible for past atrocities
have been brought to justice. Impunity must not be an
option. In this regard, Denmark is concerned about the
provisions on amnesty contained in the statute of the
bilateral Commission on Truth and Friendship. In
addition, the safety and security of victims and
witnesses who have testified in the past must be
protected at all times.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report on the issue of justice and reconciliation, taking
into account the report of the Commission of Experts,
as well as the views expressed by Indonesia and Timor-
Leste. The report should also benefit from the report of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation and could provide useful guidance to
the Council for the post-UNOTIL period.

Finally, we welcome the signing on 12 January of
an oil and gas deal between Australia and Timor-Leste,
which will provide a financial boost to Timor-Leste's
development efforts. In view of their traumatic past,
the Timorese people certainly deserve the fruits of
development and democracy, and we wish President
Gusmao and the Timorese people every success in
continuing to move the country forward.

