Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation to you for
holding this important public debate on the question of
small arms. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive, substantive and timely
report on this issue and Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Dhanapala for his presentation of this important
document.

The illicit trafficking and accumulation of small
arms remain among the greatest impediments to
sustainable development, conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peace-building. They pose
a serious threat to human security and human rights.

Ukraine has continuously expressed its concern
about the serious humanitarian consequences of this
phenomenon, which claimed hundreds of thousands of
innocent lives all over the world, thus highlighting a
global dimension of this problem. We are deeply
convinced that without concerted efforts by the
international community to prevent uncontrolled
proliferation of these weapons it is impossible to
maintain peace, regional security and global security.
The necessity of this has become even more acute and
urgent after the tragic events of 11 September.

The Programme of Action adopted by the 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects has been a
significant but perhaps only a first step towards the
goal of controlling this scourge. We hope that within
the follow-up process at global, regional and national
levels it will be possible to make the implementation of
the Programme of Action more efficient as well as to
find ways to strengthen and further develop the
measures contained therein.

In our view, it is essential to provide for global
and regional coordination between national control
systems and mechanisms for preventing illicit small
arms and light weapons trade operations.

The responsibility for establishing control over
the traffic in small arms and light weapons rests with
the States acquiring those weapons. At the same time
those States should be encouraged to improve their
abilities to curb the illicit traffic in small arms. That
might require financial assistance from the
international community.

Ukraine welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General and is looking forward to the results
of work of the Group of Governmental Experts on the
marking and tracing of small arms. We hope that the
findings of the Group will lay the groundwork for the
development of an international instrument, open to all,
which will increase the national capacity of States to
identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner,
small arms and light weapons, as well as to seize those
of an illicit nature.

Preventing, combating and eliminating the
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons is
one of the important issues the Security Council must
deal with as part of its primary responsibility for
maintenance of international peace and security.

It is evident that promoting long-term conditions
for development and security is not possible without
resolving ongoing conflicts and taking adequate
measures to ensure stability in post-conflict situations.

Excessive accumulation of and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons fuel, intensify and
delay the resolution of conflicts. We note that a series
of innovative measures, taken by the Security Council,
to enhance compliance with arms embargoes by
establishing independent panels of experts and
monitoring mechanisms resulted in positive outcomes,
especially in Angola and in Sierra Leone. At the same
time the problem of illicit trafficking persists in some
other areas of conflict.

We believe that at this stage it is important to
review the lessons learned in order to ensure the
efficiency of measures that could be further taken by
the Council. In this connection it will be useful, in our
view, to focus on financial sources used for purchase of
illegal weapons and to address the relationship between
the illicit exploitation of natural and other resources
and the purchase of and trade in illegal arms. It would
also be important to define the role the relevant
international organizations, business and financial
institutions and other actors at the international,
regional and local levels can play in the
implementation of arms embargoes.

We share the view expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General that arms embargoes help to stop
arms flows into targeted countries and to rebel groups,
but do not eliminate small arms and light weapons that
already exist in areas of conflict. The effective
functioning of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for former combatants and
the implementation of projects aimed at collecting and
destroying illegal weapons are of considerable
importance to the successful implementation of
measures taken by the Security Council to redress the
situation in a specific country-related context.

We therefore welcome the observations made and
the 12 recommendations proposed by the Secretary-
General, and we look forward to a further update on the
issue of small arms and their impact on post-conflict
peace-building, human security and human rights.

I should like to stress the fact that Ukraine
conducts a responsible policy in the field of arms
control. Ukrainian legislation envisages strict measures
to prevent the illegal manufacturing, possession and
trafficking of all types of armaments, including small
arms and light weapons. The national export-control
system provides for effective export and import
licensing procedures. Efforts are also being made to
improve national legislation in this field. One of the
most recent steps was the adoption by the Cabinet of
Ministers of Ukraine of an action plan to implement the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons.

Finally, let me assure the Council that Ukraine
will continue to take an active part in international
efforts to combat the illicit trafficking of small arms
and light weapons and to restrain their uncontrolled
proliferation.

