Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (spoke in French): Mr. President, first of all I
wish to thank you personally, as well as the other
Council members, to have granted my request to take
the floor before this body, which is the main guarantor
of peacekeeping and international security. I am aware
of your great abilities as a diplomat, Sir, and therefore I
am confident that the Council's work will be
productive this month. Let me also thank our friend
and colleague, the Ambassador of Bulgaria, who
conducted the work of the Council brilliantly during
the last month.

We are pleased to see that relations between Iraq
and Kuwait, two independent and sovereign States,
United Nations Members and members of the Non-
Aligned Movement, have once again become normal.
We encourage these two friendly countries to continue
to do their utmost in order to resolve pending issues.
This would contribute to establishing peace, security
and stability in the region.

My country, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, has been following the question of Iraq very
closely and with the greatest attention. During their
meeting on 18 September, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Movement encouraged Iraq
and the United Nations to intensify their efforts in the
quest for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
all the issues pending between them. The Ministers
also insisted on the urgency of a peaceful solution to
the question of Iraq in order to preserve the authority
and the credibility of the Charter of the United Nations
and of international law, as well as peace and stability
in the region and throughout the world.

There is not the shadow of a doubt that the
question of Iraq dominates the current international
agenda. Why is that the case? What should we do - or
rather, how should we resolve this question? Some
advance a multitude of arguments on their side to
defend tooth and nail the use of force to achieve their
objective. Others provide an opposite viewpoint,
preferring the peaceful settlement of disputes. In our
humble opinion, and based on the Charter and
international law, we should explore all peaceful means
to resolve the outstanding problems and should do
everything possible to avoid war, which can only cause
more suffering for the Iraqi people. The people of Iraq
are martyrs who have committed no crime; they have
already suffered too much and deserve to suffer no
longer. The world would render a great service to the
Iraqi people by helping to find a peaceful solution to
this question.

We are told that the question of Iraq concerns the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Moreover,
it is stated unequivocally that Iraq possesses chemical
and biological weapons and will have the ability to
manufacture nuclear weapons in the near future. In that
regard, many countries maintain that it is up to the
United Nations - the sole universal international
organization - to conduct inspections on the ground
and to verify the veracity of the statements made. We
are pleased to note that Iraq, in order to prove its
sincerity, has unconditionally accepted United Nations
inspections. In that context, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic calls for the immediate
resumption of United Nations inspections in Iraq and
expresses the hope that the question of Iraq will thus be
resolved swiftly and peacefully.

In today's world, where dialogue and cooperation
among States continues to prevail, it is important that
the international community call firmly and vigorously
for the settlement of disputes through the path of peace.
In our view, any conflict, no matter how complex, can
and must be resolved peacefully. In that spirit, we
appeal to the international community to do all it can in
order to resolve the question of Iraq swiftly and, above
all, peacefully.

