Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Ambassador
Skoog for his briefing. Let me also very much welcome
the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/429). We fully
support his work and efforts as Special Representative
to deliver the United Nations road map.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
towards national reconciliation through the national
conference process. It is important to do all that we can
to support all Libyans to have a stake in the political
process. As we have said for some months now, the
status quo is not sustainable. We therefore welcome
the efforts to prepare for elections. It is extremely
positive that 2.4 million Libyans have now registered
to vote, reflecting the popular demand for an end to
the transition period and an eagerness to engage in the
democratic political process. Libyans want to break the
political impasse and to move their country forward.

However, the Libyan people are suffering because
of the divisions and disagreements among their
leaders. As the United Nations has set out, there are
three elements that need to form part of the political
sequence: the Constitution, parliamentary elections
and presidential elections. It is important to manage
that sequencing so that credible elections are delivered
and stability is promoted. Before elections can take
place, Libya's leaders must therefore agree to an
inclusive political package on the technical, security
and political measures needed to ensure that the
elections are inclusive and peaceful and that the results
are accepted. As the international community and the
Security Council, we need to deliver a single unified
message. All national efforts must be in support of and
coordinated with the United Nations.

Turning to the economy, we welcome the 2018 budget,
agreed on 9 May, which will allow the Government to
support vital public services. Libya's leaders now need
to work together to address the suffering of the Libyan
people while the preparations for the elections continue.
They urgently need to agree economic reforms, to unify
Libya's economic institutions and to resolve the dispute
over the governorship of the Central Bank of Libya.

Finally, turning to security, the lower casualty rates
since the start of 2018 are most welcome. However, the
tragedy continues to strike, including the attack of
2 May on the High Commission for National Elections
claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It
is a stark reminder that such groups are still working
to undermine the democratic process. We in the
international community must make a concerted effort
to help to bolster electoral security arrangements so that
the Libyan people can exercise their democratic right
without the threat of violence. We recognize that the
fighting, particularly in Sabha and Derna, demonstrates
deep divisions in Libya. That fighting increases the
suffering of the Libyan people and is being exploited
by extremists.

In talking of exploitation, we still recall the
shocking reports of what appeared to be slave auctions
run by migrant traffickers. We must take action to
signal that traffickers cannot act with impunity. The
United Kingdom fully supports such efforts, including
through the Security Council sanctions regime.

The year 2018 is crucial for Libya. It presents a
great opportunity to finally deliver what the people of
Libya have long demanded - a peaceful, secure and
prosperous country and an opportunity to have a say
in how that is achieved through credible elections. The
international community must work together with the
United Nations to support Libya's leaders to deliver.
To fail now is to invite more suffering, more wasted
opportunities and greater threat to the peace and
security of us all.

