Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome the initiative of the Chinese presidency to
convene, together with the Senegalese and Angolan
delegations, this debate to discuss a topic of great
importance and scope in a global context characterized
by key threats to our collective security. Quite clearly,
the issue of privacy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea is a source of great concern to the
countries of West and Central Africa, be they coastal or
land-locked States. However, the issue necessarily has
an unquestionable international dimension, given its
underlying economic and geostrategic ramifications.

The Gulf of Guinea is among the regions of the
world that best reflects the linkages among current
global challenges. That part of the African continent's
Atlantic coast is a crossroad of international maritime
traffic owing to its location at the heart of networks of
routes linking Africa, the Americas, Europe and Asia.
However, above all the Gulf of Guinea is an area replete
with diverse economic potential. Added to that are the
many other resources of the continent, all of which
attract the interest of both legal economic actors and the
covetousness of criminals and traffickers of all types,
who increasingly are developing various means that
very often surpass the individual national capacities of
the States of the region.

Reports available to us on this issue point to the
fact that, over the past decade, the breadth of the
phenomenon of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea has increased, thereby making it a significant
obstacle to maritime activity by the countries of the
region. Nonetheless, those activities significantly drive
the economies of those countries. In recent years, the
scope oforganized maritime crime in the Gulfoquinea
has expanded to a worrying degree, no longer being
limited to the petroleum sector. Acts of piracy, at times
taking the form of increasingly bold and sophisticated
raids on the high seas, are now being compounded by
armed robbery, illicit fishing, human trafficking and
trafficking in drugs, weapons and human beings, as
well as in counterfeit medications and toxic waste. That
further complicates the increasing efforts of the States
of the region, with various international partners at their
side. That is reflected in the various initiatives taken
over the past five years in response to this challenge.
As appropriately mentioned by the Assistant
Secretary-General, whom I thank for his briefing here
today, a Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
was held at Yaounde in June 2013 under the auspices
of the three relevant subregional organizations. The
meeting provided genuine momentum and was a
tangible reflection of the collective commitment of the
States of the region to address this growing threat. The
process that led to the meeting illustrated the various
stages of regional commitment and the international
commitment underpinning it, including through the
United Nations by way of the adoption of resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012), as well as presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/13, which the Council adopted
on the heels of the Yaounde Summit.

The challenge before us is to establish and
implement an institutional legal framework that will
make it possible to undertake an effective, coordinated
response by the countries of the region, as clearly
emphasized at the Summit. Following the Summit,
a package of stragic documents was adopted on the
issue of maritime safety and security in the Gulf of
Guinea, including the Yaounde Declaration of the
Heads of State and Government of Central and West
African States on Maritime Safety and Security in the
their Common Maritime Domain, the Code of Conduct
Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa, and the memorandum of understanding
among the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC) on maritime safety and security in the Central
and West Africa maritime space.

In view, on the one hand, of the progress made
since the Council's previous meeting on this issue (see S/PV.6723) and, on the other hand, the situation on the
ground, we have reason to be satisfied with the ongoing
efforts of Gulf of Guinea States and subregional
organizations, which have made substantial progress
in the establishment of institutions and the adoption
of legal frameworks on the security architecture
for maritime security. For example, the GGC and
ECOWAS finalized their regional maritime strategies,
respectively in August 2013 and in March 2014, under
the Yaounde Declaration, which requested those entities

"to develop and adopt a regional strategy on the
fight against piracy, armed robbery and other illegal
activities committed at sea, in line with the African
Integrated Strategy for the Seas and Oceans 2050.

The Yaounde process also is proceeding with the
gradual implementation of the pillars of the interregional
architecture on maritime safety and security that serve
as the axes for the coordination and harmonization
of regional policies and initiatives envisaged during
the Summit. Moreover, it must be recognized that
the operationalization of that architecture is based on
certain conditions that have yet to be met, despite the
achievements we have often emphasized. That pertains
in particular to the strengthening of coordination and
the harmonization of legislation on the subject, which
in this configuration are made to both the interstate and
interregional levels. Furthermore, we note the existence
of barriers to the delicate question, not yet fully
resolved, of the delimitation of maritime boundaries,
which can be an element of tension in the relations
among the various States bordering the Gulf.

In addition, funding is a central element in the
effectiveness and the operation of the entire undertaking.
It should therefore be noted that, in addition to the need
to mobilize and pool the resources of Gulf of Guinea
States and subregional organizations, the support of
technical and financial partners is indispensable for
the consolidation and the sustainability of the nascent
integrated maritime safety systems. In that regard, it is
appropriate to commend the assistance on the technical
and financial fronts on the prat of partners at the
bilateral and multilateral levels in support of State and
regional initiatives against piracy and armed robbery.
On that score we especially wish to acknowledge the
contributions of the Special Trust Fund for Maritime
Security in West and Central Africa, established by the
International Maritime Organization.

In spite of the persistence of many challenges,
regional mobilization in response to the threat posed
by piracy and armed robbery at sea should be seen as
a manifestation of the commitment of the States of
the Gulf of Guinea to assume their responsibilities in
the security sphere. Moreover, security in the region
must be understood holistically, as the main causes
and drivers of maritime insecurity are to be found on
dry land. In truth, maritime crime is often fuelled by
vast networks of illegal activities that are progressively
being built on a foundation ofpoor governance, extreme
poverty and socio-political violence. Therefore, we
consider it essential to stress the links between piracy
and transnational organized crime, given that this
scourge is one of the major challenges that threaten the
stability of countries in the region.
Moreover, given the particular security situation in
West and Central Africa, we should consider seriously
the possibility of the existence of connections between
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the financing of the
activities of terrorist groups operating in the region.
It is also essential to consider other issues related to
maritime safety and security, including the management
and control of marine resources.

In the fishing sector, pressure seems to be building
on available fishery resources - due mainly to the
increasing number of fishing vessels that are operating
and to illegal fishing. We can see that the scarcity of fish
stocks tends to push small-scale, traditional fishers to
ignore maritime borders and national State legislation.
All of those factors constitute potential sources of
conflict. It is necessary to strengthen policies and
partnerships for the rational exploitation of fishery
resources and for the governance and sharing of
transboundary marine resources, taking into account
the specificities of the States.

It is because of those various but interlinked
security issues that the second Dakar International
Forum on Peace and Security in Africa, held in 2015,
devoted a plenary session to maritime safety. That
session helped to facilitate strategic dialogue among the
participants, to deepen their reflection on an integrated
approach to threats on the continent, and to identify the
most appropriate responses to current challenges. We
are therefore of the view that the relevant guidelines
arising from the Dakar Forum deserve to be endorsed
by the African States and actively supported by the
international community. I will mention just eight of
most salient points:

First, the African approach must take into account,
over and above security, the environmental, touristic
and economic dimensions. Second, it is important to
have an inclusive development policy that benefits
communities, youth and women. Third, we must
define the independent African priorities and the need
for the support of international partners. Fourth, we
must strengthen the legal and judicial capacities of
States. Fifth, support must be given to programmes
and institutions, not to mention the implementation
of the Yaounde process. Sixth, information should be
collected and shared. Seventh, training and instruction
on maritime issues are necessary. Finally, a maritime
network should be created for a continental response and
the development of a potential maritime surveillance
and response.
As we can see, the dynamic is well under way on
the African continent. Moreover, I reiterate that the
African Union is preparing an extraordinary summit on
maritime security, to be held in Lome in October. The
summit will, among other things, address the challenges
and threats to maritime security, drug trafficking,
money-laundering, illegal fishing and international
cooperation. Senegal, of course, will participate in the
meeting and actively work to ensure that it promotes
a qualitative leap in the implementation process of a
security architecture and operational maritime safety
in Africa, and particularly in the Gulf of Guinea.

