Ms. Bird (Australia): Recurrent intra-State conflicts,
expanded terrorist and extremist networks and the
deliberate targeting of civilians define global security
today. United Nations peacekeepers are facing
unprecedented demands, more complex and dangerous
environments and significant fatalities through
malicious acts.

Seven of the 11 countries most affected by
terrorism host United Nations peacekeeping operations,
even though the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Secretary-General agreed that United Nations
peacekeeping operations were not designed to
counter terrorism.

Violent and asymmetrical threat environments
should not weaken our resolve to create political space
for peace negotiations and to protect civilians. But we
must also train and equip peacekeepers to operate as
safely and effectively as possible. There is an urgent
need for consistent and relevant training, greater
situational awareness and improved crisis management.

First, with regard to training, we need to ensure
that peacekeepers meet United Nations predeployment
standards and that they are able to respond to the specific
threats they will face. We support the standardization
efforts under way, in particular the deployment of
United Nations military unit manuals and associated
training. Australia is co-chairing the drafting of the
improvised explosive device (IED) threat mitigation
military and police Headquarters handbook, which will
help peacekeepers detect and defeat terrorists" weapon
of choice.

Secondly, Australia strongly supports the findings
of the Final Report ofthe Expert Panel on Technology
and Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping,
which recommends the use of technology to improve
situational awareness and protect peacekeepers, in
particular where such technology provides low-burden,
low-cost force protection. Under Australia's REDWING
programme, for example, a suite of practical counter-
IED devices that operate in austere environments was
developed. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and
night-vision equipment are also particularly important.

Enhanced intelligence is key to ensuring that
peacekeeping operations are better positioned to prevent
and counter asymmetrical attacks. We also encourage
efforts to improve engagement with local communities,
which builds trust and is an important part of broader
early warning and conflict prevention. Thirdly, while
prevention is key to countering the threat, in the event
of a security crisis, the United Nations needs the
flexibility and resources to boost security and medical
capacities, including quick-reaction forces and medical
evacuation capabilities. A comprehensive policy
on crisis management, including mandatory crisis-
management exercises, is an important step. We also
welcome the development of a medical performance
framework for improving standards across health-care
capabilities. The lack of medical evacuation capability
that can operate 24/7 and in all weathers remains a
critical gap.

Fragile States hosting peace operations are
vulnerable to terrorist and violent extremist networks.
We support a more strategic and coherent approach
across the United Nations in its efforts to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism, and acknowledge the
need to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
United Nations counter-terrorism and peacekeeping
bodies. The Secretary-General's recommendation that
the prevention of violent extremism be integrated into
the relevant activities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with their mandates, merits
further consideration.

In conclusion, peacekeeping is a high-risk venture
at the core of the mission of the United Nations to
maintain peace and security. In asking peacekeepers
to face such risks, we must give them the means to do
their job as safely and effectively as possible.

