Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, we thank you, Sir, for convening this open
briefing on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our thanks also go to High Representative
Petritsch for his report and updates. We found the
report informative and comprehensive. The Chinese
delegation supports the High Representative's work
and appreciates the efforts made by various parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the Peace
Agreement.

China has closely followed developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The overall situation has
remained calm and stable and the Peace Agreement
continues to be implemented, which we find
encouraging. This can be attributed to the political will
and cooperation of the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the assistance provided by the
international community. We welcome the progress
made in various areas, especially the return of minority
refugees in increasing numbers. The local police forces
are playing a crucial role in ensuring the safety and
security of the returnees and very few places in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are considered to be inaccessible for
security reasons.

We note from the report, however, that progress
in implementing the Peace Agreement is very slow. In
some areas, it appears to be at a standstill. In particular,
there is a lack of dialogue and constructive engagement
in decision-making among the three members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who continue
to be guided by ethnic interests rather than by the
overall interests of the country. Thus, five years after
peace was achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, they
are still faced by challenging tasks which they are far
from completing. The international community must
exert its influence in this regard.

It has been our consistent view that a
comprehensive and thorough settlement of the question
of Bosnia and Herzegovina ultimately depends on the
people of that country themselves. The participation of
the international community in reconstruction should
be based on the principle of ceding the leading role to
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their will and
choices should be respected. The international
community's efforts should focus on helping them to
achieve self-government and independence. In
economic reconstruction and reform in particular,
efforts should be made to reduce their reliance on
external assistance. They should be helped to establish
a self-sustaining market economy. If they do not, all
kinds of social and economic problems may resurface
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the process of economic
transition.

