At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the French presidency for convening today's Security Council open debate on children and armed conflict. We thank the briefers - the Executive Director of UNICEF, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and dear Mariam of Mali - for their valuable and informative contributions. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525) and to commend the efforts of the United Nations to advance the children and armed conflict agenda. This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which was a milestone in the children and armed conflict agenda in its establishment of two important mechanisms, namely, the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism. The year 2020 also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Right of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. This anniversary provides an opportunity to take stock of our achievements and to further discuss necessary efforts to keep children from harm's way as the severe effects of conflicts on children continue to constitute a significant challenge. The Secretary-General's report highlights over 25,000 verified grave violations against children in 2019, in 19 situations. Although there is a slight decrease from previous years, the number is still high and it shows that much more remains to be done. Children continue to suffer immensely in many places around the world, including Syria, Palestine and Myanmar. Furthermore, the coronavirus disease pandemic, which presents an unprecedented global health crisis, causes serious impacts on countries in armed conflict, with children being among the most vulnerable groups. In this context, Turkey reiterates its support to the Secretary General's appeal for a global ceasefire during the course of the pandemic. Meeting the fundamental humanitarian needs of children in conflicts and emergencies, including for the provision of health services, must be one of our priorities. In the meantime, investing in the education of all children, particularly girls, requires our special attention. In addition, we see the repatriation and reintegration of children as important aspects of the agenda. Turkey fully subscribes to the Secretary-General's appeal to the countries concerned to take steps for the voluntary repatriation of their citizens, particularly women and children affiliated with Da'esh. Unfortunately, in Syria, the suffering of children continues unabated. The crimes of Al-Assad's brutal regime in the form of indiscriminate air strikes, barrel bombs, chemical weapons, artillery shelling and the targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure are not the only menaces Syrian children face. The well-documented crimes of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorist organization and its Syrian branch, the Democratic Union Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units (PY D/Y PG), in relation to the recruitment of young girls and boys over the years are a source of grave concern. PYD/YPG employs the same tactics as other terrorist organizations operating in Syria, such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra and other affiliated groups. As such, they deserve no less condemnation. As areminder, let me recall a few recent examples of the PKK/YPG's notorious terrorist activities in Syria. On 28 April, PKK/YPG carried out a bomb attack in a market in Afrin, killing 40 civilians, including 11 children. It was followed by another one, in El-Bab on 10 May. In just these two attacks, PKK/YPG killed more than 50 civilians. The Secretary-General's latest report provides damning insights into the horrific treatment of children at the hands of the PKK, as well as in areas under its control. As highlighted in the report and as no different than in previous years, YPG recruited the highest number of children in Syria in 2019. YPG also topped the lists in the abduction of children, deprivation of liberty of children and using schools and medical facilities for military purposes. This terrorist group targets schools, converts them into ammunition storages and deprives children of their fundamental right of education. We fully support United Nations efforts to document PKK/PYD/YPG's and other terrorist groups' crimes. At the same time, we must stress the need to demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. As such, we will not approve any act that could be exploited by terrorists in their search for recognition and legitimacy. That is why we condemned the signing of an "action plan" last year with a well-known PKK terrorist, Ferhat Abdi Sahin, also known as Mazloum Abdi, for whom INTERPOL had issued a red notice. In the same vein, I should underline that we do not accept, and cannot remain idle before, a terrorist organization being praised for committing to limiting its level of criminality. We just heard from Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba that, despite an increasing number of parties having signed commitments with the United Nations to end their violations in different areas, numbers do not seem to be dropping. This is indeed not surprising; believing that a terrorist organization, whose primary method is to inflict fear through violence would be bound by commitments under an international legal framework is an illusion. However, what is surprising and equally disturbing is to see that the burden of the failure of PKK/YPG to abide by its commitments is cast upon a Member State. This attempt to whitewash the crimes of this terrorist organization perpetrated against children through such pretexts is regrettable. This approach needs to be urgently reversed. My Government fully shares and supports the agenda of the United Nations in addressing the situation of children in armed conflict. For that, we show utmost care and take all precautions under international humanitarian law. We will continue to work closely and in complete transparency with the Special Representative's Office to make sure that all the information they receive is correct and complete. We also take all necessary measures to alleviate the suffering of children fleeing armed conflict. Of the almost 4 million Syrians having fled to Turkey for obvious reasons, 1.7 million are children under 18. We have mobilized our resources to provide proper and dignified living conditions for Syrian children who are under temporary protection in Turkey, from free education to health care. In conclusion, I would like to underline Turkey's unwavering support to all international and regional efforts related to the protection of children.
