Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to emphasize that, like many other
delegations, the Algerian delegation has reached the
point where it cannot but ask itself if yet another
debate on the situation in the Palestinian territories, or
even yet another resolution, could possibly have any
meaning at all. This is because Israel's arrogance and
contempt for the international community and for our
Organization, coupled with its certainty of impunity,
have seriously damaged the credibility of this
important organ, which remains for us the sole and
ultimate recourse for the maintenance of international
peace and security, for ensuring respect for legality and
for the protection of the most vulnerable.

In fact, all of the principles and values which the
international community has painstakingly
incorporated into its very fabric over the centuries, and
which our Organization based itself on in 1945 in order
to accompany humanity in its ongoing quest for law
and justice, are today being seriously jeopardized by
the activities of a State which, of its own initiative, has
decided to flout the norms of international law and to
ignore the resolutions of the very Organization that
created it 54 years ago.

How else can we explain the fact that, almost two
weeks after the Security Council urged it to withdraw
without delay from the territories it had invaded, Israel
has still not heeded that injunction, but has, in fact,
intensified its campaign of aggression and terror
against the Palestinian civilian population, multiplied
its attacks and provocations, perpetrated the bloodiest
massacres and trampled underfoot the most basic
norms of international humanitarian law?

The unbearable images of death and devastation
that have been shown on television screens throughout
the world, and reports from those who have been able
to penetrate inside the Jenin camp, graphically attest to
the horror of the repression to which thousands of
women and children have been subjected - forced to
hide in terror for days, suffering from hunger and
thirst, in the ruins of their houses, which were
destroyed by rockets. This has been further illustrated
by the appalling sight of hundreds of bodies strewn
about the streets of Jenin or trapped in the ruins, unable
to be reached by their families or by humanitarian
organizations or given the decent burial to which they
are entitled.

For a long time following the massacres
committed in Jenin, Nablus, Ramallah and elsewhere
throughout Palestine, the efforts of our Organization
risk being perceived as slightly surrealistic or viewed
with suspicion, especially in areas such as human
rights, the combat against terrorism and the
strengthening of international law, because there will
remain the memory of our inability to prevent crimes
against humanity from being committed before our
very eyes.

Israel's practice of State terrorism and the war
crimes that it has committed in full view of all -
almost live on our television screens - have now been
compounded by our complicity in this crime against
humanity, of which we all have been guilty since 29
March.

These massacres could have probably have been
avoided had the Security Council accepted months ago
to deploy an international force to protect the
Palestinian civilian population. The proposal made to
this effect a few days ago, and reiterated today by the
Secretary-General, cannot but elicit the support of our
delegation and of all those who are horrified by the
barbarity displayed by the Israeli army in its attacks
against the Palestinian civilian population. We hope
that this time the Security Council will find ways and
means to translate that proposal into reality as soon as
possible and thus avert a repetition of the horrors of
Jenin and Nablus.

Despite the multiplication and intensification of
recent efforts, in particular American ones, which our
Council has supported, to induce Israel to act in
conformity with international legality, Israel continues
to defy the international community. Confronted with
this attitude, the Security Council must shoulder the
burden of its responsibility. It must take a stance that is
commensurate with the challenge it faces.

The Arab Group has undertaken, through a draft
resolution, to propose a series of measures that it hopes
the Security Council will adopt. All of these measures
are based on respect for law and international legality
and on the relevance of international humanitarian law,
in particular of the Fourth Geneva Convention. They
provide the international community and the Council
with an unexpected opportunity to reverse the
inadmissible undermining of the achievements
recorded in terms of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Those achievements along with the
credibility of international criminal law, now under
development - can be restored only through an early
and in-depth inquiry into the recent massacres
committed in Palestine, and in Jenin in particular.

Moreover, in order to also ensure the protection
of unarmed Palestinians, the media embargo imposed
by the occupier's military censorship must be lifted.
These conditions are vital to establishing the facts and
to forging the conditions necessary to contribute to the
resumption of the peace process. The deployment of an
international force, as envisaged and recommended by
the Secretary-General, must be decided upon with the
utmost urgency.

Visiting the Jenin refugee camp today, the United
Nations envoy, Mr. Roed-Larsen, said he was revolted
by a situation "horrific beyond belief". This horror
only makes more urgent the search for a just,
comprehensive and final settlement of the Israeli-Arab
conflict, of which the Palestinian question is the
Gordian knot.

The Beirut Arab initiative has defined the shape
and content of such a settlement, based on international
legality and the principle of exchanging land for peace.
It is the conviction of Algeria, in solidarity today as in
the past with the Palestinian people in their exemplary
struggle for liberty and dignity, that only by meeting
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people,
including its right to establish an independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital, and with Israel's full
withdrawal from all the Arab territories it has occupied
since 1967 will it be possible to restore peace, stability
and security in this incredibly sensitive part of the
world - the Middle East.

