Ms. Fang Liu: On behalf of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), I am pleased to join
his Excellency Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, in briefing the Security
Council today.

Since its establishment in 1944, ICAO has fulfilled
its central role in strengthening aviation, as mandated
by the Convention on International Civil Aviation,
commonly referred to as the Chicago Convention.
ICAO provides leadership and support to our member
States and industry groups as they work with us to
develop the international civil aviation Standards and
Recommended Practices and related policies. We have
gratefully fulfilled that role for more than 70 years now,
while achieving important progress in all aspects of
international air transport.

Resolution 2309 (2016) is the first of its kind to
focus on civil-aviation security, and also highlighted
ICAO's role. Under ICAO's guidance and leadership,
extensive progress has been made since then in
enhancing aviation security. In that regard, I would in
particular like to note the following. The ICAO Global
Risk Context Statement has been updated based on the
latest threat information. Sector-wide emphasis on land-
side security, explosives detection and cybersecurity
has been increased through the adoption of amendment
15 to annex 17 of the Chicago Convention, and security,
and will be further increased through draft amendment
16. Material for a risk-management workshop has been
developed to help member States produce their own
distinct risk assessments. Guidance material has been
revised to reflect the latest best practices. Capacity
development projects have taken place in locations
designated through our No Country Left Behind
initiative, with the help of voluntary funding from
member States.

In addition to those developments, the adoption
this year of the Advance Passenger Information (API)
standard, which becomes effective on 23 October
2017, will make it harder for foreign terrorist fighters
to move between States. Our collaboration with the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), with
additional participation from the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) entities, ensures
this important programme is at the forefront of
States' priorities.

A natural outcome arising from our leadership role
in aviation security has been the development of the
new ICAO Global Aviation Security Plan (GASeP).
This pivotal document, which focuses extensively on
the threat of terrorism to civil aviation, has benefitted
from extensive inputs on behalf of Governments and
industry alike. It is currently expected to be approved
by the ICAO Council at its next session in November.

Member State enthusiasm and support for the Global
Aviation Security Plan were clearly demonstrated
during the recent Regional Aviation Security Ministerial
Conference on Africa and the Middle East regions,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt. By the conclusion of
that three-day meeting, participants had developed a
regionally focused road map that is fully aligned with
the Global Aviation Security Plan objectives, and which
includes monitoring objectives to ensure that this
progress remains consistent and accountable.

The Global Aviation Security Plan's core objective
is to enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of
global provisions and the sustainable implementation
of preventative measures. To help accomplish this, it
sets forth five key priorities aimed at enhancing risk
awareness and response; establishing a better-defined
security culture; improving technological resources
and fostering innovation; improving oversight and
quality assurance; and lastly, increasing cooperation
and support.
The objectives of the Global Aviation Security
Plan reflect those of resolution 2309 (2016). Once
finalized, the Global Aviation Security Plan will be the
primary tool by which the aviation security community
fulfils its roles, as defined in the resolution. ICAO will
carefully analyse indicators and monitor progress in
achieving these milestones, but of course the ultimate
results will be largely dependent on the dedication and
actions of States and industry operators. It will only
be by virtue of sustained political will, especially at
the highest levels of Government and industry, that
the Global Aviation Security Plan will succeed. I shall
come back to that challenge in a few minutes.

Many other challenges lie ahead. To meet the
security targets identified in the Global Aviation
Security Plan and regional road maps, capacity-
development and technology-assistance programmes
must expand significantly. States must also be willing
to accept help in strengthening their counter-terrorism
postures and in resolving vulnerabilities, and once
help is received, States must be dedicated in following
through with what they have learned and what they
have received, whether it is equipment and technology,
or training and mentoring.

The Global Aviation Security Plan establishes a
mechanism to enable member States to confidentially
request assistance as a result of our audit or through
their own self-generated risk assessment. ICAO will
be proactive in comparing all such requests with
other States' competencies, and then recommending
partnerships where appropriate.

Another challenge that persists for us regards
the sharing of key information. For instance, many
actionable details regarding recent aviation security
events are still unavailable to ICAO and member
States. We must find a way to identify and judiciously
share essential elements of information necessary to
implementing appropriate measures at the proper level.
Resolution 2309 (2016) reinforces that point, and States
have acknowledged it, and it is our hope that through
the Global Aviation Security Plan, ICAO, States and
industry can improve their sharing of information.

Looking now to the attack methods discussed
in the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), held this past July, although some
of them are not new, terrorists have made progress
in exploiting vulnerabilities and circumventing the
countermeasures in place. Landside security gaps,
for example, have been exploited to some extent for
decades now, but with recent amendments to annex
17 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation,
on security, we are now capturing the attention and
participation of all stakeholders involved in effectively
mitigating these risks. Amendment 15 to annex 17 of
the Chicago Convention, which became applicable in
August, emphasizes the identification of landside areas,
the development of security measures aligned with a
risk assessment, and coordination among the relevant
actors. That new emphasis is now helping to bring
together law enforcement agencies, security forces,
airport authorities and even vendors.

Similarly, the threat from improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) in portable electronic devices is not a
new one in air transport, having first emerged when
such a device was concealed in an unaccompanied
suitcase and brought down Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. Effective and affordable
countermeasures for increasingly sophisticated
concealment methods have been discussed in numerous
ICAO working roups, task forces and conferences,
and new and more detailed screening requirements
specific to IEDs have been incorporated into the draft
amendment 16 to annex 17 of the Chicago Convention.

Of the threats we discussed in July, aviation's
rapid cyberconnectivity growth is certainly the newest.
The more we rely on computers and information
technology, the more exposed we are to cyberthreats.
Again, ICAO has recognized that challenge and is
already cooperating with member States and industry
to determine the extent of vulnerabilities and the most
effective countermeasures. This topic will definitely
remain high on our list of concerns.

Similarly, the use of projectiles against aircraft,
such as man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS),
has proven to be of increasing concern, especially in
conflict zones. Effective MANPADS countermeasure
procedures are available to industry and member
States through the ICAO secure portal. Each of these
threats potentially generates a new layer of technology
requirements, which become costly not only in terms of
equipment purchase but also in building renovations,
training and maintenance requirements, slowdowns in
security procedures, and other effects on operations
and facilitation.

Technology innovation was extensively discussed
during the recent ICAO Global Aviation Security

Symposium, which we organized earlier this month,
in collaboration with Airports Council International,
with the active participation of CTED and some other
United Nations counter-terrorism actors. Participants
recognized, and explored in detail, the need for
innovation and synergies throughout the security
system. This, too, is a priority action in the Global
Aviation Security Plan.

As we look together now at the way forward, I
would like to offer some insights on the current aviation
security outlook.

Terrorist groups continue to View aviation as an
attractive target, with the aim of causing substantial loss
oflife, economic damage and disruption to connectivity
between States; the risk of terrorist attacks against civil
aviation may affect all regions and Member States.

Therefore, the key element of the implementation
of resolution 2309 (2016) and the Global Aviation
Security Plan is States' commitment to ensuring the
implementation of effective and risk-based measures
that reflect the ever-evolving threat picture and ensure
that such measures are in accordance with ICAO
standards and recommended practices.

The Global Aviation Security Plan provides the
foundation for enhancing aviation security worldwide,
consistent with the objectives ofresolution 2309 (2016).
In that context, States and ICAO should continue to
work and cooperate together, along with the civil
aviation industry and other relevant stakeholders, to
effectively address threats to civil aviation.

Therefore, all States are encouraged to strengthen
their support for ICAO's work on aviation security,
ensure the implementation of the Global Aviation
Security Plan as a matter of high priority, and
cooperate at the global, regional and national levels
to raise the level of effective implementation of global
aviation security.

This is an area in which the Security Council,
along with the relevant United Nations entities, can
assist ICAO. Security experts and aviation authorities
understand the importance of the Global Aviation
Security Plan and its implementing actions, but they
need determined support - including legislative and
operational authority, financial backing, appropriate
resources and statements of commitment - to fulfil
their responsibilities.

Through key mechanisms such as resolution 2309
(2016) and its supplemental undertakings, we must
therefore continue to work together to encourage
decision-makers to support these endeavours.

Obtaining financial support in particular is
another major area where United Nations entities
can assist ICAO. Member States capable of doing so
must be willing to participate in ICAO initiatives to
bolster security worldwide, whether through the loan
or donation of technology, the provision of training
in basic procedures or best practices, the provision of
mentors, or via direct financial support for ICAO's
capacity-building and assistance programmes.
Increased contributions from Member States would
enable a much earlier implementation of the robust
assistance regime envisaged in the Global Aviation
Security Plan road map.

ICAO, Member States and other stakeholders will
then pursue further opportunities to enhance counter-
terrorism capabilities in the locations that need them
most. This will include enhanced risk awareness and
response, a wider understanding of the threats and risks
facing civil aviation, monitoring new and emerging
threats to civil aviation, maintaining an updated ICAO
Global Risk Context Statement and reviewing the
measures set out in annex 17, on security, ofthe Chicago
Convention and related ICAO guidance material.

The use of Advance Passenger Information System
data, along with Passenger Name Record information,
will greatly assist us in identifying air travellers who
may pose a threat to aviation. We must also remain
vigilant, however, to keep an appropriate balance
between the necessary level of security, the passenger
experience and facilitation objectives.

The importance of an accurate risk assessment,
based on an equally accurate threat assessment, cannot
be overemphasized. All facets of national and local
activities should be focused on understanding applicable
risks. Although the terms "security risk assessment" and
"threat assessment" have been in annex 17, on security,
of the Chicago Convention for many years, there
remain varied levels of understanding, development
and implementation of viable risk assessments among
Member States.

ICAO's continued attention to the Global Risk

Context Statement, along with ournew Risk Management
Workshop, intends to address this concern.

The ICAO Global Aviation Security Symposium
2017 highlightedthe strong commitments by all members
of the air-transport community to the principles and
goals contained in resolution 2309 (2016). I remain
confident that through our continued collaboration,
we will persevere and be successful in reducing the
likelihood that an act of unlawful interference will be
committed against aviation. The recently established
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism will be an
important ally with which I look forward to working.

In particular, I would like to highlight the
cooperation between ICAO and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force on the delivery of technical
assistance and capacity-building in the field of aviation
security. ICAO personnel are extensively trained and
experienced in understanding the myriad ways in which
compliance can be achieved in the aviation regime, and
our participation in these evaluations also contributes
to our own understanding of best practices.

We are currently exploring an arrangement with
CTED in order to enhance our cooperation. Other
United Nations agencies can also be valuable partners.

The Security Council may wish to consider
allocating a portion of counter-terrorism funds
and to encourage Member States to increase their
contributions to aviation security projects, in particular
for capacity-building and training, so as to enhance
the effective implementation of ICAO standards by all
Member States.

The Global Aviation Security Plan is a major
milestone for civil aviation security, contributing to
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Consequently, I call on the Security Council to support
and promote the Global Aviation Security Plan so as to
facilitate its implementation by all Member States.

In summary, I believe that resolution 2309 (2016)
and the Global Aviation Security Plan will provide a
globally accepted foundation upon which stronger
aviation security postures can be achieved.

As the Council is aware, aviation, which represents
50 per cent of international tourism and 35 per cent of
international trade by value, contributes significantly
to the sustainable development of all States Members
of the United Nations and to the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals. This recognition
of aviation's importance with respect to the threats
posed by terrorism enables ICAO and the other entities
charged with mitigating terrorist acts to press ahead
with the improvements necessary in all areas of our
strategies and operations.

I thank the members ofthe Security Council for this
opportunity to brief them on the latest developments in
aviation security, and I remain at their disposal for any
future updates on this or any other matter relating to
international civil aviation security.
