Mr. Tiirk: I am very pleased to participate in the
discussion today, which coincides with the publication
of the key findings of the Stockholm Process on the
Implementation of Targeted Sanctions. Having actively
supported and participated in the Interlaken, Bonn-
Berlin and Stockholm processes, the Secretariat has
observed with keen interest as ideas and
recommendations emerging from each of those
processes have found their expression in recent
Security Council deliberations and decisions
concerning sanctions.

I should like at the outset to thank the
Government of Sweden for its generous support for the
Stockholm Process, and to offer particular thanks to
Sweden's State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hans
Dahlgren, for his guidance and expertise, gained in no
small part from his dedicated service as a member of
the Security Council and as Chairman of the Sierra
Leone sanctions Committee. I am very pleased to see
Mr. Dahlgren here today at this Council meeting.

I should also like to acknowledge the role played
by the Coordinator of the Stockholm Process, Professor
Peter Wallensteen of Uppsala University, who is also
with us today, in organizing the expert meetings and
leading them to a successful conclusion. I also pay
tribute at this time to the Governments of Switzerland
and Germany for the Vital support they provided to the
targeted sanctions initiatives that preceded the
Stockholm Process.

In his most recent report on the work of the
Organization, the Secretary-General noted that he was
encouraged by the ongoing efforts at the
intergovernmental and expert levels to design
"smarter" Security Council sanctions measures. He
also recognized that the participation of partners from
civil society, academia and the private sector in the
expert meetings - a hallmark of all three processes -
could help to build the political will necessary for
effective sanctions.

I will not take up valuable time on this occasion
to review the activities and findings of the three major
processes on targeted sanctions. I would, however, note
how highly relevant the work already undertaken in
areas such as financial sanctions and arms embargoes
continues to be. This is all the more so in the light of
concerns about the flow of resources to individuals and
entities associated with international terrorism, as well
as concerns regarding ongoing instability in a number
of regions that has been linked to the illicit flow of
small arms. In hindsight, it is clear that the expert
meetings on targeted sanctions that we are discussing
here today have been on the right track; it is now
important that the Council devise further guidance.

The Stockholm paper touches upon the
importance of transparency and of promoting a sense of
ownership regarding the implementation of targeted
sanctions among the broader membership. Resolution
1455 (2003), adopted as the Stockholm paper was
being finalized, calls on the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999)
(1267 Committee), with input from the Monitoring
Group, to provide guidance to all Member States
regarding submission of the implementation reports
required by the resolution. Those reports, based on
transparent criteria, will be taken into account in
briefings that will be made to the Council by the
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, in accordance with
resolution 1455 (2003). It is to be hoped that this
mechanism will help the Committee to encourage
regular input from Member States and that the reports
submitted will inform the Committee of areas where
technical assistance is most acutely needed.

While recognizing that it may at times be
necessary to uphold the confidentiality of sources of
information available to expert panels or monitoring
groups regarding sanctions-busting or non-compliance,
the Stockholm paper notes that the credibility of the
findings and the integrity of the process require that
evidence be as transparent and verifiable as possible. In
that connection, I would note that the Council again
acted in parallel to those findings when, in resolutions
1408 (2002) and 1458 (2003), it requested the Panel of
Experts on Liberia to make efforts to bring relevant
information to the attention of States concerned for
investigation and appropriate action, and to allow them
the right of reply.

The advances made in sanctions theory and
practice, however, have also served to reveal new
pitfalls and ineffective implementation, while also
drawing attention to existing problems that were
hitherto unrecognized. The assistance that the
handbook before members will provide to the Council
in identifying and addressing those lacunae is
undoubtedly one of the most significant outcomes of
the Stockholm Process.

One set of findings common to Interlaken and
Bonn-Berlin pointed to the need for enhanced
monitoring, accompanied by other ways of ensuring
that States have the capacity to effectively implement
targeted sanctions. Those important concerns were
picked up under the able leadership of Sweden and put
at the core of the Stockholm Process, together with
groundbreaking analysis on how to maintain the focus
of sanctions on targeted actors in response to evasion
strategies.

The Council is very familiar by now with the
effective work of independent investigative panels and
monitoring mechanisms, and it has also heard the
findings of field missions undertaken by sanctions
committee Chairmen. As the various expert groups
established by the Council have proliferated, and as the
sanctions committee Chairs have become more
engaged, the need for better coordination in many areas
of sanctions implementation has come to the fore.
Many of the reports produced by the expert groups
have identified similar patterns of violation, often
orchestrated by identical actors. And, perhaps even
more important, the expert group reports have
identified similar avenues of follow-up action that the
Council could pursue, including in relation to regional
or other competent organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the
International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol).

There would appear to be room to improve the
expert group mechanism by fully utilizing collective
experiences and by coordinating approaches to better
respond to the Council's mandates. The Stockholm
paper before members includes, for the first time,
careful analysis and recommendations on those and
related issues. The Secretariat stands ready to do all it
can to facilitate contacts between various entities
established by the Council, to improve coordination
among all actors involved and to enhance institutional
memory. For their part, the members of the Security
Council and other interested States may wish to
continue to seek improved modalities for taking
coordinated follow-up action on findings and
recommendations of the expert groups.

The Secretariat hopes that the Council will take
the findings of the Stockholm Process into account
when it conducts sanctions reviews or when it
considers future application of the targeted sanctions
instrument, because, without effective implementation,
there is a risk that much of the good work
accomplished since 1997 will remain in the domain of
theory rather in that of practice, notwithstanding the
results already achieved.

The Secretariat likewise hopes that the Council
and the broader international community will continue
to build upon the valuable work already undertaken in
the area of targeted sanctions. There are a number of
key elements that remain to be addressed, including,
among others, improving coordination among all
relevant actors, optimizing the design and use of
sanctions lists, and studying ways by which to probe
the deterrent value of targeted Security Council
sanctions and their integration into an overall strategy
for preventive diplomacy. Issues such as those could be
considered now and in the future, and the Secretariat
will continue to provide its assistance.

