Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We would like to thank and commend the Dutch
presidency for calling this important open briefing. In
particular, I would like to thank the Dutch Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. van Aartsen, for his thoughtful
presentation, and also to thank the Secretary-General
for his comments.

We applaud the commitment of the Netherlands
to advancing peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Mr. van Aartsen's efforts complement the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and our own
continuing intensive assistance to Ethiopia and Eritrea
with respect to concluding a final peace agreement.

We wish to congratulate the Netherlands on its
substantial contribution to the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), and on the
appointment of Major-General Patrick Cammaert as
UNMEE Force Commander. We should also
acknowledge all the other Member States that have
made or will make significant troop contributions to
the Mission.

The landmark Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, which was negotiated under the auspices of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and signed
by the Foreign Ministers of Ethiopia and Eritrea at
Algiers on 18 June, is a major step towards a final,
peaceful settlement of the conflict. By all indications,
the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea have held true
to their commitments and continue to respect the
Agreement. We must take advantage of this
opportunity to lay the foundation for a durable peace.

It is now incumbent upon all of us to encourage
the parties to sustain the political will necessary to
achieve a comprehensive and lasting settlement. We
urge them to extend their full cooperation to UNMEE
in the implementation of its mandate and to exercise
every restraint. A credible United Nations presence
will serve as a confidence-building measure that we
hope will promote trust and bolster the peace
negotiations. The United States support for UNMEE
remains strong, and we are pleased that deployment is
under way.

While we welcome these signs of progress, a final
peace settlement must be achieved. Several outstanding
issues need to be resolved. An agreement on the
delimitation and demarcation of a common border is a
critical component to a final peace agreement. This
element will be essential if the peace between the two
neighbours is to be self-sustaining and beneficial to the
people of both countries.

As I think we would all agree, Blue Helmets
should never be seen as substitutes for peace
agreements, but as the creators of opportunity to
achieve a durable peace. The growing United Nations
presence in Ethiopia and Eritrea should calm tensions
and create an environment for the search for solutions.
While the search for improved bilateral relations may
continue in perpetuity, the presence of United Nations
peacekeepers should not. Likewise, the Council must
work to ensure that peacekeepers provide the catalyst
for progress and not an excuse for procrastination.

We welcome Foreign Minister van Aartsen's
suggestions on appropriate confidence-building
measures - such as the return of prisoners of war -
which could be taken both to help resolve outstanding
humanitarian issues and to move the parties closer
toward a final accord. The Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities makes explicit the commitment of the
parties to determine their common border if a quick
agreement cannot otherwise be reached. Indeed, that
commitment appears no fewer than five times in the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities.

The United States remains committed to
supporting the efforts of the United Nations and the
OAU to achieve a permanent, lasting peace. The
President's special representative, Mr. Anthony Lake,
will continue to engage with Minister Messahel of
Algeria and with the leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea to
bring a just and lasting settlement to this conflict.

