Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me start by thanking
the Presisdent for convening this debate. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui and Executive Director Anthony Lake
for their comprehensive and very insightful briefings.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union and with the
statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

Twenty years ago, in August 1996, Graca Machel
presented her seminal report (see A/51/306) to the
General Assembly on the impact of armed conflict
on children. The normative framework that we have
developed since then has contributed to some major
successes. Some 150,000 child soldiers have been freed.
Nine parties to conflict have successfully implemented
action plans to end and prevent the recruitment of
children, and were subsequently removed from the
annex to the Secretary-General's reports. As former
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Germany is proud to have contributed to
the development of this indispensable framework. Yet
in spite of those achievements, children, along with
other civilians, are increasingly and deliberately under
attack, leaving them vulnerable to violence, exploitation
and abuse. Germany remains particularly concerned
about the increase in grave violations recorded by the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan, Somalia, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen.

The children and armed conflict agenda remains
more relevant than ever. It is both a matter of urgency
and a key priority to further strengthen the United
Nations mechanisms for the protection of children and
implement them impartially and objectively. There

are numerous examples for how those mechanisms
have very tangibly improved the lives of thousands of
children on the ground. Notably, all eight Government
armed forces listed in the Secretary-General's annexes
have now signed national action plans and committed
themselves to specific steps to end the victimization of
children. We welcome the most recent adoption of such
an action plan by the Sudan, and expect that it will now
be swiftly implemented.

Germany commends the work of the Special
Representative on Children andArmed Conflict and fully
supports her mandate. Through her campaign Children,
Not Soldiers, Special Representative Zerrougui has
tirelessly spread a key message: children are victims,
not perpetrators, and must be treated accordingly. We
would also like to applaud the United Nations field
missions for their day-to-day work in implementing
the monitoring and reporting mechanism - the key
element of success of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We need to ensure that United Nations missions
continue to receive dedicated and appropriate resources
for their child-protection work.

The discussion on how to advance the children and
armed conflict agenda is still overly New York-centred.
But New York can only develop guidelines. The
implementation needs to happen elsewhere. Germany
is therefore committed to raising awareness for the
protection of children on the ground. Child protection
and the re-integration of former child soldiers into their
respective societies remain an important element of our
bilateral discussions with partners. We will continue
to support the formation of local groups of friends on
children and armed conflict. The recent formation of
the Group of Friends in Afghanistan is such an example,
and Germany is proud to take over the chairmanship of
that group.

Finally, the discussion on children and armed
conflict in the Security Council must not be limited
to this type of thematic debate. We need to further
strengthen the operative language on child protection
in the country-specific resolutions of the Council. It
therefore comes as very welcome news that the renewed
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq now contains a stand-alone paragraph on the
protection of children in Iraq. Germany applauds the
tireless efforts exerted by Malaysia to mainstream the
children and armed conflict agenda throughout the
work of the Council.

As we now stand, 20 years after the presentation
of the Machel report and five years after the adoption
of resolution 1998 (2011), on attacks against schools
and hospitals during the last German presidency
of the Council, let me conclude by reaffirming
Germany's unfailing commitment to the protection
of children victimized by armed conflicts and to
Special Representative Zerrougui and her team. The
implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda is more urgent than ever and will remain one of
our top priorities.

