Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Pascoe for his thorough
briefing. We recognize the great significance of the
assessment mission, and in particular, as the author of
the report (see S/2012/42) said, the fact that the
mission took place in cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.

We carefully analysed the document and the
recommendations it contains, which confirm that the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, the real scope of
which is only beginning to come to light, are a serious
threat to security and stability in the entire region.

Moreover, the negative effect is also evident beyond its
borders and not only on the African continent.

We are especially concerned by the uncontrolled
spread of weapons in Libya and beyond its borders as a
result of the conflict. The theft of weapons, including
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS), from
Libyan army warehouses and their further
trans-shipment abroad, sharply increases the risk of
terrorism. That is one concrete but not exhaustive
example among those that are cited in the report before
us today.

That situation persists even as the Libyan
authorities have no opportunity to fully control the
situation in their country or to prevent weapons from
falling into the hands of terrorist elements. We recall
that, according to current assessments, as many as
5,000 MANPADs are unaccounted for. We must
therefore conclude that, given the regional realities -
military and political instability, socio-economic
problems, lack of border control and smuggling - it is
only a matter of time before Libyan MANPADs appear
in the hands of terrorists and on the black market.

Resolution 2017 (2011), adopted upon Russia's
initiative, is aimed at preventing those risks and
threats, and lays the foundation for collective action by
the entire international community. In that context, in
interacting with regional players and in solving the
problems that confront the countries of the Sahel in
this post-hot phase of the Libyan crisis, it is necessary
to exploit the potential of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) to support the initiatives of the
Sahel countries in countering threats to their security.

Of course, full and effective implementation of
resolution 2017 (2011) is very important. We look
forward to the timely preparation of the report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), which we hope will contain specific, results-
oriented recommendations. Also, bearing in mind
separate groundwork in the report of the assessment
mission, it is our view that Secretariat entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and other United Nations agencies, will
make a significant contribution to preparing materials
for the Sanctions Committee.

The Sahel mission identified one other very
serious problem - the mass exodus from Libya of
migrants from African countries, which complicates
the already complex socio-economic situation in the

region. Migrants in motion can become easy prey for
criminal groups, especially those advocating extremist
views. We need an urgent programme to reintegrate
migrants. That is a complex challenge for the Sahel
countries and regional agencies.

The concerted efforts of regional authorities and
the support of the international community, in
particular that of the United Nations, are important to
countering the threat. Coordinated action by the United
Nations system, based on national priorities, is
essential.

In developing a strategy to combat the
consequences of the Libyan crisis, a critical and
decisive role must be played by States of the region.

With respect to the report's idea of establishing
some type of framework mechanism to help Sahel
countries deal with security problems, decisions in that
regard must be taken by the States of the region
themselves, with due respect for their sovereignty.

Finally, the threats unleashed like a genie from a
bottle by the Libyan conflict are the fruit of the use-of-
force scenario elected by some members of the
international community to resolve the Libyan conflict
and of the arbitrary interpretation of the provisions of
resolution 1973 (2011), which is an object lesson for
us all.

