Mr. Arias Cardenas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I bring greetings to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela fully supports the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the Israeli military incursions into the occupied
Palestinian territories and into Lebanese territory and
the violation of Syrian airspace. On this occasion, more
than ever before, what has happened in the last few
days is extremely serious. From this same place, where
effective measures should have been devised to avoid
death and destruction, we send our condolences to the
families of all the countries affected by these
abominable acts.

Deeds have been carried out that indiscriminately
affect the territories and peoples of Lebanon and
Palestine. A military campaign to bomb the physical
infrastructure of Lebanon and parts of Gaza has been
undertaken. Bridges have been destroyed, as have
power stations that provide for the energy needs of
those peoples. Lebanon has been blockaded by land,
sea and air. These incursions are completely out of all
proportion and have destabilized the Middle East
region. One third of the deaths have been of children.
Venezuela condemns those acts and demands that they
cease immediately.

The United Nations staff members who provide
humanitarian assistance to victims in Lebanon have
been attacked, which has prevented them from
fulfilling their role in assisting those who have been
affected by the confrontation.

We condemn the arrest of parliamentarians and
members of the Palestinian National Authority. Those
acts are a flagrant violation of international law. The
fact that the Palestinian people freely chose a given
political group is no justification for this deplorable
conduct.

Our country is convinced that maintaining peace
and international security depends on the premise that
relationships between States, quite apart from
ideological, cultural and political differences, should
be governed by the very strict adherence to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and by respect for international law, including the
principle of peaceful coexistence between States.

The Security Council cannot become an
accomplice of destruction and death. For a long time
now within the Council there has been an
obstructionist policy with regard to a balanced, just and
consensus action to resolve the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. That
demonstrates double standards that in no way
contribute to a fair, broad and lasting solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The Security Council should
fulfil the role that is incumbent upon it in a courageous
and responsible way.

The recent recourse to the veto could be
understood as complicity with the death and
destruction that is now occurring in the Middle East.

In the United Nations, we are witnessing a new
outrage that joins a long list of failures that represent,
one after another, lamentable episodes that taint the
history of the Organization - Iraq, Afghanistan,
Rwanda Is it possible that we could finally put an
end to this situation of death and destruction?

We cannot set aside the idea that, in view of the
Council's failure to act, we should invoke the
resolution entitled "Uniting for Peace" (General Assembly resolution 377 (V)) of 3 November 1950 for
an emergency session of the General Assembly to
discuss in a very broad, transparent and democratic
way the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and in this way adopt a resolution
that would not be vetoed.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its solidarity with the innocent
victims and calls upon the Member States of the
Organization to develop a joint effort that would lead
to the immediate cessation of hostilities and the
resumption of negotiations that would promote the
advent of a much desired peace, to which all peoples of
the world have the right.

