Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, let me congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your entire team for the
authority, dedication, efficiency, enthusiasm and
leadership with which you and your delegation have
conducted the work of the Council's presidency in
the month of January. This has been a month of great
activity, and we would like to focus on several aspects
of particular importance for my delegation.

With regard to the question of Africa, the Council
addressed the situations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia
and West Africa, with particular emphasis on Mali.
Venezuela aspires to be a constructive participant in
that area and is ready to work with African regional
and subregional organizations and all countries of the
region in order to resolve conflicts and build lasting
peace.

The informative Council meeting on peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict, chaired by Mr. Heraldo
Munoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, on
14 January (see S/PV. 7359) highlighted the role of
exclusion and inequality as root causes of relapse into
conflict.

It is important to highlight some points of
agreement on how to advance the peacebuilding
process, such as the importance of inclusive political
dialogue and short-, medium- and long-term funding
with proper coordination among national, regional and
international entities in implementing recovery policies,
as well as the importance of the leadership of the
country concerned in the design and implementation of
the State's reconstruction policies. The Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in that regard.

Venezuela shares the goals just mentioned but
recalls that, without addressing the fundamental
causes of conflict and relapse - including inequality,
the impact of colonialism, foreign intervention and
occupation and economic dependence - lasting peace
will not be achieved.

January was a busy month in the Middle East.
Events in Yemen were the subject of the Council's
focus. We hope that a political settlement will be
arrived at between the parties to enable the country to
restore calm and achieve a durable peace agreement
based on strict respect for the country's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

The open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question (see S/PV.7360), provided States
Members of the United Nations an opportunity to
draw attention once again to the Council's inescapable
responsibility of promoting, with the support of the
parties, a negotiated political solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. That task has become increasingly
necessary to strengthen the credibility and confidence
of the international community in this organ, especially
when a draft resolution (S/2014/916) of fundamental
importance to the Palestinian people did not attain
sufficient votes in the Council for adoption on
30 December (see S/PV.7354), despite majority support
in the General Assembly.

The achievement of a firm and lasting peace on that
issue will require and end to Israeli military occupation
of the Palestinian territories and the establishment
of a Palestinian State with pre-1967, internationally
secure borders, coexisting peacefully with Israel, in
accordance with international law, including the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Security Council should therefore spare
no effort in playing a more active and constructive
role in promoting the two-State solution. We urge the
parties to resume at the earliest negotiations to achieve
a firm and lasting peace.

Venezuela reiterates its strong support for including
Palestine as a fully fledged State Member of the United
Nations and urgently calls upon Israel to immediately
resume the transfer of the customs revenues it is
holding, cease its blockade of Gaza and end its illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territories.

My country was honoured to see President Michelle
Bachelet Jeria, of the brotherly country of Chile,
presiding over the Council on 19 January (see S/PV.7361).
The topic of the open debate, "Inclusive development for
the maintenance of international peace and security",
helped to highlight the links among peace and security
and development. It was a broad debate with the
participation of over 80 countries. Although we have
some doubts about the appropriateness of addressing
that issue in the Security Council, we value the efforts
made by the Chilean delegation to highlight the inverse
relationship between inequality and exclusion, on the
one hand, and peace and the well-being of nations, on
the other. We cannot but agree that combating social and
economic inequality and exclusion in all their aspects
is an urgent task of all States that desire lasting peace.
In that context, we value the presence of President
Bachelet Jeria in presiding over the Council.

Another issue that attracted the attention of the
Security Council during the month was the working
visit to Haiti from 23 to 25 January, on which we heard
a briefing this morning (see S/PV.7372), which we fully
endorse. We participated in the mission, together with
the other members of the Council. The mission made
it possible to reaffirm the Council's support to the
Government and the people of Haiti in their in their
efforts in building peace, democracy and stability
and promote the country's recovery and sustainable
development. Furthermore, the visit allowed us to see
on the ground the important role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti in maintaining peace.

Venezuela therefore reiterates its appeal for
ongoing and increased assistance to Haiti with a view
to assisting it in overcoming the economic and social
problems that have affected the country for decades
and that were further exacerbated by the natural
disaster of 2010. Venezuela welcomes all assistance to
the Haitian people. We support a free and sovereign
Haiti's democratic development and political and social
stability.

Concerning the situation in Syria, Venezuela
would like to reiterate that the only way to stop the
armed conflict and the complex humanitarian situation
in Syria is through a negotiated and inclusive political
solution to the crisis. To that end there should be an
immediate ceasefire, which will help to reach a
firm and lasting peace ensuring reconciliation for
our brotherly Arab country, with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We support efforts
aimed at achieving peace in Syria and reject any
outside interference or financing of armed and terrorist
groups designed to effect regime change in this Arab
State, in violation of international law. In that regard,
Venezuela welcomes the Russian Federation's offer to
provide a platform for a dialogue between the parties
to the conflict.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate
our fraternal congratulations to the delegation of Chile
on its successful leadership of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to wish every success and our full
support to the delegation of China during its presidency
for the month of February. Lastly, we support and agree
with New Zealand's proposal that during these wrap-up
meetings of the Council we should include the voices of
the countries involved in the Council's decisions.

