Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): We have just renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) for a further
period of seven months, which we hope will be the last
period. This is legitimate grounds for satisfaction because
of the sense of confidence we feel when taking a decision
on a process which seems to be successfully moving
towards a lasting solution.

Argentina, a member of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, which has, as is clear from
its actions, played a leading role in South America in the
difficult task of restoring democracy in Haiti, feels
particularly strong satisfaction.

The fulfilment of UNMIH's mandate no longer
seems in doubt. The activities of the Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, as well as his closest
associates and all the personnel of the mission, has been
impeccable and we encourage them to continue their
efforts which will make possible the successful
culmination of their difficult task.

That additional effort should continue to press
forward towards the goals that the Security Council has
set with respect to sustaining a secure and stable
environment, the creation of a separate police force and
the professionalization of the armed forces, as well as the
establishment of an environment conducive to the holding
of elections.

The legislative and municipal elections held on 25
June, despite certain organizational and procedural errors
which should be corrected in the future, represent clear
proof of the Haitian people's commitment to the
restoration of their institutions.

We hope - I repeat - that future elections will not be
delayed and may be free from such procedural
irregularities as have occurred.

The comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/ 1995/614) before the Council for its deliberations,

 

which have culminated in the resolution we have adopted
today, contains observations and recommendations with
which we agree. Among other things, the report places on
record the significant relevance of cooperation in this
undertaking with the Organization of American States. We
are convinced of the desirability of coordinated and
concerted action and of the division of labour in initiatives
that lend themselves to the involvement of our world
Organization with the appropriate regional organization.

In the case of Haiti, the combination of peace-keeping
and post-conflict peace-building efforts, as reflected in a
range of specific projects described by the Secretary-
General, shows that combining the two is not merely
possible but desirable.

Let me conclude by stressing the importance of the
presence of the Organization and of Member States that
have provided personnel to the efforts to consolidate
democracy in Haiti. We hope that the commitment of the
Haitian people to its present course of reconciliation proves
irreversible, so that after so much crime, so much suffering
and so many denials that people - the object of our
efforts - may at last enjoy the peace, security, respect for
human rights and general stability that are inherent in any
democratic society.

