The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

Russia strongly condemns terrorism in all of its
forms, and Russia is convinced that it is impossible to
attain political goals through terrorist acts. This fully
applies to terrorist acts in Israel, among the victims of
which are many of our compatriots.

At the same time, Israel's response should be
appropriate to the threat faced today. We condemn all
forms of violence. We mourn for the victims on both
sides, and we call for an immediate halt to the
bloodshed. However, today we have the impression
that both sides are behaving in a suicidal fashion and
that the raging conflict is threatening to spill over to
the other countries of the region. The madness must be
stopped before it is too late. The unprecedented
sufferings of civilians in the conflict elicited the
extreme concern of the Secretary-General, of all the
countries of the world and of many organizations,
including the League of Arab States, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Rio Group, the European Union and the
United Nations Commission on Human Rights. The
Palestinian-Israeli conflict is the subject of regular
contacts between the leaders of Russia and the United
States, as co-sponsors of the peace process. This
rampage of violence is inflicting suffering on not only
the Israelis and Palestinians, but the citizens of other
countries, too, including Russians.

We are seriously concerned that Israeli troops are
continuing to hold on to the site and building in
Bethlehem belonging to the Russian Orthodox Church,
where Russian pilgrims are lodged. Russia insists on
the speedy release of Russia's property and on the
inadmissability of causing any damage to it. On the
whole, we are very concerned at the overall alarming
situation around various religious holy sites in the
territory of the Palestinian National Authority, as a
result of the continuing Palestinian-Israeli
confrontation.

Halting the confrontation is possible only through
joint efforts by the Israelis and the Palestinians and
through their return to collaboration to implement the
agreements that have been achieved.

If Israel uses indiscriminate acts of force to do
the job of the Palestinians by destroying the terrorist
infrastructure, and the Palestinians likewise decide to
do Israel's work by bringing about a withdrawal from
the occupied territories, then the result will be all-out
war.

We are convinced that rooting out terror and
achieving a settlement, including the creation of a
Palestinian State, are in the fundamental interests of
both the Israelis and Palestinians, and can be achieved
only through peaceful means and direct talks by the
parties, in active cooperation with international
mediators, who must act in a united fashion. That is
why Russia, as a co-sponsor of the peace process and a
member of the "quartet", persistently seeks the speedy
implementation of resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002), which provide for a comprehensive approach to
overcoming the crisis through an immediate ceasefire,
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian towns,
the renunciation of any form of terrorism and other acts
of violence, the lifting of the economic blockades and
the implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations as preconditions for moving towards
a final settlement on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and the Madrid principles. The ultimate
goal of that process is peace, security and good-
neighbourliness between the two States, Israel and
Palestine.

We call upon Israel and the Palestinians to take
immediate steps to implement resolution 1402 (2002).
To this end, it is imperative and urgent to end the
isolation of the President of the Palestinian National
Authority, Yasser Arafat.

Following talks in Madrid, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Russia, Igor Ivanov, stated today
that Russia and the European Union oppose linking the
campaign against terrorism with the destruction of the
political structure within the Palestinian National
Authority.

Today, we have a unique opportunity, not only to
halt the cycle of Violence, but to achieve the goal of a
comprehensive settlement throughout the entire Middle
East region. This opportunity has emerged thanks to
the unanimous position of members of the Security
Council, as reflected in resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002), as well as of the Arab peace initiative, put
forward by Saudi Arabia and endorsed at the Beirut
Summit. Missing that opportunity would be an
unforgivable mistake.

Russia supports the constructive role of the
Security Council in helping to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis and will do everything it can to
facilitate further practical steps by the Council in this
important area.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list.

The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.
