Ms. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
We thank the delegation of Viet Nam for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict. The
situation of children in armed conflict is a serious
concern and warrants special attention by the Security
Council. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the representative of the
non-governmental organization for their contributions
to the debate this morning and for their efforts to
improve the situation of children affected by armed
conflict.

My delegation wishes to commend the efforts of
the Special Representative and to place on record our
support for her work. We also wish to commend the
work of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, under the leadership of France. We call for
more support for the Office of the Special
Representative and for the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in the discharge of their mandates.

The Security Council has come a long way since
the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), its first
resolution on children and armed conflict, which has
been followed by five other resolutions. Those
resolutions and the presidential statements that have
been issued on this subject matter have laid the
foundation and the framework for the protection of
children in armed conflict. We are encouraged by the
progress that has been achieved in the protection of
children in conflict situations as a result of continuous
engagement by the Security Council on the issue.

We are further encouraged by the results achieved
through the monitoring and reporting mechanism that
was established under resolution 1612 (2005).
However, we note that, despite those encouraging
results, the situation on the ground is far from
satisfactory. More concerted efforts are required to
maintain the momentum and to further improve the
lives of children affected by armed conflicts in all
situations.
In that regard, we request that the Security
Council consider monitoring the other grave violations
in addition to the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict. We can start the addition of other
violations in phases, beginning with sexual and gender-
based violence as a trigger for action. That trigger is
suggested in view of the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) on sexual violence in armed conflict, as well as
of the magnitude of the problem of sexual violence
perpetrated against children.

The continued violation of the rights of children,
particularly in situations of conflict, is a matter of
serious concern. My delegation is further concerned by
the escalating incidences of rape and sexual abuse of
children, especially girls, in times of conflict. We
strongly condemn all violations of the rights of
children, including rape and gender-based violence, the
use of children as instruments of war, such as human
shields, perpetrators of attacks, spies and suicide
bombers.

We also condemn attacks on civilians and public
property, especially those targeting schools, teachers
and recreational areas. We have to hold perpetrators of
those crimes accountable so as to end impunity. In that
regard, we acknowledge the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in bringing the perpetrators to
justice and call upon Member States to support the
ICC. We also urge national Governments to strengthen
the rule of law in their countries and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Furthermore, we call upon the
Security Council to consider targeted sanctions against
perpetrators.

One of our greatest challenges in protecting
children is to end conflict. We need to tackle the root
causes of war as well as to address other political,
economic and social issues that can improve the
situation of children and other civilians in situations of
conflict. It is thus imperative that programmes being
undertaken in conflict areas have a strong focus on
children. We request the Secretary-General to ensure
that trained and adequately resourced child protection
advisers be stationed in all peacekeeping missions.
Furthermore, children's concerns should be
mainstreamed in peace processes and in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes with a
focus on long-term community-based reintegration.
Adequate resources should be made available to those
child-focused programmes. We urge the Security
Council to remain seized of this issue.
