Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; and the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania, align themselves with
this statement.

Let me start with the Middle East peace process.
Ending the conflict is a fundamental interest of the
European Union, as well as of the parties themselves
and the wider region. For this reason, the European
Union reiterates the urgency of renewed, structural and
substantial peace efforts in 2013.

The European Union commends and supports
the diplomatic efforts currently being deployed by
the United States to facilitate this process, including
the personal commitment of President Obama and
Secretary of State Kerry, and urges the parties to engage
in good faith and with the necessary political will. The
European Union also recalls the particular importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which provides regional
support for a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace
settlement.

The European Union is aware of the obstacles
that stand in the way of a comprehensive peace
between Israelis and Palestinians, but it also believes
that a decisive breakthrough is possible and that it
must take place very soon. Waiting for supposedly
better circumstances is not an option, as the time for
implementing a two-State solution is running out.

The European Union reiterates that Israeli
settlement activities, which are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
undermine the viability of the two-State solution. The
European Union recalls its long-standing concern about
the extensive use by Israel of administrative detention
without formal charge.

The new opportunity for peace must be seized and
must be about more than simply getting the parties back
to the negotiating table. Greater mutual confidence
between the parties needs to be created. An appropriate
framework, including parameters, is needed if
negotiations are to have a chance of succeeding in a
reasonable time frame.

The European Union stands ready to give active and
concrete support to these efforts with all the instruments
at its disposal. The emphasis that the European Union
has placed in recent months on economic development
in the occupied Palestinian territory f in particular in
Area C of the West Bank - is fully in line with the
options and initiatives currently under discussion. The
European Union is ready and willing to take its support
to the next level in order to help to ensure that resumed
direct substantial negotiations between the parties are
successful. In the same spirit, the European Union
remains fully supportive of ongoing efforts aimed
at Palestinian reconciliation under the leadership of
President Abbas, in line with the principles set out in
his speech of4 May 2011.

The European Union condemns in the strongest
terms the latest rocket fire from Gaza and rocket
attacks against the Israeli city of Eilat, and reiterates
its fundamental commitment to the security of
Israel. It is vital that all parts of the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities be implemented. On the same
line, the European Union also urges once again the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) in all
its parts. The European Union will also continue to
work to reduce actions on the ground that threaten the
success of a renewed talks process.

The European Union understands that Salam
Fayyad has decided to resign as Palestinian Prime
Minister but that he will, for the time being, remain
at the head of a caretaker Government. The European
Union commends him for the remarkable results he has
achieved in institution-building and in strengthening the
rule of law over almost six years in a very challenging
role.

The European Union recalls that, as the largest
donor to the Palestinian Authority, it has played a
major role in bringing about these achievements, which
led international financial institutions to declare that
the Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State. The European Union stresses in this
regard the importance of the Palestinian Authority's
fiscal sustainability and economic viability. It
underlines the necessity for the transfer of Palestinian
tax and custom revenues to be made in full and on a
regular basis.

If an agreement to finally end this conflict, which
has lasted for decades, were to be reached, the door
would open to a deepened and enhanced cooperation
between the European Union and all the countries
of the region, bringing benefits to all involved and
contributing to the prospect of a new era of peace and
prosperity throughout the Middle East.

Allow me now, Sir, to turn to Syria. The
humanitarian briefings last week in this Council (see S/PV.6949) painted a horrific image, underscoring
once again how civilians, and among them women
and children, are paying the price for the fighting. The
European Union recalls that the Syrian regime bears
the primary responsibility for the ongoing violence, and
condemns the widespread and systematic violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We continue to witness indiscriminate shelling with
heavy weaponry and air and Scud missiles attacks by
the Syrian regime; just recently we have heard reports
about another onslaught of the regime forces close to
Damascus, killing at least 109 people - many of them
civilians - in the single suburb Jdeidet Al-Fadel.

The European Union recalls the latest report of
the independent international commission of inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, which states that crimes
against humanity and war crimes have been committed
in Syria. In this regard, let me stress that all parties to
the conflict should commit to their obligation to abide
by international humanitarian law - including the
protection of medical facilities, staff and patients - and
hold to account those in their ranks who do not. The
European Union recalls that there should be no impunity
for any such violations and abuses.

Syria has not responded to the repeated calls of
the international community to ensure accountability
through a national procedure. The European Union
therefore wishes to recall that the Security Council can
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, as requested in the Swiss letter to the Security
Council of 14 January 2013, at any time. The European
Union calls on the Security Council urgently to address
the situation in Syria in all its aspects, including this
issue.

We are maintaining our efforts towards reaching a
credible political solution through a Syrian-led political
transition principally based on the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012, and leading to a democratic, peaceful
and inclusive Syria. In this regard, the European Union
welcomes the establishment of the Syrian National
Coalition, which the European Union accepts as a
legitimate representative of the Syrian people, as a
crucial step forward. We fully support Joint Special
Representative Brahimi's efforts and the proposals he
made on 29 January. In his briefing just a few days
ago, he emphasized that the initiative of dialogue that
was proposed in February by Sheikh Moaz Al-Khateeb
should be further developed, not discarded.

The European Union is therefore encouraged by the
acceptance by the Coalition ofthe principle ofa political
process under credible conditions. It is of the utmost
importance that all Syrian opposition forces act in a
united way towards achieving a democratic transition
in Syria in the inclusive framework of the Syrian
National Coalition. The European Union looks forward
to working with the interim Chairman, Mr. George
Sabra, to that end. In that regard, we also welcome the
opening of the office of the Syrian National Coalition
in New York.

Alongside its diplomatic action to promote a
political settlement, the European Union is the leading
humanitarian donor in the context of the Syrian
conflict, as part of a wider international response.
The total European Union response to the crisis,
including pledged support, has reached a level of close
to €800 million committed by the European Union and
its member States. However, that is still an insufficient
amount to cope with the growing number of persons in
need. We are particularly grateful to the Governments
and peoples of Syria's neighbouring countries for the
generosity they have shown, and we call on Member
States to honour the pledges they have made, including
those made most recently at the Kuwait Conference.

However, money is only one aspect of the problem.
Given the quickly deteriorating situation and the high
risk to the overall stability of the region, an effective
delivery of aid to all those in need is urgently required.
As was requested by Under-Secretary-General Amos
in her statement before the Council last week (see S/PV.6949), the European Union will take steps in line
with humanitarian principles to provide humanitarian
assistance to all areas in the country, including those
currently not reached by humanitarian aid.
The complex situation on the ground and the
difficulty in gaining access require that the European
Union work with the Syrian National Coalition where
necessary to calibrate its response to the real needs of
the population inside Syria. The European Union also
urges the regime in Damascus to allow delivery of
humanitarian assistance by whatever routes are most
effective, in order to reach all the population in need,
including across borders, and to allow a broader scope of
humanitarian actors to work in Syria. We welcome the
fact that the Security Council was finally able to agree
on joint messages in that regard after the humanitarian
briefing, but more is required from the Council.

The Syrian conflict has already spilled over beyond
Syrian borders. The crisis is escalating in a dramatic and
unpredictable way, with a huge potential to destabilize
the entire region. We urge the Security Council to
actively follow the situation in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq
and Turkey and other spillover threats. The European
Union recalls the obligation of the Syrian authorities to
respect the sovereignty and integrity of neighbouring
States and condemns its violations of those principles.

Lastly, the European Union is extremely concerned
by allegations that chemical weapons might have been
used in Syria. We emphasize that any use of chemical
weapons, whether by a State or a non-State actor, is
abhorrent and must be unreservedly condemned. The
European Union and its member States have addressed
a letter to the Secretary-General welcoming his
decision to start an investigation into that matter. We
remain convinced that the seriousness of the allegations
that have been made warrants a full, independent and
impartial investigation and that such an investigation
should commence quickly and cover all serious
allegations about the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
All parties in Syria, particularly the Syrian regime,
must cooperate fully with the investigation, including
by providing unimpeded access for investigators. They
must also ensure the safety and security of chemical
weapons stockpiles, pending independently verified
destruction under supervision by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

