Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I too would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste, which
the Security Council has followed with particular
attention since the attacks against President Jose
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao
10 days ago. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nelson Santos, Permanent Representative of Timor-
Leste, for his statement.

We were very shocked to learn about the terrorist
attacks against the head of State and the Prime
Minister, which were aimed at destabilizing the
country and undermining the Government's recovery
efforts. France once again condemns those attacks
against the legitimate and democratically elected
authorities of Timor-Leste. At the same time, we
commend the constructive response to those
developments by Timorese political officials, both in
the majority and the opposition. In contrast to what
occurred in the spring of 2006, Timorese institutions
have continued to function in an environment of
legality and cooperation, regularly including the
opposition.

My delegation also welcomes the very positive
role played by neighbouring countries, especially
Indonesia and Australia, whose speedy response
provided support to the Timorese authorities and
crucially helped to maintain stability in that country.
As has been mentioned here, that support included vital
medical assistance for President Ramos-Horta. We
welcome the encouraging signs regarding
developments in his medical condition. France hopes
for his speedy and complete recovery.

The events of 11 February serve once again to
remind us of the importance of combating impunity for
past crimes, both those of 1999 and those of the spring
of 2006, as a condition for lasting reconciliation. In
that connection, we reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) to assist the Prosecutor-General of
Timor-Leste. Those efforts are fully in line with the
mandate given to the mission by the Security Council.

Finally, we believe that in the current
circumstances, it is more necessary than ever before to
maintain an international security presence in Timor-
Leste. The reassuring presence of UNMIT and of the
international security forces is an essential element for
stability in the country and for the strengthening of its
institutions. In that regard, my delegation would like to
express once again its appreciation for the work carried
out by Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste. I should also like
to join preceding speakers in commending Ambassador
Kumalo of South Africa for his efforts on Timor-Leste
in the Security Council.

Thus, France supports a l2-month extension of
UNMIT's mandate. The mandate should be part of a
medium-term consolidation strategy formulated by the
Secretary-General with a View to gradual Timorese
ownership of tasks currently being performed by
UNMIT. In that context, my country will continue to
support the international community's efforts to
achieve development and stability in Timor-Leste.

