Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Iceland welcomes the
Security Council's decision to deliberate on the
important issue of children and armed conflict. We are
especially pleased to see you here at this meeting, Mr.
Foreign Minister.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for his briefing and the
representatives of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for their statements.

The impact of armed conflict on children has,
fortunately, been given greater attention by the
international community in recent years. The ground-
breaking study done in 1996 laid the foundation for
United Nations consideration of this matter. The report
concluded, for example, that, first, the nature of intra-
State conflict has drawn civilians, including children,
to the forefront of battles, and that children thus
constitute a high proportion of the victims of war;
secondly, children are being deliberately recruited as
combatants; thirdly, armed conflict leads to a
breakdown in the family support systems so essential
to a child's survival and development; fourthly,
Government and community support systems collapse;
fifthly, children remain disproportionately exposed to
the dangers of landmines; and sixthly, during armed
conflicts there is a heightened risk of rape, sexual
abuse and violence, prostitution and other forms of
gender-based violence.

The authors of the report presented us with
disturbing and often shocking reading, and called for
action. Some tangible results have been made in the
course of recent years, as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/72), dated 9 February 2005.
There is increased awareness, norms have been put in
place and protection of war-affected children has been
placed on the international peace and security agenda.

In this context, we acknowledge the valuable
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu.
Various organizations and entities of the United
Nations, such as UNICEF and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, have also been pivotal in
advancing the protection of children associated with
armed conflict. Many non-governmental organizations
have also played a vital role.

Despite the advances made, the report of the
Secretary-General also clearly outlines our failures.
The report records "widespread and unacceptable
patterns of Violations" (5/2005/72, para. 57) against
children. Armed groups that recruit and use children in
armed conflicts are named.

During last year's open debate in the Security
Council on this issue, there was unanimous support for
establishing a monitoring and reporting system.
Indeed, the Security Council requested the Secretary-
General to devise an action plan to that effect. But, as
the Special Representative pointed out in that debate,
the monitoring and reporting system "is of little
value unless the information compiled can serve as
triggers for action" (S/PV.4898, p. 3).

The Secretary-General's proposed action plan
provides a basis for concerted action by the Security
Council, the International Criminal Court, the
Commission on Human Rights and regional
organizations, triggered by monitoring reports. The
Security Council should be a leader in that process.

Iceland supports the recommendation by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council to take
measures, such as imposing travel restrictions on
certain leaders, the imposition of arms embargoes, a
ban on military assistance and restrictions on the flow
of financial resources to the parties.

We fully agree with the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report concerning
the role of the International Criminal Court. Concrete
steps should be taken to ensure prosecution of persons
responsible for war crimes against children.

As regards the role of regional and subregional
organizations, Iceland has actively contributed to the
activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in its effort to combat
trafficking in human beings. As we know, women and
children constitute the majority of such victims.

The high - and increasing - number of
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse of local
women and children by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel around the world, most recently, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, demonstrate an
urgent need to review current methods in addressing
this problem across all peacekeeping operations.
United Nations peacekeeping forces contribute
courageously in their thousands around the world. It is,
however, vital that they not become part of the
problem. The ramifications of such sexual misconduct,
both for the victims and the international community at
large, will be extensive and long-term, and will require
disproportionate efforts to counteract.

In conclusion, we hope that this debate and the
report of the Secretary-General will culminate in an
action-oriented resolution by the Security Council that
could serve as an effective mechanism in an "era of
application" of the internationally agreed norms and
standards for the protection of children in armed
conflict.
