Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me start byjoining
other delegations in congratulating Australia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of November. I also wish to express my delegation's
sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important debate on international cooperation in
combating terrorism and violent extremism.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Botswana strongly condemns acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations and wishes to reiterate its
unwavering support for the efforts of the international
community towards the promotion and protection of
international peace and security. Terrorism and violent
extremism remain serious threats to national, regional
and international peace and security. Acts of terrorism
have shown that terrorism knows no boundaries and
that no country is exempt from such heinous crimes.

My delegation has been following with horror and
disbelief the emergence of violent extremist groups
and foreign terrorist fighters in the Middle East region
who have no regard for human life. There is no doubt
that the existence of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front in Iraq and
Syria is a blatant challenge to international peace and
security. During this year alone, they have committed
atrocious acts against humanity ranging from bombing
neighbourhoods to beheading innocent people.

The recent beheading of a United States
humanitarian worker, Mr. Peter Kassig, has gripped the
consciousness of humankind, while demonstrating how
savage and senseless these terrorists are. My delegation
condemns in the strongest possible terms this barbaric
and grisly killing, which was captured on videotape and
shamelessly broadcast for the entire world to watch.

That just goes to show that no nation can
single-handedly fight and root out organized terror.
Therefore, a comprehensive and holistic approach is the
only way to tackle this problem.

Poor governance, discrimination, political
exclusion and inequitable economic development,
among other things, are some of the factors that have
been found to create social tension, which has the
potential to precipitate terrorism. Governments should
therefore guard against such conditions, as they provide
a breeding ground for terrorism.

In that regard, we believe that developing strong
institutions of governance, the promotion of the rule of
law and the promotion and protection of human rights
provide a useful foundation for countering terrorism.
Needless to say, it is the duty and responsibility of
States to ensure that citizens are protected from crimes
against humanity, genocide, war crimes and crimes of
aggression.

We call on the international community to scale
up its cooperation assistance to strengthen institutions
that promote good governance and the rule of law. That
can go a long way in making the world a more secure
and prosperous place for the benefit of both present and
future generations of humankind.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
commitment to the fight against terrorism and
impunity. We remain disheartened by the fact that
the perpetrators of terrorist acts continue to wantonly
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their activities. Yet they still remain
at large, frustrating the course ofjustice and continuing
to endanger the lives of innocent women and children.
That state of affairs must cease forthwith.

