Mr. Koenigs: With the incoming Afghan new
year, Afghanistan remains a place of hope and
challenge. Unprecedented efforts to improve
governance, help development and register military
gains are being put to the test. While the conflict
continues in the south, with border areas in the east and
south-east vulnerable to incursions and violence, the
need for strategic coordination of military, political and
development efforts is stronger than ever. The threat to
peace has not diminished, but the joint response by
Afghan institutions, by the NATO-led International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), by donors and by
the Afghan people themselves is encouraging.

Coordination efforts are moving forward, but
they can be improved further. I would like to thank the
Security Council for reinforcing the current consensus
on the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(J CMB) as the principal framework guiding the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in the implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact. It is crucial at this moment to ensure that the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy works
well and delivers. At the last JCMB meeting in Berlin,
which included the participation of political directors
from capitals, donors underscored their support for the
Government's goal of exerting greater ownership over
security, reconstruction and development activities.
Afghan ministries are currently drafting their five-year
strategies, and subnational consultations are about to
begin, in May. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has reaffirmed its
commitment to implement effective coordination of the
07-27564
international community and with the Government of
Afghanistan at the provincial and national levels.

I count on the support of the Council to make the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy work. It
will deliver results only if everyone contributes to the
process. To be candid, international participation needs
to improve. I would therefore like to request, through
the Council, that all donors ensure meaningful
participation by their Government representatives in
the National Development Strategy working and
consultative groups, starting right now, in the run-up to
the Afghanistan Development Forum, to be held on 30
April, and the fifth JCMB meeting, to be held on 1
May. For some donors and some key sectors that must
entail reinforced staffing and resources on the ground
in Kabul and in Afghanistan's provinces.

For the Afghan Government to fulfil its role
under the Compact, the National Assembly needs to
become more engaged in the Compact implementation
process by including relevant discussions in its plenary
agenda. Increased involvement will enable the National
Assembly to analyse the Government's reporting on the
use of donor assistance and to advance its legislative
function.

Many other wings of the Government, including
the Ministry of the Interior, will need to take more
seriously their responsibility under the Compact. The
continued passivity of many Government agencies -
in the expectation that the international community will
come to their rescue to meet the Compact objectives -
only serves to delay progress, and in some cases even
to undermine it.

For the process to succeed it is critical that the
Government starts to View political advice by members
of the international community as a genuine attempt to
assist rather than as an attempt to control. It is of
fundamental importance that the Government takes
seriously the issue of top-down reform of key
ministries, particularly the Ministry of the Interior. If it
does not, the bottom-up attempts of the international
community - for instance, to reform the police - will
be an opportunity lost.

Improved utilization of development aid and
accelerated budget execution, together with a
strengthened international military presence and
reinforced Afghanistan security forces, remain key
prerequisites for the success of both development and
military efforts during 2007.
07-27564

As we speak, ISAF, together with Afghan
national security forces, is engaged in large-scale
operations against Taliban forces. The main theatre of
operation is in the Sangin and Kajaki districts, in
Helmand, although areas of Uruzgan, Kandahar, Farah
and Ghor are also affected. Operation Achilles, which
was launched on 6 March, and the subsequent
offensive Operation Nowruz - which translates as
"new year", which begins tomorrow - aim to defeat a
tough enemy in unforgiving terrain. Past experience
indicates that we can expect intensified violence as the
weather gets warmer and spring begins.

But the ability of Taliban forces to acquire and
retain the military initiative is now under active
challenge in many districts. Its symbiotic relationship
with drug-trafficking networks in Helmand and other
southern provinces has been exposed as never before.
Moreover, the Taliban model of governance remains
broadly unpopular. Given the nature of this contest, I
welcome the commitment of new forces to ISAF,
which will generate a credible theatre reserve for the
first time. Those include an additional 3,500 soldiers
from the United States, 1,400 from the United
Kingdom, 1,000 from Poland, 400 from Bulgaria and
300 from Hungary.

As military action increases, the protection of
civilians has emerged as a burning concern. Taliban-led
terrorist and insurgent groups bear sole responsibility
for the high toll of deaths and injuries caused by
suicide bombings. Despite some successes by Afghan
security forces in detecting and dismantling suicide
attack facilitation networks, there have been 27 suicide
attacks so far this year - a figure that exceeds by far
the rate in the same period of last year. Over 80 per
cent of the Victims of those attacks are civilian
bystanders.

There have been a number of cases of civilian
casualties caused by Government and international
military forces during the reporting period. On 4 March
in Nangahar province, 12 civilians were killed and 38
injured in the aftermath of a vehicle-borne suicide
improvised explosive device attack on a United States
Marine Corps convoy. That incident prompted
demonstrations against the foreign military forces. In
Kapisa, an ISAF air strike on a residential compound
killed nine persons, including four children. The
compound was targeted after two men were seen firing
their weapons at a nearby Afghan National Army base,
according to a United States military spokesperson.
3
Those incidents expose the grave risks posed by
civilian losses in military action. Beyond the tragic loss
of innocent human life, the resulting disaffection and civil
unrest, loss of public support, as well as victims' right to
justice place the international effort to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan under additional stress.

In line with its human rights mandate, UNAMA
has sought to position itself as an impartial and
credible advocate on behalf of civilians by conducting
objective verifications of those incidents and sharing
the information with key actors. Our primary aim is to
prevent further civilian casualties caused by any party
to the conflict, even if our greatest concern remains the
flagrant disregard of insurgent groups for civilian lives.
Afghan Government and international military forces,
too, must take greater care to ensure that they are
seeking to do no harm to civilians and are so perceived.
Afghan villages and communities must be able to count
on their Government and ISAF for protection from
Violence in all its forms.

As a complement to military action, there is
considerable potential for improved security through
political outreach to disaffected tribal groups and
commanders with a "soft" commitment to the Taliban
and other insurgent groups. There are signs that more
groups than ever are receptive to Afghan Government
overtures when they are credibly made.

While insurgency-affected areas are concentrated
along the Afghan-Pakistani border, with suicide
attackers, facilitators and Taliban commanders
continuing to cross over from Pakistan, the insurgency
has a distinct local profile from district to district and
is equally susceptible to local solutions. It is critical in
that regard for the Afghan Government to recognize that
alienation along tribal lines has resulted in many cases
from past actions of Government officials. Strategies to
overcome that disaffection are urgently required.

Local solutions to improve security through
outreach to local communities have proven successful
in Paktya, Khost, Kandahar and Kunar provinces, often
with UNAMA support. On the other hand, a
considerable number of provincial governors and other
key officials continue to underperform in that respect;
support to the provinces from the central Government
is sometimes insufficient. The current situation in
Helmand province illustrates that. The Afghan
Government has so far failed to project its authority
into such districts as Nauzad, Sangin, Kajaki and
Baghran even when community leaders have
demonstrated courage in defying the Taliban. A
credible strategy is needed to enlist the support of
tribal leaders and their communities for Government
initiatives to keep the peace, restore basic services and
meet urgent humanitarian needs. A successful counter-
narcotics policy in Helmand, Uruzgan and elsewhere
will depend on the re-establishment of governance and
strong community engagement.

As the Secretary-General's report before the
Council in document S/2007/152 makes clear,
UNAMA is eager to strengthen its efforts to deliver
effective coordination, meet humanitarian needs and
promote regional cooperation in economic, social,
development and other spheres. Our constructive role
in outreach to vulnerable communities to develop local
solutions for governance and insecurity can be of
enormous value and deserves reinforcement. Our work
must be an effective complement to Government and
military action. The new UNAMA provincial offices
are meant to open doors and initiate dialogue with a
wide variety of groups whose role will be critical in
ending the conflict. The Policy Action Group led by
President Karzai must be made increasingly
operational at the provincial level to guide and support
the concerned provincial governors and enable further
outreach to the districts.

There is a strategic consensus on the need to
disrupt Taliban leadership networks as a key aspect of
the multifaceted effort to defeat the insurgency. The
capacity of national law enforcement authorities to
locate and arrest Taliban leaders needs to be
strengthened in both Afghanistan and Pakistan. The
continuing impunity of terrorist networks based in
Waziristan but operating in Afghanistan remains of
high concern, as does information about Taliban
leadership presence and training activities in and
around Quetta, Peshawar and Miram Shah. I welcome
as a very positive step the recent arrest in Quetta of
Mullah Obaidullah Akhund, one of Mullah Omar's two
deputies and former Taliban Minister of Defence - a
key figure featuring on the sanctions list established
under Security Council resolution 1267 (1999).

Regional cooperation remains essential to
resolving the insurgency. Existing practical initiatives
to increase regional trust and dialogue between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, notably in infrastructure,
health and private sector development, have to be
further developed as confidence-building measures.
07-27564
On 10 March, the Wolesi Jirga approved a revised
reconciliation and general amnesty bill that grants
amnesty to all political and belligerent groups involved
in the armed conflict before the establishment of the
Interim Administration in 2001, as well as to those
individuals and groups still in armed opposition to the
Government who join the national reconciliation
process. Since the right of individuals to seek justice
with respect to individual crimes is explicitly not
affected, that, like any initiative to integrate groups
willing to live in peace under the new Constitution, is
welcome.

Nevertheless, the principal framework for action
in that area remains the Action Plan on Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation launched by the President on
10 December 2006. The key elements of the Action
Plan include, among other things, establishing the truth
about atrocities committed between April 1978 and the
fall of the Taliban in 2001, measures to honour victims,
reform of State institutions - including vetting and
reconciliation initiatives - and providing
recommendations on an appropriate accountability
mechanism. The key objectives of the Plan, which
remains a benchmark under the Afghanistan Compact,
have to be protected, and United Nations principles
with regard to the inadmissibility of amnesties for
crimes against humanity, war crimes and other
egregious human rights violations have to be respected.
The debate on those issues in Afghanistan is likely to
remain Vigorous and at times divisive. It will be vital to
lay continuing stress on concrete measures to recognize
and honour victims and support reconciliation.

Counter-narcotics efforts continue to be an area
of utmost strategic priority. The implementation of the
National Drug Control Strategy requires concerted
action by the international community and the Afghan
Government to prevent a possible failure of counter-
narcotics policy. Initial reports of this year's opium
poppy planting indicate that there will be a record
harvest in 2007. Eradication is ongoing, but it has not
had a critical impact on opium poppy cultivation in the
southern provinces. A significant decrease is expected
in the north where initiatives to promote licit
livelihoods have succeeded and governance and law
enforcement have been strengthened. Eradication
activities must be accompanied by both effective
alternative livelihood programmes and enforcement
measures against drug networks, to break the nexus of
drug trafficking, insurgency, violence and corruption.
07-27564

Widespread corruption within the justice sector is
a major concern. To tackle that problem, the reform
process urgently needs to address the issue of the low-
level salaries of judges and prosecutors and the other
recurrent expenditures in the justice system. The
Afghan budget will not be able to cover those expenses
in the foreseeable future. There is a strong case for the
establishment of some form of multidonor funding
mechanism within the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund to meet these and other costs. The justice
institutions will need to further restructure and reform
their organizations for greater accountability, improved
service delivery and work conditions and better
resources and security for justice officials.

In March, the Supreme Court, the Office of the
Attorney General and the Ministry of Justice each
presented comprehensive new reform strategies as part
of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy
process. Now is the time to seek funding for a concrete
implementable national programme for justice
institutions.

Finally, I would like to raise one UNAMA-related
internal issue. The continued lack of a secure
environment severely limits the ability of the mission
to implement its mandate and exposes its staff - in
particular, those in the field - to considerable risk.
While UNAMA has been making strenuous efforts to
protect its staff, it is facing serious operational
constraints. Against that background, recruiting and
retaining qualified staff represents a major challenge,
especially in the field offices. In view of the
importance of UNAMA's role at this critical juncture in
the Afghan peace process and especially in view of the
increasing need for UNAMA's outreach, that issue
must also be addressed in terms of financial resources.
Your support in that regard will be critical.

I wish to thank the Council and the international
community for their continuing commitment to the peace
process in Afghanistan and to the mission of UNAMA.
We will continue to endeavour to ensure that coordination
in all fields, political outreach and regional cooperation
continue to improve in the areas we have identified as
critical to the success of the transition.

