Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the head of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), Mr. Klein, for his comprehensive briefing.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report. We support his recommendation to extend the
current mandate of UNMIBH for another year.
We agree with the suggested reduction, as spelled
out in the report, of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) to 1,850 personnel.

We commend the work done by Mr. Klein and the
Mission that he heads, aimed at implementing the core
mandate of the Mission by the end of 2002, in
accordance with the Mission's implementation plan to
continue the policy of full implementation of the
Dayton Agreements and of making the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina irreversible. The Russian
Federation continues to believe that the basis of
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the Dayton
Peace Agreement. The signing of that Agreement more
than five years ago made it possible to take into
account the sometimes very conflicting interests of the
three Bosnian peoples and of neighbouring States,
particularly Yugoslavia and Croatia, and to lay the
groundwork for Bosnian statehood on the basis of the
existence of two entities enjoying equal rights and
three peoples that formed States.

Attempts to revise Dayton could upset the
balance of interests and cause new tension not only
within Bosnia and Herzegovina, but outside of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. On the other hand, relying on the
solid basis of Dayton, Security Council resolutions and
other international instruments aimed at resolving the
Bosnia and Herzegovina problem will lead to progress.
It will mean meeting the challenges of reinforcing the
multi-ethnic State, observance of the rights of all
peoples of that country and the achievement of genuine
reconciliation and effective post-conflict
reconstruction. We are convinced that that must
continue to be the focus of the activities of the United
Nation Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The situation in that country continues to cause
concern. Despite the Victory won by moderate political
forces in the elections of last autumn in both entities,
nationalist circles, primarily those that have come
together in the Croatian Democratic Alliance, are
refusing to participate in the implementation of the
outcome of the elections and are boycotting the
majority of institutions, both at the level of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and at the entity level.

We are particularly concerned by attempts to
proclaim Croatian self-government in certain parts of
Herzegovina. We strongly condemn any manifestations
of extremism and ethnically motivated violence. In this
context, we note with concern the growing frequency
of acts of Violence against refugees and against the
reconstruction of historical religious centres. It is
important to ensure that the leading political forces in
Bosnia and Herzegovina shoulder the responsibility for
the fate of their country. Cooperation must be improved
between both entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, that
is between the entities themselves in the framework of
the Bosnian-wide State organs and between the entities
and the international structures in the country, in
particular the High Representative, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Mission as a whole.

We welcome the strengthening of bilateral
relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina with Croatia
and Yugoslavia, and their cooperation in implementing
the Peace Agreement, which is of particular importance
for the further development of regional, political and
economic cooperation pursuant to the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the inviolability of
the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and other States
of the region.

Today, as never before, it is important to work out
a specific programme of action for the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to establish
an effective mechanism for their cooperation in the
field in order to have better coordination and better
interaction in the process of meeting the challenges
they face, with the leading role being played by the
United Nations. The Russian Federation is prepared to
make a constructive contribution to resolving the
problems still outstanding on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina agenda for the establishment of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a unified, multi-ethnic and
democratic State, which includes practical participation
in the United Nations Mission in that country and in
the International Police Task Force, which has been
deployed under its auspices.

