Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I shall begin by stating the obvious: the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is a fundamental actor for
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is a fundamental actor in the relations of the Security
Council with other organizations. I also underscore that
the role of the OIC arises from the fact that societies
with Muslim majorities are those that are paying a
very high price for terrorism - which, I stress, has no
roots, no justification of a religious nature. I say that
again and again. Therefore the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation can play - and does play - a fundamental
role in all those Islamic societies that are threatened.

We engaged in some reflection in preparation
for today's discussion, and we have identified four
important areas in which I think it is possible to forge
better connectivity between the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the United Nations in general.
First is the area of preventive action. Then, in a very
simple and straightforward analysis, I will look at how
we can cooperate better in the short, medium, and long
terms. If Council members will indulge, I will provide
a brief summary of my written statement on what we
think can be done in the area of preventive diplomacy.

The first measure under preventive diplomacy that
we have identified is the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). In
that regard, the role of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is fundamental. While there is an
array of measures that can be developed, I shall
highlight only one. I believe that the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation could contribute to a broader
dissemination of the ideas and spirit of the Plan of
Action throughout the societies of its member States.
In the area of preventative diplomacy, I would like to
underscore women. In general, they play a key role in
preventing violent extremism. As we are all aware, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and UN-Women are already working jointly on a
number of interesting initiatives in that regard. And,
with regard to preventive diplomacy, we in Spain have
worked with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
in particular in the context of a seminar we hosted in
Alicante, where together we came up with a set of ideas
on mediation that, frankly, are very interesting.

Secondly, with regard to how we can work better
in the short-term, I would mention Spain's proposal
to establish a task force of religious leaders for crisis
situations, which would be under the aegis of the
Secretary-General. As Spain proposed, the task force
would be a rapid-reaction force that would be deployed
immediately in reaction to any emerging crisis involving
interreligious issues or violent extremism. Also in the
short-term, I believe we must accord a louder and more
powerful voice to the victims of terrorism. Spain did
that here through an Arria Formula meeting during
which, for the first time, victims of terrorism in Spain
participated. I believe that victims of terrorism - and
I am sorry to say it, for they are victims - can be key
allies in combating violent extremism. Lastly in terms
of short-term action, we believe that we must continue
to make an effort to provide a counternarrative to
terrorists' narratives, as Mr. Diagne stated in his
briefing. In that regard, as one of the co-sponsors of
the Alliance of Civilizations, Spain has proposed the
idea of establishing a supra-national, public/ private
committee on tolerance that would contribute to the
dissemination ofpositive messages and the development
of a counternarrative to debunk extremist narratives on
the Internet and social networks.

Turning to the medium-term, we have proposed
the deployment of experts ion interreligious and
intercultural areas as part of peacekeeping operations.
For a deep-rooted understanding of cultural and
religious sensitivities is vital if our peacekeeping
operations are to be more effective. We are also
promoting the establishment of platforms for peace
for religious leaders in areas of conflict, such as Syria,
Iraq, Israel and Palestine, among others.

With regard to long-term efforts, what do I intend
by that term? The answer is simple. I believe that the
long-term involves youth. Only 20 per cent of young
people claim that religious reasons are behind their
radicalization and recruitment by armed or terrorist
groups. "Long-term" means talking to and about
the 1.8 billion young people throughout the world. It
means taking every possible precaution to ensure that
they have a proper education, which is a necessary, but
not exclusive, condition to prevent them from being
attracted to extremist and violent ideologies.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
carried out by Egypt's Al-Azhar University, which has
set up a centre to analyse all the decrees and identify
those that could most likely to attract young people into
joining or participating in extremist groups.

I have greatly shortened my statement so as to
make the best use of time. Those who wish to can
read the entire text, which will be made available on
the webiste of the Permanent Mission of Spain to the
United Nations.

