Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, the delegation of Senegal thanks you and
welcomes your initiative to convene this public debate
on counter-terrorism. It cannot come at a better time,
given the almost metronomic recurrence of terrorist
attacks across the globe.

International terrorism, which continues to spread,
has reached hitherto unseen proportions and remains
of utmost concern for the international community,
including for the countries of West Africa and the Sahel
that have been struck hard by attacks, kidnappings,
summary executions and unprecedented violence
perpetrated by armed groups with such names as
Al-Shabaab, Al-Mourabitoun, Ansar Dine, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and others, but their
methods are as similar as they are barbarous, sowing
the seeds of destruction, terrorism, massacres and
desolation within our communities.

Given this threat, it is urgent that the international
community provide its support to the West African and
the Sahel-Saharan regions in the implementation and
operationalization of action plans and other subregional
initiatives, including the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, the African Union initiative to
create an African force to fight against terrorism, the
Nouakchott process and Group of Five for the Sahel
force project.

To be effective, any initiatives to counter terrorism
or fight violent extremism should first address both
the structural and contextual factors that lead to the
rise of terrorism, including ignorance, marginalization
and discrimination as well as poor governance and
the lack of socioeconomic prospects, the erroneous
interpretations or the instrumentalization of religion
and the abuse religious vocabulary. My point is that
authoritarian repression or a military approach is not
enough in and of itself.

It is therefore key that, on the one hand, we
ensure the effective implementation of development
programmes and that, on the other, we also support
initiatives that give priority to dialogue, tolerance and
understanding among civilizations, cultures, peoples
and religions. In all these cases, intolerance should never
be associated with a religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. This is a global scourge that affects
the international community as a whole, placing it in a
state of emergency - indeed, a state of siege.

In its efforts to implement measures to counter
international terrorism and violent extremism, Senegal
has adopted an approach that combines prevention,
cooperation and quick response with, inter alia, the
adoption, in 2007, of two laws that provide for severe
punishment of perpetrators of terrorist acts and, in
2009, a law that combats the financing of terrorism.
These measures strengthen the Senegalese reality,
which is characterized by a successful ethnic blending,
religious harmony - religious symbiosis, even - in a
State where the rule of law, democracy, human rights,
good governance and the fight against the impunity are
cardinal values.

Terrorist groups are masters in the art of using the
Internet and social media to incite violence, recruit
fighters, and finance and plan terrorist acts. In this
respect, the relevant provisions ofresolutions 2178 (2014)
and 2253 (2015) must be implemented in a coordinated,
methodical and effective manner by Member States, in
particular through pursuing cooperation in intelligence
and better collaboration with private organizations that
provide these services, all of this in order to improve
enforcement systems.

To finance their activities, terrorist cleverly - or I
should say, cynically - exploit gaps in financial systems
and regional, national and international legal instruments
to collect funds, including through the illicit
exploitation and sale of such natural resources as oil
and precious stones, as well as through kidnappings
for ransom, trafficking in human beings and weapons,
various forms of extortion, looting and sale of valuable
cultural artefacts.

To counter these activities, it is necessary to
readapt the international financial system by making it
more secure, calling upon Member States to apply the
standards set by Financial Action Task Force rules on
terrorist financing and strengthen partnerships with the
private sector, in particular charitable organizations,
so as to identify suspicious activity. In this regard, we
think it important to recall the Secretary-General's
recommendations made in his report (S/2016/92)
on the implementation of resolution 2253 (2015),
while working to keep the fight against terrorism
and its financing from having a detrimental effect on
migrants, refugees and displaced persons. Nor should
the countries of origin of these migrants be penalized,
as they benefited in 2014 from around $400 billion in
remittances by emigrants, which is more than three
times official development assistance.

The recruitment by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other extremist groups, foreign terrorist
fighters from a hundred different countries and whose
number exceeds 30,000, according to United Nations
statistics, is another major challenge that we have to
face in an urgent, effective and coordinated manner.
These combatants constitute a real threat to countries
of origin, transit countries and destination countries. To
eradicate these phenomena better cooperation in border
control is imperative. However, measures to be taken in
this context should not undermine the principle of the
free movement of people and goods. It is in this spirit
and in this framework that a subregional workshop
will be held in Dakar in May 2016 on border control in
West Africa, Central Africa and the Sahel. Promoting
dialogue and preventing conflicts, involving the people
by mobilizing youth, empowering women, education,
strengthening competencies and improving access to
jobs arejust as important to a good strategy for countering
violent extremism, the radicalization of young people
and recruitment by extremist organizations.

Considering how difficult it seems to be for the
international community to come up with successful
strategies, it is crucial that we take an inclusive and
united approach with a view to the long term that
strengthens cooperation at all three of the subregional,
regional and international levels. In that regard, it
helps when Member States, acting in full sovereignty,
devise national strategies and plans of action that are
based on local realities and therefore better adapted to
their own socioeconomic and security contexts. The
international community as a whole and the United
Nations in particular should assist in strengthening
States' capacities in that regard.

We believe that the upcoming June review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be an excellent
opportunity for deeper reflection on the effectiveness
of the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture
and on the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. We should take advantage
of the event to ensure the relevance of the Strategy,
which has to be able to adapt to today's new challenges
and realities.

IwouldberemissifIdidnotcommendtheoutstanding
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, which has united 34 international entities in
the fight against this scourge and plays an essential
role in coordinating United Nations efforts in the
area. Similarly, the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and
effectively chaired by the Egyptian delegation, deserves
all our support and cooperation for its numerous
activities implemented under the leadership of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
whose recommendations in its country visit reports
should receive regular follow-up and evaluation as well
as information exchange with the countries concerned.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
willingness and unwavering commitment to making
every effort in our shared fight against terrorism,
including in the as yet unfinished task of drafting an
international convention on combating terrorism, and
especially in View of the fact that Africa already has
a regional convention on the subject in place, with a
dedicated research centre headquartered in Algiers.

