Mr. Butagira (Uganda): The rule of law should
be viewed in the wider context of the economic and
social setting. Allow me to congratulate the Secretary-
General on his report (S/2004/6l6), which is excellent,
especially on the issue of adequate funding for the
reform of the justice system. Uganda fully endorses the
recommendations in that report.

The United Nations, over the years, has
endeavoured to put in place an institutional
architecture to regulate the conduct of States, based on
the rule of law, respect for human rights and the
promotion of good governance: the prerequisites for
conflict prevention. Thus, an array of conventions,
such as the International Covenants on Civil and
Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the Statute of the International Criminal Court,
and so forth, have been elaborated. Through numerous
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the United Nations is at the centre of the globalized
world and has done remarkably well in advancing
world order and security, despite a few setbacks. The
Charter of the United Nations remains a beacon of
hope. All those instruments add up to a code of
conduct in conflict and post-conflict situations,
especially in dealing with the culture of impunity.

One of the subjects that fascinated me when I was
studying law at Harvard Law School, was the subject
of exemption clauses in the field of contracts. An array
of ingenious devices was devised to circumvent the
application of exemption clauses. Thus, exemption
clauses were not looked upon favourably. In the field
of the application of international law, there should be
no exemption clauses. Both the mighty and the weak
must be treated equally. In extremely rare cases,
national interest may justify a departure from
recognized norms, but such departure should be well
grounded in law and should be the exception rather
than the rule. In this way, the United Nations would
gain credibility.

The rule of law should also mean that the United
Nations does not stand idly by while some States,
either through failed systems - that is, failed States -
or through an inability to act, are unable to protect their
citizens from being butchered or otherwise grossly
abused. Indeed, the notion of sovereignty should imply
the obligation on the part of the State to protect its
citizens. Where this is lacking, the international
community should intervene on humanitarian grounds.
I, therefore, commend the report of the International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty co-
chaired by Gareth Evans and Mohamed Sahnoun,
which elaborated on this concept. Sovereignty should
not be used as a cloak to cover gross human rights
abuses by nations.

Attention should now be focused on defining the
parameters of that right to intervene on humanitarian
grounds so that it is firmly embedded in international
law.

The causes of conflict should be addressed,
poverty in particular. Justice and the rule of law mean
that all nations, big and small, developed and
developing, should benefit equally from the benefits of
globalization. For developing countries, this implies,
for instance, access to international markets for their
products, with the elimination of trade barriers. Trade,
not loans, should be at the centre of the international
development agenda. This does not mean, however,
that we should do away with loans. Loans and grants
should supplement trade. The developed countries
should live up to the promises they made at various
international United Nations conferences, such as those
set out in the Monterrey Consensus. Lastly, on this
issue, debts for developing countries, both multilateral
and bilateral, should be entirely written off in order to
kick-start meaningful economic development.

Trials by tribunals set up by the United Nations
are slow-moving. Not only are they costly: justice
delayed is justice denied. The United Nations should
delegate some of the cases to be tried by local courts
with international observers.

The Charter of the United Nations places primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and security on the
shoulders of the Security Council. For practical
reasons, in some instances that responsibility has been
devolved to regional organizations. In that regard, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the nascent Peace and Security
Council of the African Union have played an important
role in maintaining peace and security on the African
continent. However, that devolution should not mean
abdication. We see the dangerous trend of a hands-off
policy by the Security Council in peacekeeping
operations in Africa. That trend should be discouraged.
Both the Security Council and regional organizations
should work in partnership where appropriate.

Lastly, let me say a word about the right to self-
defence, which is enshrined in the Charter. There was a
time when this was not an issue, since aggressive
attacks would take place on the territory of the State
defending itself. The problem arises, however, when a
State has to defend itself on the territory of the
offending State. Surely a State has a right to nip attacks
in the bud and for that purpose carry out a pre-emptive
attack. The problem is, where should the line be drawn
between acts of aggression and acts aimed at warding
off immediate threats of attack? The international
community should elaborate on this issue, since it has a
direct bearing on conflict resolution.

