Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to express our satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over this post and to wish the
members of your delegation success throughout the
month of November.
We would also like to thank Ambassador Martin
Belinga-Eboutou and his team from the delegation of
Cameroon for the important work they did last month.

The delegation of Colombia would like also to
thank the Panel of Experts, chaired by Ambassador
Kassem, which has fulfilled its task of investigating the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have received from them a report on a complex and
demanding topic, which has led to the submission of
recommendations that should not be overlooked by the
Council.

The accusations made against certain individuals
and companies with respect to the illicit appropriation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are causes of deep concern to our delegation
because of the effects of this phenomenon on the
Congolese people, the continuation of the armed
conflict, and peace in Africa.

For that reason, we would like to thank the
various countries mentioned in the report that have
spoken at this meeting. They have given us an
opportunity to hear their views concerning these
accusations. Most particularly we would like to
welcome the presence of and the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.

The Council is accustomed to considering
situations of conflict from the perspective of
international security, including its political and
humanitarian aspects. That may be why we were
shocked to hear the experts' statement that the
economic ambitions of certain elite networks
established in various parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and connected to international criminal
organizations offer the best explanation for the
continuation of armed conflict in that country.

We know, of course, that in all wars there are
always those, such as arms traffickers or unscrupulous
bankers, who profit from the suffering of a large
number of people. But if our understanding of the
report is correct, in the case of the Congo, plundering
has become the main reason for the continuation of the
war.

We are even more concerned by the assertion that
this criminal undertaking is being encouraged by
economic agents located within the country, even
following the withdrawal of the foreign troops that had
been there.
For us, this assessment is a call to speedy and
effective action on the part of the Security Council and,
in keeping with the recommendations made in the
report, my country would like to note three possible
courses of action.

First, we must strengthen the institutional
capacity of the Congolese State, because its weakness
and, indeed, its absence in many parts of the country,
particularly in the eastern provinces, have led the
aforementioned elite networks - which have
economic, political and military power - to fill the
resulting vacuum by engaging in the acquisition of
State enterprises and the collection of taxes and
customs duties, inter alia. This is where the plundering
begins, and it must be stopped.

Secondly, the other countries whose nationals and
companies have been denounced by the Panel of
Experts must be called on to take energetic action to
investigate these accusations within a reasonable time
frame. We believe that in this respect, legal action and
the punishment of those responsible for the illicit
exploitation of the resources of the Congo are factors
that contribute to the peace process.

In the grey area between what is legal and what is
illegal in situations of conflict, frequently we find
companies that appear to be engaging in transactions
that are legal, when, in fact, they are not legal at all,
and often they are involved in a money-laundering
system. In addition, the accusations contained in the
report may contribute to efforts to do away with
impunity, which will be a decisive factor if
reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is to take place.

The nationality of an individual or business
cannot be used to evade responsibility for acts that the
international community wishes to sanction.

Thirdly and lastly, my delegation believes that we
should consider the recommendation of the experts that
we draw up a list of individuals whose travel and
access to financial markets should be restricted, as well
as of companies or commercial enterprises whose
financial access should also be restricted because of
their participation in the illicit exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The function of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security requires that once we
have committed the efforts of the United Nations to the
restoration of peace in areas of conflict, as we have
done through the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
then we must do our utmost to ensure that there will be
a sustainable and lasting peace. In the case of the
Congo, this means returning to its population and to its
Government access to the resources that have been
wrested from them by the war.

