Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): 1 thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate on the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). I join those who have taken the floor
before me to thank our distinguished briefers for their
succinct briefings.

We want to express our deep appreciation to the
Presidents of the ICTY and the ICTR for their reports
(S/2014/556 and S/2014/546), which set out in particular
the progress made towards the implementation of the
completion strategy of the Tribunals and the measures
the Tribunals are taking to ensure a smooth transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

With regard to the ICTY, Nigeria notes that the
Tribunal has concluded proceedings against 141 of
the 161 individuals it has indicted. We commend the
Tribunal'sjudges and staffmembers for their determined
focus on completing the remaining judicial proceedings
as expeditiously as possible without compromising the
principles of due process and fairness. We applaud the
success of the ICTY and cooperating States in locating
and transferring fugitives to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. As a result, there are no outstanding fugitives
from the law as far as the ICTY is concerned. That is a
remarkable achievement in the fight against impunity.

We commend the ICTY for the measures it has
taken to expedite its work. Of particular significance is
the close monitoring ofthe progress oftrials and appeals
by the Working Group on Trials and Appeals Schedules
to prevent delays to judicial proceedings. With that
and other measures in place, we are confident that the
ICTY will be able to work efficiently and effectively to
dispose of all outstanding cases with minimum delay.

On staff recruitment and retention, the report
indicates that it has become a problem that is having
an adverse impact on the completion strategy of the
Tribunal. That is understandable in the light of the
Tribunal's ongoing downsizing. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to maintain a careful balance that will allow
the work of the Tribunal to go on unhindered. In that
regard, we are pleased to note that the Tribunal has
taken measures to improve staff retention, recruitment
and promotion. It is our hope that this matter can be
resolved in a timely manner through engagement with
the relevant division in the United Nations Secretariat.

Nigeria takes positive note of the progress made
by the ICTR in implementing its completion strategy,
which has been continuously updated since 2003.
It is significant that during the reporting period all
outstanding appeal judgements with exception of the
Nyiramasuhuko et al. ("Butare") case were delivered.
That has allowed the ICTR to focus its efforts on the
transition to the Mechanism. The near-completion of
its cases demonstrates the effectiveness of the ICTR as
a tool in the search for justice and accountability for
perpetrators of mass atrocity crimes.

We note that the preparation and submission of
archives to the Mechanism are major challenges.
Nevertheless, we urge the ICTR to continue to pay
attention to the process of transferring these records
and archives to the Mechanism. It is also noteworthy
that, on 5 November 2014, the ICTR launched its new
website, which includes information on its remaining
work, milestones attained and lessons learned in its
pursuit of justice. We commend the initiative last
September to hold a developed practices workshop
for the International Tribunals and the International
Criminal Court, which indeed was the first of its kind.

Nigeria welcomes the progress reports of the
President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals from
16 May to 19 November 2014 (S/2014/826, annex I).
We are pleased to note that the Mechanism has been
receiving support from the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office
of Legal Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and
States Members of the United Nations. In accordance
with its mandate, the Mechanism has now assumed
responsibility for many functions of the ICTY and
ICTR. We call on the Mechanism to continue to work
closely with the principals and staff of both Tribunals to
ensure a smooth transition of the remaining functions
and services. The Mechanism should also work towards
the harmonization and adoption of best practices.

Nigeria commends the ICTR and the ICTY for their
contributions to the development of substantive and
procedural international criminal law. The Tribunals
have also symbolized the firm commitment of the
international community to fight against impunity and
crimes against humanity.

