Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): | would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his briefing. I would also like to thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I also welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. The Houthi militias have pursed their persistent policy of stubbornness and stalling regarding the implementation of their commitments since signing the Stockholm Agreement under the auspices of the United Nations in December 2018. Their policy demonstrates that those militias are not serious about achieving peace; rather, they defy the efforts of the United Nations and the Council. Meanwhile, any attempt to circumvent the implementation of the agreement would not serve the desired political process but would threaten the road to achieving peace altogether. Therefore, we reiterate the Government of Yemen's insistence on the importance of implementing all the components of the Stockholm Agreement, especially the Al-Hudaydah Agreement regarding the local security forces and local authority, the withdrawal from the ports and city of Al-Hudaydah and the exchange of prisoners and detainees. That should not be subject to any political bids. In the meantime, the siege on Taiz should be lifted. The Government of Yemen would like to express once again its support for the efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to achieve a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict based on the agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the inclusive national dialogue and the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). The serious escalation and violations committed by the Houthi militias, including targeting the premises of the Redeployment Coordination Committee last month, the Medecins sans frontieres hospital and the Red Sea mills, are totally deplorable and unjustifiable. The Security Council should condemn them as an egregious challenge to all efforts to realize peace. The Government of Yemen is making major efforts, as duly instructed by His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi and under the supervision and follow- up of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, to overcome the obstacles impeding the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. The Government is very eager to implement the provisions of the agreement according to the chronological order agreed therein and without any selectivity. In recent days, a matrix of security and military arrangements has been signed under the tireless supervision of His Excellency the President of Yemen and the leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. In that regard, we highly appreciate the fraternal role and endeavours of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in providing ongoing support to Yemen consistent with the principles of fraternity and good-neighbourliness, and based on _ historical relations with Yemen. Their work laid the foundation for Riyadh agreement and a new phase of partnership, reform and consolidation of efforts aimed at thwarting the Houthi-Iranian project in Yemen, which has caused all the destruction and chaos in the country. Our goal is to build a new federal Yemen, in line with the outcome of the inclusive national dialogue conference. The interference by the Iranian regime and its subversive role in Yemen, through its close ties with the Houthi militias, are unequivocally conspicuous and constitute a threat to the security and stability of Yemen and the region, as well as regional and international peace and security. The Yemeni people will never allow Yemen to become a field for the adventures and projects of the Iranian regime, as our people have grown more determined than ever to continue to thwart the Houthi- Iranian project. The Government of Yemen spares no effort to normalize economic and humanitarian conditions and to operationalize the State institutions in order to promote the livelihoods of citizens. It is dedicated to defining the tasks of those institutions and developing the mechanisms needed for the next phase, including reorganizing the work of those institutions and expanding the payroll system. The Government hastaken a number of measures to implement major reforms in the area of anti-corruption and to operationalize the national integrity and anti-corruption system, as well as to reconstitute and operationalize the national committee to combat money-laundering and _ the financing of terrorism. In their efforts to exacerbate humanitarian suffering and destabilize the national economy and the exchange rate, the Houthi militias have prohibited the circulation and use of the new national currency in the areas they control. That decision will not only deprive tens of thousands of civil servants and retirees of their salaries and money transfers, but will also completely paralyse economic activity in the areas controlled by those militias, which will have catastrophic consequences. The Government of Yemen therefore calls on the international community, the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to shoulder their responsibility regarding such procedures, which exacerbate the humanitarian crisis caused by the Houthi militias. Those militias have subverted the aspirations of the Yemeni people, thwarted national unanimity and taken State institutions hostage. International organizations operating in Houthi-controlled areas of Yemen are subjected to obstacles and extortion. Humanitarian workers are being harassed while the militias attempt to divert the programmes and aid of those organizations to specific places and areas in order to generate financial gains and impede the delivery of assistance to those in need. The Government of Yemen reiterates that it stands ready to facilitate all procedures necessary to ensure that those international organizations and agencies working in Yemen can carry out their work. Moreover, it pledges to continue working in partnership with them in order to address the humanitarian situation, which is deteriorating due to the war. In that regard, we express the gratitude of the Yemeni people for the enormous humanitarian tasks undertaken by those organizations to mitigate the humanitarian suffering experienced by the Yemeni people, who are living in grim and bleak circumstances. The Houthi militias are contriving and fabricating a fuel crisis in the areas they control in order to enhance the black market so as to enrich their leaders and finance their military and political activities, thereby commodifying the suffering of the Yemeni people. That is taking place despite the fact that fuel imports to Yemeni ports from | October 2019 to 10 January 2020, of which Al-Hudaydah port received 60 per cent, could cover the fuel needs in the Houthi-controlled areas until mid-March 2020. We once again sound an alarm with regard to potential environmental hazards that might result from the leakage of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, as such an event could lead to an unprecedented environmental catastrophe affecting Yemen, the region and international navigation. We call on the Security Council and the international community to shoulder their responsibility and to bring pressure to bear on the Houthi militias in order to force them to give access to the United Nations technical team so that it can carry out a technical assessment of the tanker, including thedamage it sustained, and to undertake the necessary maintenance as soon as possible in order to avert certain calamity. In conclusion, the Government and people of Yemen aspire to peace. They look forward to bringing this war and coup to an end. However, the Houthi militias, which are supported by Iran and claim the divine right to either govern or kill the Yemeni people, reject peace.
