Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting. I should also like to
take this opportunity to thank the Mission of Argentina
for its efforts in drafting, and organizing consultations
on, the draft resolution on small arms and light
weapons.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Hoppe, Officer-in-Charge of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing.

The excessive accumulation of and illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons have exacerbated
warfare in certain countries and regions, disrupted
peace processes and the smooth operation of post-
conflict reconstruction, and bolstered terrorism, drug
trafficking and other criminal activities, with negative
political, economic and social repercussions. In recent
years, the United Nations and the international
community have focused on the issue of small arms
and light weapons, have made many efforts and have
achieved some progress in seeking solutions to that
problem.

The Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of
and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects were concluded in 2001. They have provided a
legal and policy basis for the solution of the question
of small arms and light weapons. In 2003 and 2005,
two United Nations biannual meetings on the
implementation of the Programme of Action were
successful in further enhancing the comprehensive
implementation of the Programme. The International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, concluded in 2005, has demonstrated
the international community's political will and
determination to fight the illicit problem of small arms
and light weapons. In addition, various international
and regional seminars on small arms and light weapons
have played an important role in forging international
consensus and in increasing the exchange of
experience and information.

The United Nations conference to review progress
made in the implementation of the Programme of Action
will be held in New York from 26 June to 7 July this year.
That meeting will mark another milestone in combating the
illicit traffic in small arms. We hope that the international
community will use that opportunity to help the meeting
produce substantial results in the following areas. First, it
should further clarify that States bear the primary
responsibility for combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons so as to prompt them to enhance their
capacity and institution-building accordingly, strengthen
the management and control of small arms and light

weapons, and prevent the outflow of such weapons to
illegal channels.

Secondly, it should emphasize the implementation
of Programme of Action-related follow-up actions,
including effectively implementing the International
Instrument on the marking and tracing of illicit small
arms and light weapons and initiating in a timely manner
the work of the group of governmental experts on
combating the illicit brokering of small arms and light
weapons.

Thirdly, the conference will be an opportunity to
adopt further specific measures, strengthen international
coordination and cooperation, and give full play to the
lead role of the United Nations.

Fourthly, it should continue to encourage the
international community actively to help the countries
concerned to develop their economy, eradicate poverty,
social injustice and other hidden security hazards, and
to achieve peace, stability and development, thus
removing the root causes of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

We are glad to note that the issue of small arms
and light weapons has received the full attention of the
Security Council. Several open debates have been held
and a number of presidential statements adopted. At the
same time, the Security Council has stressed the
importance of the small arms and light weapons issue
when reviewing such questions as the protection of
civilians, women and children in armed conflict. That
has played an important role in effectively reducing
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and
enhancing regional peace and stability.

China supports the Security Council as it
continues to play an important role on the issue of
small arms and light weapons, pursuant to its mandate.
In addressing that issue, the Council should coordinate
with other United Nations bodies so as to complement
and promote each other's work.

The Chinese Government has always attached
great importance to combating the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. We have taken an active part
in the international endeavour in that area. In recent
years, China has adopted a series of specific measures
in domestic legislation, law enforcement, capacity-
building and institution-building. We have earnestly
implemented the Programme of Action. At the same
time, we have actively participated in international

exchanges and cooperation by holding international
seminars, providing assistance to countries and regions
concerned within our capabilities, and keeping regular
operational links with the concerned departments of
other countries and international organizations. We are
ready to continue to take part in the international
endeavour against the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in a vigorous and constructive manner.

